something of the kind, and generally, with animals supplied with blood, in

the  parts  charged  with  blood.  In  other  animals  it  has  its  seat  in  parts

analogous to the parts charged with blood; but in all cases it is seated in parts

that in their texture are homogeneous.

The  active  faculties,  on  the  contrary,  are  seated  in  the  parts  that  are

heterogeneous: as, for instance, the business of preparing the food is seated in

the mouth, and the office of locomotion in the feet, the wings, or in organs to

correspond.

  Again, some animals are supplied with blood, as man, the horse, and all

such animals as are, when full-grown, either destitute of feet, or two-footed,

or four-footed; other animals are bloodless, such as the bee and the wasp,

and, of marine animals, the cuttle-fish, the crawfish, and all such animals as

have more than four feet.

<

div id="section5" class="section" title="5">


5


  Again, some animals are viviparous, others oviparous, others vermiparous

or ‘grub-bearing’. Some are viviparous, such as man, the horse, the seal, and

all other animals that are hair-coated, and, of marine animals, the cetaceans,

as the dolphin, and the so-called Selachia. (Of these latter animals, some have

a tubular air-passage and no gills, as the dolphin and the whale: the dolphin

with the air-passage going through its back, the whale with the air-passage in

its  forehead;  others  have  uncovered  gills,  as  the  Selachia,  the  sharks  and

rays.)

  What we term an egg is a certain completed result of conception out of

which the animal that is to be develops, and in such a way that in respect to

its primitive germ it comes from part only of the egg, while the rest serves for

food as the germ develops. A ‘grub’ on the other hand is a thing out of which

in  its  entirety  the  animal  in  its  entirety  develops,  by  differentiation  and

growth of the embryo.

Of viviparous animals, some hatch eggs in their own interior, as creatures

of the shark kind; others engender in their interior a live foetus, as man and

the horse. When the result of conception is perfected, with some animals a

living creature is brought forth, with others an egg is brought to light, with

others a grub. Of the eggs, some have egg-shells and are of two differentcolours within, such as birds’ eggs; others are soft-skinned and of uniform

colour, as the eggs of animals of the shark kind. Of the grubs, some are from

the first capable of movement, others are motionless. However, with regard

to these phenomena we shall speak precisely hereafter when we come to treat

of Generation.

  Furthermore, some animals have feet and some are destitute thereof. Of

such as have feet some animals have two, as is the case with men and birds,

and with men and birds only; some have four, as the lizard and the dog; some

have more, as the centipede and the bee; but allsoever that have feet have an

even number of them.

Of swimming creatures that are destitute of feet, some have winglets or

fins, as fishes: and of these some have four fins, two above on the back, two

below on the belly, as the gilthead and the basse; some have two only,-to wit,

such as are exceedingly long and smooth, as the eel and the conger; some

have  none  at  all,  as  the  muraena,  but  use  the  sea  just  as  snakes  use  dry

ground-and by the way, snakes swim in water in just the same way. Of the

shark-kind some have no fins, such as those that are flat and long-tailed, as

the ray and the sting-ray, but these fishes swim actually by the undulatory

motion  of  their  flat  bodies;  the  fishing  frog,  however,  has  fins,  and  so

likewise have all such fishes as have not their flat surfaces thinned off to a

sharp edge.

Of those swimming creatures that appear to have feet, as is the case with

the molluscs, these creatures swim by the aid of their feet and their fins as

well, and they swim most rapidly backwards in the direction of the trunk, as

is the case with the cuttle-fish or sepia and the calamary; and, by the way,

neither of these latter can walk as the poulpe or octopus can.

The hard-skinned or crustaceous animals, like the crawfish, swim by the

instrumentality of their tail-parts; and they swim most rapidly tail foremost,

by  the  aid  of  the  fins  developed  upon  that  member.  The  newt  swims  by

means  of  its  feet  and  tail;  and  its  tail  resembles  that  of  the  sheatfish,  to

compare little with great.

Of animals that can fly some are furnished with feathered wings, as the

eagle and the hawk; some are furnished with membranous wings, as the bee

and the cockchafer; others are furnished with leathern wings, as the flying fox

and the bat. All flying creatures possessed of blood have feathered wings or

leathern wings; the bloodless creatures have membranous wings, as insects.

The creatures that have feathered wings or leathern wings have either twofeet or no feet at all: for there are said to be certain flying serpents in Ethiopia

that are destitute of feet.

  Creatures that have feathered wings are classed as a genus under the name

of ‘bird’; the other two genera, the leathern-winged and membrane-winged,

are as yet without a generic title.

Of  creatures  that  can  fly  and  are  bloodless  some  are  coleopterous  or

sheath-winged,  for  they  have  their  wings  in  a  sheath  or  shard,  like  the

cockchafer  and  the  dung-beetle;  others  are  sheathless,  and  of  these  latter

some  are  dipterous  and  some  tetrapterous:  tetrapterous,  such  as  are

comparatively large or have their stings in the tail, dipterous, such as are

comparatively small or have their stings in front. The coleoptera are, without

exception, devoid of stings; the diptera have the sting in front, as the fly, the

horsefly, the gadfly, and the gnat.

  Bloodless animals as a general rule are inferior in point of size to blooded

animals; though, by the way, there are found in the sea some few bloodless

creatures of abnormal size, as in the case of certain molluscs. And of these

bloodless genera, those are the largest that dwell in milder climates, and those

that inhabit the sea are larger than those living on dry land or in fresh water.

All creatures that are capable of motion move with four or more points of

motion; the blooded animals with four only: as, for instance, man with two

hands and two feet, birds with two wings and two feet, quadrupeds and fishes

severally with four feet and four fins. Creatures that have two winglets or

fins, or that have none at all like serpents, move all the same with not less

than four points of motion; for there are four bends in their bodies as they

move,  or  two  bends  together  with  their  fins.  Bloodless  and  many  footed

animals, whether furnished with wings or feet, move with more than four

points of motion; as, for instance, the dayfly moves with four feet and four

wings: and, I may observe in passing, this creature is exceptional not only in

regard to the duration of its existence, whence it receives its name, but also

because though a quadruped it has wings also.

All animals move alike, four-footed and many-footed; in other words, they

all move cross-corner-wise. And animals in general have two feet in advance;

the crab alone has four.

<

div id="section6" class="section" title="6">


6Very extensive genera of animals, into which other subdivisions fall, are

the following: one, of birds; one, of fishes; and another, of cetaceans. Now all

these creatures are blooded.

  There  is  another  genus  of  the  hard-shell  kind,  which  is  called  oyster;

another of the soft-shell kind, not as yet designated by a single term, such as

the spiny crawfish and the various kinds of crabs and lobsters; and another of

molluscs, as the two kinds of calamary and the cuttle-fish; that of insects is

different. All these latter creatures are bloodless, and such of them as have

feet have a goodly number of them; and of the insects some have wings as

well as feet.

Of the other animals the genera are not extensive. For in them one species

does not comprehend many species; but in one case, as man, the species is

simple,  admitting  of  no  differentiation,  while  other  cases  admit  of

differentiation, but the forms lack particular designations.

So, for instance, creatures that are qudapedal and unprovided with wings

are blooded without exception, but some of them are viviparous, and some

oviparous. Such as are viviparous are hair-coated, and such as are oviparous

are covered with a kind of tessellated hard substance; and the tessellated bits

of this substance are, as it were, similar in regard to position to a scale.

An animal that is blooded and capable of movement on dry land, but is

naturally unprovided with feet, belongs to the serpent genus; and animals of

this genus are coated with the tessellated horny substance. Serpents in general

are  oviparous;  the  adder,  an  exceptional  case,  is  viviparous:  for  not  all

viviparous animals are hair-coated, and some fishes also are viviparous.

All animals, however, that are hair-coated are viviparous. For, by the way,

one  must  regard  as  a  kind  of  hair  such  prickly  hairs  as  hedgehogs  and

porcupines carry; for these spines perform the office of hair, and not of feet

as is the case with similar parts of sea-urchins.

In the genus that combines all viviparous quadrupeds are many species, but

under no common appellation. They are only named as it were one by one, as

we say man, lion, stag, horse, dog, and so on; though, by the way, there is a

sort of genus that embraces all creatures that have bushy manes and bushy

tails, such as the horse, the ass, the mule, the jennet, and the animals that are

called Hemioni in Syria,-from their externally resembling mules, though they

are not strictly of the same species. And that they are not so is proved by the

fact that they mate with and breed from one another. For all these reasons, we

must  take  animals  species  by  species,  and  discuss  their  peculiaritiesseverally’

  These preceding statements, then, have been put forward thus in a general

way, as a kind of foretaste of the number of subjects and of the properties that

we have to consider in order that we may first get a clear notion of distinctive

character and common properties. By and by we shall discuss these matters

with greater minuteness.

  After this we shall pass on to the discussion of causes. For to do this when

the investigation of the details is complete is the proper and natural method,

and  that  whereby  the  subjects  and  the  premisses  of  our  argument  will

afterwards be rendered plain.

In the first place we must look to the constituent parts of animals. For it is

in  a  way  relative  to  these  parts,  first  and  foremost,  that  animals  in  their

entirety differ from one another: either in the fact that some have this or that,

while  they  have  not  that  or  this;  or  by  peculiarities  of  position  or  of

arrangement;  or  by  the  differences  that  have  been  previously  mentioned,

depending  upon  diversity  of  form,  or  excess  or  defect  in  this  or  that

particular, on analogy, or on contrasts of the accidental qualities.

To begin with, we must take into consideration the parts of Man. For, just

as each nation is wont to reckon by that monetary standard with which it is

most familiar, so must we do in other matters. And, of course, man is the

animal with which we are all of us the most familiar.

Now the parts are obvious enough to physical perception. However, with

the view of observing due order and sequence and of combining rational

notions with physical perception, we shall proceed to enumerate the parts:

firstly, the organic, and afterwards the simple or non-composite.

<

div id="section7" class="section" title="7">


7


The chief parts into which the body as a whole is subdivided, are the head,

the neck, the trunk (extending from the neck to the privy parts), which is

called the thorax, two arms and two legs.

Of the parts of which the head is composed the hair-covered portion is

called the ‘skull’. The front portion of it is termed ‘bregma’ or ‘sinciput’,

developed after birth-for it is the last of all the bones in the body to acquire

solidity,-the  hinder  part  is  termed  the  ‘occiput’,  and  the  part  interveningbetween the sinciput and the occiput is the ‘crown’. The brain lies underneath

the sinciput; the occiput is hollow. The skull consists entirely of thin bone,

rounded in shape, and contained within a wrapper of fleshless skin.

The skull has sutures: one, of circular form, in the case of women; in the

case of men, as a general rule, three meeting at a point. Instances have been

known of a man’s skull devoid of suture altogether. In the skull the middle

line, where the hair parts, is called the crown or vertex. In some cases the

parting is double; that is to say, some men are double crowned, not in regard

to the bony skull, but in consequence of the double fall or set of the hair.

<

div id="section8" class="section" title="8">


8


The part that lies under the skull is called the ‘face’: but in the case of man

only, for the term is not applied to a fish or to an ox. In the face the part

below the sinciput and between the eyes is termed the forehead. When men

have large foreheads, they are slow to move; when they have small ones, they

are fickle; when they have broad ones, they are apt to be distraught; when

they have foreheads rounded or bulging out, they are quick-tempered.

<

div id="section9" class="section" title="9">


9


  Underneath the forehead are two eyebrows. Straight eyebrows are a sign of

softness of disposition; such as curve in towards the nose, of harshness; such

as curve out towards the temples, of humour and dissimulation; such as are

drawn in towards one another, of jealousy.

Under the eyebrows come the eyes. These are naturally two in number.

Each of them has an upper and a lower eyelid, and the hairs on the edges of

these are termed ‘eyelashes’. The central part of the eye includes the moist

part whereby vision is effected, termed the ‘pupil’, and the part surrounding it

called the ‘black’; the part outside this is the ‘white’. A part common to the

upper and lower eyelid is a pair of nicks or corners, one in the direction of the

nose, and the other in the direction of the temples. When these are long theyare a sign of bad disposition; if the side toward the nostril be fleshy and

comb-like, they are a sign of dishonesty.

All  animals,  as  a  general  rule,  are  provided  with  eyes,  excepting  the

ostracoderms  and  other  imperfect  creatures;  at  all  events,  all  viviparous

animals have eyes, with the exception of the mole. And yet one might assert

that, though the mole has not eyes in the full sense, yet it has eyes in a kind of

a way. For in point of absolute fact it cannot see, and has no eyes visible

externally; but when the outer skin is removed, it is found to have the place

where  eyes  are  usually  situated,  and  the  black  parts  of  the  eyes  rightly

situated,  and  all  the  place  that  is  usually  devoted  on  the  outside  to  eyes:

showing that the parts are stunted in development, and the skin allowed to

grow over.

<

div id="section10" class="section" title="10">


10


Of the eye the white is pretty much the same in all creatures; but what is

called the black differs in various animals. Some have the rim black, some

distinctly blue, some greyish-blue, some greenish; and this last colour is the

sign of an excellent disposition, and is particularly well adapted for sharpness

of  vision.  Man  is  the  only,  or  nearly  the  only,  creature,  that  has  eyes  of

diverse  colours.  Animals,  as  a  rule,  have  eyes  of  one  colour  only.  Some

horses have blue eyes.

Of eyes, some are large, some small, some medium-sized; of these, the

medium-sized are the best. Moreover, eyes sometimes protrude, sometimes

recede, sometimes are neither protruding nor receding. Of these, the receding

eye is in all animals the most acute; but the last kind are the sign of the best

disposition. Again, eyes are sometimes inclined to wink under observation,

sometimes to remain open and staring, and sometimes are disposed neither to

wink nor stare. The last kind are the sign of the best nature, and of the others,

the latter kind indicates impudence, and the former indecision.

<

div id="section11" class="section" title="11">


11  Furthermore, there is a portion of the head, whereby an animal hears, a part

incapable of breathing, the ‘ear’. I say ‘incapable of breathing’, for Alcmaeon

is mistaken when he says that goats inspire through their ears. Of the ear one

part is unnamed, the other part is called the ‘lobe’; and it is entirely composed

of gristle and flesh. The ear is constructed internally like the trumpet-shell,

and the innermost bone is like the ear itself, and into it at the end the sound

makes  its  way,  as  into  the  bottom  of  a  jar.  This  receptacle  does  not

communicate by any passage with the brain, but does so with the palate, and

a vein extends from the brain towards it. The eyes also are connected with the

brain, and each of them lies at the end of a little vein. Of animals possessed

of  ears  man  is  the  only  one  that  cannot  move  this  organ.  Of  creatures

possessed of hearing, some have ears, whilst others have none, but merely

have  the  passages  for  ears  visible,  as,  for  example,  feathered  animals  or

animals coated with horny tessellates.

  Viviparous animals, with the exception of the seal, the dolphin, and those

others which after a similar fashion to these are cetaceans, are all provided

with ears; for, by the way, the shark-kind are also viviparous. Now, the seal

has the passages visible whereby it hears; but the dolphin can hear, but has no

ears, nor yet any passages visible. But man alone is unable to move his ears,

and all other animals can move them. And the ears lie, with man, in the same

horizontal plane with the eyes, and not in a plane above them as is the case

with some quadrupeds. Of ears, some are fine, some are coarse, and some are

of medium texture; the last kind are best for hearing, but they serve in no way

to indicate character. Some ears are large, some small, some medium-sized;

again, some stand out far, some lie in close and tight, and some take up a

medium  position;  of  these  such  as  are  of  medium  size  and  of  medium

position  are  indications  of  the  best  disposition,  while  the  large  and

outstanding ones indicate a tendency to irrelevant talk or chattering. The part

intercepted between the eye, the ear, and the crown is termed the ‘temple’.

Again, there is a part of the countenance that serves as a passage for the

breath, the ‘nose’. For a man inhales and exhales by this organ, and sneezing

is effected by its means: which last is an outward rush of collected breath,

and is the only mode of breath used as an omen and regarded as supernatural.

Both inhalation and exhalation go right on from the nose towards the chest;

and with the nostrils alone and separately it is impossible to inhale or exhale,

owing to the fact that the inspiration and respiration take place from the chest

along the windpipe, and not by any portion connected with the head; andindeed it is possible for a creature to live without using this process of nasal

respiration.

  Again, smelling takes place by means of the nose,-smelling, or the sensible

discrimination of odour. And the nostril admits of easy motion, and is not,

like  the  ear,  intrinsically  immovable.  A  part  of  it,  composed  of  gristle,

constitutes, a septum or partition, and part is an open passage; for the nostril

consists of two separate channels. The nostril (or nose) of the elephant is long

and strong, and the animal uses it like a hand; for by means of this organ it

draws objects towards it, and takes hold of them, and introduces its food into

its mouth, whether liquid or dry food, and it is the only living creature that

does so.

  Furthermore, there are two jaws; the front part of them constitutes the chin,

and the hinder part the cheek. All animals move the lower jaw, with the

exception of the river crocodile; this creature moves the upper jaw only.

Next after the nose come two lips, composed of flesh, and facile of motion.

The mouth lies inside the jaws and lips. Parts of the mouth are the roof or

palate and the pharynx.

The part that is sensible of taste is the tongue. The sensation has its seat at

the tip of the tongue; if the object to be tasted be placed on the flat surface of

the organ, the taste is less sensibly experienced. The tongue is sensitive in all

other ways wherein flesh in general is so: that is, it can appreciate hardness,

or warmth and cold, in any part of it, just as it can appreciate taste. The

tongue is sometimes broad, sometimes narrow, and sometimes of medium

width; the last kind is the best and the clearest in its discrimination of taste.

Moreover, the tongue is sometimes loosely hung, and sometimes fastened: as

in the case of those who mumble and who lisp.

The tongue consists of flesh, soft and spongy, and the so-called ‘epiglottis’

is a part of this organ.

That part of the mouth that splits into two bits is called the ‘tonsils’; that

part that splits into many bits, the ‘gums’. Both the tonsils and the gums are

composed of flesh. In the gums are teeth, composed of bone.

  Inside the mouth is another part, shaped like a bunch of grapes, a pillar

streaked with veins. If this pillar gets relaxed and inflamed it is called ‘uvula’

or ‘bunch of grapes’, and it then has a tendency to bring about suffocation.

<

div id="section12" class="section" title="12">12


The neck is the part between the face and the trunk. Of this the front part is

the  larynx  land  the  back  part  the  ur  The  front  part,  composed  of  gristle,

through which respiration and speech is effected, is termed the ‘windpipe’;

the part that is fleshy is the oesophagus, inside just in front of the chine. The

part to the back of the neck is the epomis, or ‘shoulder-point’.

  These then are the parts to be met with before you come to the thorax.

To the trunk there is a front part and a back part. Next after the neck in the

front part is the chest, with a pair of breasts. To each of the breasts is attached

a teat or nipple, through which in the case of females the milk percolates; and

the breast is of a spongy texture. Milk, by the way, is found at times in the

male; but with the male the flesh of the breast is tough, with the female it is

soft and porous.

<

div id="section13" class="section" title="13">


13


Next  after  the  thorax  and  in  front  comes  the  ‘belly’,  and  its  root  the

‘navel’. Underneath this root the bilateral part is the ‘flank’: the undivided

part below the navel, the ‘abdomen’, the extremity of which is the region of

the ‘pubes’; above the navel the ‘hypochondrium’; the cavity common to the

hypochondrium and the flank is the gut-cavity.

  Serving as a brace girdle to the hinder parts is the pelvis, and hence it gets

its  name  (osphus),  for  it  is  symmetrical  (isophues)  in  appearance;  of  the

fundament the part for resting on is termed the ‘rump’, and the part whereon

the thigh pivots is termed the ‘socket’ (or acetabulum).

The ‘womb’ is a part peculiar to the female; and the ‘penis’ is peculiar to

the male. This latter organ is external and situated at the extremity of the

trunk; it is composed of two separate parts: of which the extreme part is

fleshy, does not alter in size, and is called the glans; and round about it is a

skin devoid of any specific title, which integument if it be cut asunder never

grows together again, any more than does the jaw or the eyelid. And the

connexion  between  the  latter  and  the  glans  is  called  the  frenum.  The

remaining part of the penis is composed of gristle; it is easily susceptible of

enlargement; and it protrudes and recedes in the reverse directions to what isobservable  in  the  identical  organ  in  cats.  Underneath  the  penis  are  two

‘testicles’, and the integument of these is a skin that is termed the ‘scrotum’.

  Testicles are not identical with flesh, and are not altogether diverse from it.

But by and by we shall treat in an exhaustive way regarding all such parts.

<

div id="section14" class="section" title="14">


14


The privy part of the female is in character opposite to that of the male. In

other words, the part under the pubes is hollow or receding, and not, like the

male  organ,  protruding.  Further,  there  is  an  ‘urethra’  outside  the  womb;

which organ serves as a passage for the sperm of the male, and as an outlet

for liquid excretion to both sexes).

The part common to the neck and chest is the ‘throat’; the ‘armpit’ is

common to side, arm, and shoulder; and the ‘groin’ is common to thigh and

abdomen. The part inside the thigh and buttocks is the ‘perineum’, and the

part outside the thigh and buttocks is the ‘hypoglutis’.

The front parts of the trunk have now been enumerated.

The part behind the chest is termed the ‘back’.

<

div id="section15" class="section" title="15">


15


  Parts  of  the  back  are  a  pair  of  ‘shoulderblades’,  the  ‘back-bone’,  and,

underneath on a level with the belly in the trunk, the ‘loins’. Common to the

upper and lower part of the trunk are the ‘ribs’, eight on either side, for as to

the  so-called  seven-ribbed  Ligyans  we  have  not  received  any  trustworthy

evidence.

Man, then, has an upper and a lower part, a front and a back part, a right

and a left side. Now the right and the left side are pretty well alike in their

parts and identical throughout, except that the left side is the weaker of the

two; but the back parts do not resemble the front ones, neither do the lower

ones the upper: only that these upper and lower parts may be said to resemble

one another thus far, that, if the face be plump or meagre, the abdomen isplump or meagre to correspond; and that the legs correspond to the arms, and

where the upper arm is short the thigh is usually short also, and where the

feet are small the hands are small correspondingly.

Of the limbs, one set, forming a pair, is ‘arms’. To the arm belong the

‘shoulder’, ‘upper-arm’, ‘elbow’, ‘fore-arm’, and ‘hand’. To the hand belong

the ‘palm’, and the five ‘fingers’. The part of the finger that bends is termed

‘knuckle’, the part that is inflexible is termed the ‘phalanx’. The big finger or

thumb is single-jointed, the other fingers are double jointed. The bending

both of the arm and of the finger takes place from without inwards in all

cases; and the arm bends at the elbow. The inner part of the hand is termed

the palm’, and is fleshy and divided by joints or lines: in the case of long-

lived people by one or two extending right across, in the case of the short-

lived by two, not so extending. The joint between hand and arm is termed the

‘wrist’.  The  outside  or  back  of  the  hand  is  sinewy,  and  has  no  specific

designation.

  There is another duplicate limb, the ‘leg’. Of this limb the double-knobbed

part is termed the ‘thigh-bone’, the sliding part of the ‘kneecap’, the double-

boned part the ‘leg’; the front part of this latter is termed the ‘shin’, and the

part behind it the ‘calf’, wherein the flesh is sinewy and venous, in some

cases drawn upwards towards the hollow behind the knee, as in the case of

people  with  large  hips,  and  in  other  cases  drawn  downwards.  The  lower

extremity of the shin is the ‘ankle’, duplicate in either leg. The part of the

limb that contains a multiplicity of bones is the ‘foot’. The hinder part of the

foot is the ‘heel’; at the front of it the divided part consists of ‘toes’, five in

number; the fleshy part underneath is the ‘ball’; the upper part or back of the

foot is sinewy and has no particular appellation; of the toe, one portion is the

‘nail’ and another the ‘joint’, and the nail is in all cases at the extremity; and

toes are without exception single jointed. Men that have the inside or sole of

the foot clumsy and not arched, that is, that walk resting on the entire under-

surface of their feet, are prone to roguery. The joint common to thigh and

shin is the ‘knee’.

These, then, are the parts common to the male and the female sex. The

relative position of the parts as to up and down, or to front and back, or to

right  and  left,  all  this  as  regards  externals  might  safely  be  left  to  mere

ordinary perception. But for all that, we must treat of them for the same

reason as the one previously brought forward; that is to say, we must refer to

them  in  order  that  a  due  and  regular  sequence  may  be  observed  in  ourexposition, and in order that by the enumeration of these obvious facts due

attention may be subsequently given to those parts in men and other animals

that are diverse in any way from one another.

In man, above all other animals, the terms ‘upper’ and ‘lower’ are used in

harmony with their natural positions; for in him, upper and lower have the

same meaning as when they are applied to the universe as a whole. In like

manner  the  terms,  ‘in  front’,  ‘behind’,  ‘right’  and  ‘left’,  are  used  in

accordance with their natural sense. But in regard to other animals, in some

cases these distinctions do not exist, and in others they do so, but in a vague

way. For instance, the head with all animals is up and above in respect to

their  bodies;  but  man  alone,  as  has  been  said,  has,  in  maturity,  this  part

uppermost in respect to the material universe.

Next after the head comes the neck, and then the chest and the back: the

one in front and the other behind. Next after these come the belly, the loins,

the sexual parts, and the haunches; then the thigh and shin; and, lastly, the

feet.

The  legs  bend  frontwards,  in  the  direction  of  actual  progression,  and

frontwards  also  lies  that  part  of  the  foot  which  is  the  most  effective  of

motion, and the flexure of that part; but the heel lies at the back, and the

anklebones lie laterally, earwise. The arms are situated to right and left, and

bend  inwards:  so  that  the  convexities  formed  by  bent  arms  and  legs  are

practically face to face with one another in the case of man.

As for the senses and for the organs of sensation, the eyes, the nostrils, and

the tongue, all alike are situated frontwards; the sense of hearing, and the

organ of hearing, the ear, is situated sideways, on the same horizontal plane

with the eyes. The eyes in man are, in proportion to his size, nearer to one

another than in any other animal.

Of the senses man has the sense of touch more refined than any animal,

and so also, but in less degree, the sense of taste; in the development of the

other senses he is surpassed by a great number of animals.

<

div id="section16" class="section" title="16">


16


The parts, then, that are externally visible are arranged in the way above

stated, and as a rule have their special designations, and from use and wontare known familiarly to all; but this is not the case with the inner parts. For

the fact is that the inner parts of man are to a very great extent unknown, and

the consequence is that we must have recourse to an examination of the inner

parts of other animals whose nature in any way resembles that of man.

In the first place then, the brain lies in the front part of the head. And this

holds alike with all animals possessed of a brain; and all blooded animals are

possessed thereof, and, by the way, molluscs as well. But, taking size for size

of animal, the largest brain, and the moistest, is that of man. Two membranes

enclose it: the stronger one near the bone of the skull; the inner one, round

the brain itself, is finer. The brain in all cases is bilateral. Behind this, right at

the back, comes what is termed the ‘cerebellum’, differing in form from the

brain as we may both feel and see.

The back of the head is with all animals empty and hollow, whatever be its

size in the different animals. For some creatures have big heads while the

face below is small in proportion, as is the case with round-faced animals;

some  have  little  heads  and  long  jaws,  as  is  the  case,  without  exception,

among animals of the mane-and-tail species.

The brain in all animals is bloodless, devoid of veins, and naturally cold to

the touch; in the great majority of animals it has a small hollow in its centre.

The brain-caul around it is reticulated with veins; and this brain-caul is that

skin-like membrane which closely surrounds the brain. Above the brain is the

thinnest and weakest bone of the head, which is termed or ‘sinciput’.

  From the eye there go three ducts to the brain: the largest and the medium-

sized to the cerebellum, the least to the brain itself; and the least is the one

situated nearest to the nostril. The two largest ones, then, run side by side and

do not meet; the medium-sized ones meet-and this is particularly visible in

fishes,-for they lie nearer than the large ones to the brain; the smallest pair are

the most widely separate from one another, and do not meet.

  Inside the neck is what is termed the oesophagus (whose other name is

derived oesophagus from its length and narrowness), and the windpipe. The

windpipe is situated in front of the oesophagus in all animals that have a

windpipe,  and  all  animals  have  one  that  are  furnished  with  lungs.  The

windpipe  is  made  up  of  gristle,  is  sparingly  supplied  with  blood,  and  is

streaked all round with numerous minute veins; it is situated, in its upper part,

near the mouth, below the aperture formed by the nostrils into the mouth-an

aperture through which, when men, in drinking, inhale any of the liquid, this

liquid finds its way out through the nostrils. In betwixt the two openingscomes the so-called epiglottis, an organ capable of being drawn over and

covering the orifice of the windpipe communicating with the mouth; the end

of the tongue is attached to the epiglottis. In the other direction the windpipe

extends to the interval between the lungs, and hereupon bifurcates into each

of the two divisions of the lung; for the lung in all animals possessed of the

organ  has  a  tendency  to  be  double.  In  viviparous  animals,  however,  the

duplication  is  not  so  plainly  discernible  as  in  other  species,  and  the

duplication is least discernible in man. And in man the organ is not split into

many parts, as is the case with some vivipara, neither is it smooth, but its

surface is uneven.

In the case of the ovipara, such as birds and oviparous quadrupeds, the two

parts of the organ are separated to a distance from one another, so that the

creatures appear to be furnished with a pair of lungs; and from the windpipe,

itself single, there branch off two separate parts extending to each of the two

divisions of the lung. It is attached also to the great vein and to what is

designated the ‘aorta’. When the windpipe is charged with air, the air passes

on to the hollow parts of the lung. These parts have divisions, composed of

gristle, which meet at an acute angle; from the divisions run passages through

the entire lung, giving off smaller and smaller ramifications. The heart also is

attached to the windpipe, by connexions of fat, gristle, and sinew; and at the

point of juncture there is a hollow. When the windpipe is charged with air,

the entrance of the air into the heart, though imperceptible in some animals, is

perceptible  enough  in  the  larger  ones.  Such  are  the  properties  of  the

windpipe, and it takes in and throws out air only, and takes in nothing else

either dry or liquid, or else it causes you pain until you shall have coughed up

whatever may have gone down.

The  oesophagus  communicates  at  the  top  with  the  mouth,  close  to  the

windpipe, and is attached to the backbone and the windpipe by membranous

ligaments, and at last finds its way through the midriff into the belly. It is

composed  of  flesh-like  substance,  and  is  elastic  both  lengthways  and

breadthways.

The stomach of man resembles that of a dog; for it is not much bigger than

the  bowel,  but  is  somewhat  like  a  bowel  of  more  than  usual  width;  then

comes the bowel, single, convoluted, moderately wide. The lower part of the

gut is like that of a pig; for it is broad, and the part from it to the buttocks is

thick and short. The caul, or great omentum, is attached to the middle of the

stomach,  and  consists  of  a  fatty  membrane,  as  is  the  case  with  all  otheranimals whose stomachs are single and which have teeth in both jaws.

The mesentery is over the bowels; this also is membranous and broad, and

turns  to  fat.  It  is  attached  to  the  great  vein  and  the  aorta,  and  there  run

through it a number of veins closely packed together, extending towards the

region of the bowels, beginning above and ending below.

So  much  for  the  properties  of  the  oesophagus,  the  windpipe,  and  the

stomach.

<

div id="section17" class="section" title="17">


17


The heart has three cavities, and is situated above the lung at the division

of the windpipe, and is provided with a fatty and thick membrane where it

fastens on to the great vein and the aorta. It lies with its tapering portion upon

the aorta, and this portion is similarly situated in relation to the chest in all

animals that have a chest. In all animals alike, in those that have a chest and

in those that have none, the apex of the heart points forwards, although this

fact might possibly escape notice by a change of position under dissection.

The rounded end of the heart is at the top. The apex is to a great extent fleshy

and close in texture, and in the cavities of the heart are sinews. As a rule the

heart is situated in the middle of the chest in animals that have a chest, and in

man it is situated a little to the left-hand side, leaning a little way from the

division of the breasts towards the left breast in the upper part of the chest.

The heart is not large, and in its general shape it is not elongated; in fact, it

is somewhat round in form: only, be it remembered, it is sharp-pointed at the

bottom. It has three cavities, as has been said: the right-hand one the largest

of the three, the left-hand one the least, and the middle one intermediate in

size. All these cavities, even the two small ones, are connected by passages

with the lung, and this fact is rendered quite plain in one of the cavities. And

below, at the point of attachment, in the largest cavity there is a connexion

with the great vein (near which the mesentery lies); and in the middle one

there is a connexion with the aorta.

Canals  lead  from  the  heart  into  the  lung,  and  branch  off  just  as  the

windpipe does, running all over the lung parallel with the passages from the

windpipe. The canals from the heart are uppermost; and there is no common

passage, but the passages through their having a common wall receive thebreath and pass it on to the heart; and one of the passages conveys it to the

right cavity, and the other to the left.

  With regard to the great vein and the aorta we shall, by and by, treat of

them  together  in  a  discussion  devoted  to  them  and  to  them  alone.  In  all

animals  that  are  furnished  with  a  lung,  and  that  are  both  internally  and

externally viviparous, the lung is of all organs the most richly supplied with

blood; for the lung is throughout spongy in texture, and along by every single

pore in it go branches from the great vein. Those who imagine it to be empty

are altogether mistaken; and they are led into their error by their observation

of lungs removed from animals under dissection, out of which organs the

blood had all escaped immediately after death.

Of the other internal organs the heart alone contains blood. And the lung

has blood not in itself but in its veins, but the heart has blood in itself; for in

each of its three cavities it has blood, but the thinnest blood is what it has in

its central cavity.

Under the lung comes the thoracic diaphragm or midriff, attached to the

ribs, the hypochondria and the backbone, with a thin membrane in the middle

of it. It has veins running through it; and the diaphragm in the case of man is

thicker in proportion to the size of his frame than in other animals.

Under the diaphragm on the right-hand side lies the ‘liver’, and on the left-

hand side the ‘spleen’, alike in all animals that are provided with these organs

in  an  ordinary  and  not  preternatural  way;  for,  be  it  observed,  in  some

quadrupeds these organs have been found in a transposed position. These

organs are connected with the stomach by the caul.

To outward view the spleen of man is narrow and long, resembling the

self-same organ in the pig. The liver in the great majority of animals is not

provided with a ‘gall-bladder’; but the latter is present in some. The liver of a

man is round-shaped, and resembles the same organ in the ox. And, by the

way, the absence above referred to of a gall-bladder is at times met with in

the practice of augury. For instance, in a certain district of the Chalcidic

settlement in Euboea the sheep are devoid of gall-bladders; and in Naxos

nearly all the quadrupeds have one so large that foreigners when they offer

sacrifice with such victims are bewildered with fright, under the impression

that the phenomenon is not due to natural causes, but bodes some mischief to

the individual offerers of the sacrifice.

  Again, the liver is attached to the great vein, but it has no communication

with  the  aorta;  for  the  vein  that  goes  off  from  the  great  vein  goes  rightthrough the liver, at a point where are the so-called ‘portals’ of the liver. The

spleen also is connected only with the great vein, for a vein extends to the

spleen off from it.

  After these organs come the ‘kidneys’, and these are placed close to the

backbone, and resemble in character the same organ in kine. In all animals

that are provided with this organ, the right kidney is situated higher up than

the other. It has also less fatty substance than the left-hand one and is less

moist. And this phenomenon also is observable in all the other animals alike.

  Furthermore, passages or ducts lead into the kidneys both from the great

vein and from the aorta, only not into the cavity. For, by the way, there is a

cavity  in  the  middle  of  the  kidney,  bigger  in  some  creatures  and  less  in

others; but there is none in the case of the seal. This latter animal has kidneys

resembling in shape the identical organ in kine, but in its case the organs are

more solid than in any other known creature. The ducts that lead into the

kidneys lose themselves in the substance of the kidneys themselves; and the

proof that they extend no farther rests on the fact that they contain no blood,

nor is any clot found therein. The kidneys, however, have, as has been said, a

small cavity. From this cavity in the kidney there lead two considerable ducts

or  ureters  into  the  bladder;  and  others  spring  from  the  aorta,  strong  and

continuous. And to the middle of each of the two kidneys is attached a hollow

sinewy vein, stretching right along the spine through the narrows; by and by

these veins are lost in either loin, and again become visible extending to the

flank. And these off-branchings of the veins terminate in the bladder. For the

bladder lies at the extremity, and is held in position by the ducts stretching

from the kidneys, along the stalk that extends to the urethra; and pretty well

all round it is fastened by fine sinewy membranes, that resemble to some

extent the thoracic diaphragm. The bladder in man is, proportionately to his

size, tolerably large.

To the stalk of the bladder the private part is attached, the external orifices

coalescing; but a little lower down, one of the openings communicates with

the testicles and the other with the bladder. The penis is gristly and sinewy in

its  texture.  With  it  are  connected  the  testicles  in  male  animals,  and  the

properties of these organs we shall discuss in our general account of the said

organ.

All these organs are similar in the female; for there is no difference in

regard  to  the  internal  organs,  except  in  respect  to  the  womb,  and  with

reference to the appearance of this organ I must refer the reader to diagramsin my ‘Anatomy’. The womb, however, is situated over the bowel, and the

bladder lies over the womb. But we must treat by and by in our pages of the

womb of all female animals viewed generally. For the wombs of all female

animals are not identical, neither do their local dispositions coincide.

  These are the organs, internal and external, of man, and such is their nature

and such their local disposition.                      The History of Animals, Book II


translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson


<

div id="book2" class="chapter" title="Book II">


1


  With regard to animals in general, some parts or organs are common to all,

as has been said, and some are common only to particular genera; the parts,

moreover,  are  identical  with  or  different  from  one  another  on  the  lines

already  repeatedly  laid  down.  For  as  a  general  rule  all  animals  that  are

generically distinct have the majority of their parts or organs different in form

or species; and some of them they have only analogically similar and diverse

in kind or genus, while they have others that are alike in kind but specifically

diverse; and many parts or organs exist in some animals, but not in others.

For instance, viviparous quadrupeds have all a head and a neck, and all the

parts or organs of the head, but they differ each from other in the shapes of

the  parts.  The  lion  has  its  neck  composed  of  one  single  bone  instead  of

vertebrae; but, when dissected, the animal is found in all internal characters to

resemble the dog.

The quadrupedal vivipara instead of arms have forelegs. This is true of all

quadrupeds, but such of them as have toes have, practically speaking, organs

analogous to hands; at all events, they use these fore-limbs for many purposes

as hands. And they have the limbs on the left-hand side less distinct from

those on the right than man.

The fore-limbs then serve more or less the purpose of hands in quadrupeds,

with the exception of the elephant. This latter animal has its toes somewhat

indistinctly defined, and its front legs are much bigger than its hinder ones; it

is five-toed, and has short ankles to its hind feet. But it has a nose such in

properties and such in size as to allow of its using the same for a hand. For it

eats and drinks by lifting up its food with the aid of this organ into its mouth,

and with the same organ it lifts up articles to the driver on its back; with this

organ it can pluck up trees by the roots, and when walking through water itspouts the water up by means of it; and this organ is capable of being crooked

or coiled at the tip, but not of flexing like a joint, for it is composed of gristle.

Of all animals man alone can learn to make equal use of both hands.

All animals have a part analogous to the chest in man, but not similar to

his; for the chest in man is broad, but that of all other animals is narrow.

Moreover,  no  other  animal  but  man  has  breasts  in  front;  the  elephant,

certainly, has two breasts, not however in the chest, but near it.

  Moreover, also, animals have the flexions of their fore and hind limbs in

directions  opposite  to  one  another,  and  in  directions  the  reverse  of  those

observed in the arms and legs of man; with the exception of the elephant. In

other words, with the viviparous quadrupeds the front legs bend forwards and

the hind ones backwards, and the concavities of the two pairs of limbs thus

face one another.

The elephant does not sleep standing, as some were wont to assert, but it

bends its legs and settles down; only that in consequence of its weight it

cannot bend its leg on both sides simultaneously, but falls into a recumbent

position on one side or the other, and in this position it goes to sleep. And it

bends its hind legs just as a man bends his legs.

In the case of the ovipara, as the crocodile and the lizard and the like, both

pairs of legs, fore and hind, bend forwards, with a slight swerve on one side.

The  flexion  is  similar  in  the  case  of  the  multipeds;  only  that  the  legs  in

between the extreme ends always move in a manner intermediate between

that of those in front and those behind, and accordingly bend sideways rather

than backwards or forwards. But man bends his arms and his legs towards the

same point, and therefore in opposite ways: that is to say, he bends his arms

backwards, with just a slight inclination inwards, and his legs frontwards. No

animal bends both its fore-limbs and hind-limbs backwards; but in the case of

all animals the flexion of the shoulders is in the opposite direction to that of

the elbows or the joints of the forelegs, and the flexure in the hips to that of

the knees of the hind-legs: so that since man differs from other animals in

flexion,  those  animals  that  possess  such  parts  as  these  move  them

contrariwise to man.

  Birds have the flexions of their limbs like those of the quadrupeds; for,

although bipeds, they bend their legs backwards, and instead of arms or front

legs have wings which bend frontwards.

The seal is a kind of imperfect or crippled quadruped; for just behind the

shoulder-blade its front feet are placed, resembling hands, like the front pawsof the bear; for they are furnished with five toes, and each of the toes has

three  flexions  and  a  nail  of  inconsiderable  size.  The  hind  feet  are  also

furnished with five toes; in their flexions and nails they resemble the front

feet, and in shape they resemble a fish’s tail.

The movements of animals, quadruped and multiped, are crosswise, or in

diagonals, and their equilibrium in standing posture is maintained crosswise;

and it is always the limb on the right-hand side that is the first to move. The

lion,  however,  and  the  two  species  of  camels,  both  the  Bactrian  and  the

Arabian, progress by an amble; and the action so called is when the animal

never overpasses the right with the left, but always follows close upon it.

  Whatever parts men have in front, these parts quadrupeds have below, in

or on the belly; and whatever parts men have behind, these parts quadrupeds

have above on their backs. Most quadrupeds have a tail; for even the seal has

a tiny one resembling that of the stag. Regarding the tails of the pithecoids we

must give their distinctive properties by and by animal

All viviparous quadrupeds are hair-coated, whereas man has only a few

short hairs excepting on the head, but, so far as the head is concerned, he is

hairier than any other animal. Further, of hair-coated animals, the back is

hairier than the belly, which latter is either comparatively void of hair or

smooth and void of hair altogether. With man the reverse is the case.

Man also has upper and lower eyelashes, and hair under the armpits and on

the pubes. No other animal has hair in either of these localities, or has an

under eyelash; though in the case of some animals a few straggling hairs

grow under the eyelid.

Of hair-coated quadrupeds some are hairy all over the body, as the pig, the

bear, and the dog; others are especially hairy on the neck and all round about

it, as is the case with animals that have a shaggy mane, such as the lion;

others again are especially hairy on the upper surface of the neck from the

head as far as the withers, namely, such as have a crested mane, as in the case

with the horse, the mule, and, among the undomesticated horned animals, the

bison.

The so-called hippelaphus also has a mane on its withers, and the animal

called pardion, in either case a thin mane extending from the head to the

withers; the hippelaphus has, exceptionally, a beard by the larynx. Both these

animals  have  horns  and  are  cloven-footed;  the  female,  however,  of  the

hippelaphus has no horns. This latter animal resembles the stag in size; it is

found in the territory of the Arachotae, where the wild cattle also are found.Wild cattle differ from their domesticated congeners just as the wild boar

differs  from  the  domesticated  one.  That  is  to  say  they  are  black,  strong

looking, with a hook-nosed muzzle, and with horns lying more over the back.

The horns of the hippelaphus resemble those of the gazelle.

The  elephant,  by  the  way,  is  the  least  hairy  of  all  quadrupeds.  With

animals,  as  a  general  rule,  the  tail  corresponds  with  the  body  as  regards

thickness or thinness of hair-coating; that is, with animals that have long tails,

for some creatures have tails of altogether insignificant size.

  Camels  have  an  exceptional  organ  wherein  they  differ  from  all  other

animals, and that is the so-called ‘hump’ on their back. The Bactrian camel

differs from the Arabian; for the former has two humps and the latter only

one, though it has, by the way, a kind of a hump below like the one above, on

which, when it kneels, the weight of the whole body rests. The camel has four

teats like the cow, a tail like that of an ass, and the privy parts of the male are

directed backwards. It has one knee in each leg, and the flexures of the limb

are  not  manifold,  as  some  say,  although  they  appear  to  be  so  from  the

constricted shape of the region of the belly. It has a huckle-bone like that of

kine, but meagre and small in proportion to its bulk. It is cloven-footed, and

has not got teeth in both jaws; and it is cloven footed in the following way: at

the back there is a slight cleft extending as far up as the second joint of the

toes; and in front there are small hooves on the tip of the first joint of the

toes; and a sort of web passes across the cleft, as in geese. The foot is fleshy

underneath, like that of the bear; so that, when the animal goes to war, they

protect its feet, when they get sore, with sandals.

The legs of all quadrupeds are bony, sinewy, and fleshless; and in point of

fact such is the case with all animals that are furnished with feet, with the

exception of man. They are also unfurnished with buttocks; and this last point

is plain in an especial degree in birds. It is the reverse with man; for there is

scarcely any part of the body in which man is so fleshy as in the buttock, the

thigh, and the calf; for the part of the leg called gastroenemia or is fleshy.

Of  blooded  and  viviparous  quadrupeds  some  have  the  foot  cloven  into

many parts, as is the case with the hands and feet of man (for some animals,

by the way, are many-toed, as the lion, the dog, and the pard); others have

feet cloven in twain, and instead of nails have hooves, as the sheep, the goat,

the deer, and the hippopotamus; others are uncloven of foot, such for instance

as the solid-hooved animals, the horse and the mule. Swine are either cloven-

footed  or  uncloven-footed;  for  there  are  in  Illyria  and  in  Paeonia  andelsewhere solid-hooved swine. The cloven-footed animals have two clefts

behind; in the solid-hooved this part is continuous and undivided.

  Furthermore, of animals some are horned, and some are not so. The great

majority of the horned animals are cloven-footed, as the ox, the stag, the

goat; and a solid-hooved animal with a pair of horns has never yet been met

with. But a few animals are known to be singled-horned and single-hooved,

as the Indian ass; and one, to wit the oryx, is single horned and cloven-

hooved.

Of  all  solid-hooved  animals  the  Indian  ass  alone  has  an  astragalus  or

huckle-bone; for the pig, as was said above, is either solid-hooved or cloven-

footed,  and  consequently  has  no  well-formed  huckle-bone.  Of  the  cloven

footed  many  are  provided  with  a  huckle-bone.  Of  the  many-fingered  or

many-toed, no single one has been observed to have a huckle-bone, none of

the  others  any  more  than  man.  The  lynx,  however,  has  something  like  a

hemiastragal, and the lion something resembling the sculptor’s ‘labyrinth’.

All the animals that have a huckle-bone have it in the hinder legs. They have

also the bone placed straight up in the joint; the upper part, outside; the lower

part, inside; the sides called Coa turned towards one another, the sides called

Chia outside, and the keraiae or ‘horns’ on the top. This, then, is the position

of the hucklebone in the case of all animals provided with the part.

  Some animals are, at one and the same time, furnished with a mane and

furnished also with a pair of horns bent in towards one another, as is the

bison (or aurochs), which is found in Paeonia and Maedica. But all animals

that are horned are quadrupedal, except in cases where a creature is said

metaphorically, or by a figure of speech, to have horns; just as the Egyptians

describe the serpents found in the neighbourhood of Thebes, while in point of

fact the creatures have merely protuberances on the head sufficiently large to

suggest such an epithet.

Of horned animals the deer alone has a horn, or antler, hard and solid

throughout. The horns of other animals are hollow for a certain distance, and

solid towards the extremity. The hollow part is derived from the skin, but the

core round which this is wrapped-the hard part-is derived from the bones; as

is the case with the horns of oxen. The deer is the only animal that sheds its

horns, and it does so annually, after reaching the age of two years, and again

renews them. All other animals retain their horns permanently, unless the

horns be damaged by accident.

  Again, with regard to the breasts and the generative organs, animals differwidely from one another and from man. For instance, the breasts of some

animals are situated in front, either in the chest or near to it, and there are in

such  cases  two  breasts  and  two  teats,  as  is  the  case  with  man  and  the

elephant, as previously stated. For the elephant has two breasts in the region

of the axillae; and the female elephant has two breasts insignificant in size

and  in  no  way  proportionate  to  the  bulk  of  the  entire  frame,  in  fact,  so

insignificant  as  to  be  invisible  in  a  sideways  view;  the  males  also  have

breasts, like the females, exceedingly small. The she-bear has four breasts.

Some  animals  have  two  breasts,  but  situated  near  the  thighs,  and  teats,

likewise two in number, as the sheep; others have four teats, as the cow.

Some have breasts neither in the chest nor at the thighs, but in the belly, as

the dog and pig; and they have a considerable number of breasts or dugs, but

not all of equal size. Thus the shepard has four dugs in the belly, the lioness

two, and others more. The she-camel, also, has two dugs and four teats, like

the cow. Of solid-hooved animals the males have no dugs, excepting in the

case of males that take after the mother, which phenomenon is observable in

horses.

Of male animals the genitals of some are external, as is the case with man,

the horse, and most other creatures; some are internal, as with the dolphin.

With those that have the organ externally placed, the organ in some cases is

situated in front, as in the cases already mentioned, and of these some have

the organ detached, both penis and testicles, as man; others have penis and

testicles closely attached to the belly, some more closely, some less; for this

organ is not detached in the wild boar nor in the horse.

The penis of the elephant resembles that of the horse; compared with the

size of the animal it is disproportionately small; the testicles are not visible,

but are concealed inside in the vicinity of the kidneys; and for this reason the

male speedily gives over in the act of intercourse. The genitals of the female

are situated where the udder is in sheep; when she is in heat, she draws the

organ back and exposes it externally, to facilitate the act of intercourse for the

male; and the organ opens out to a considerable extent.

  With most animals the genitals have the position above assigned; but some

animals discharge their urine backwards, as the lynx, the lion, the camel, and

the hare. Male animals differ from one another, as has been said, in this

particular, but all female animals are retromingent: even the female elephant

like other animals, though she has the privy part below the thighs.

In the male organ itself there is a great diversity. For in some cases theorgan is composed of flesh and gristle, as in man; in such cases, the fleshy

part does not become inflated, but the gristly part is subject to enlargement.

In other cases, the organ is composed of fibrous tissue, as with the camel and

the deer; in other cases it is bony, as with the fox, the wolf, the marten, and

the weasel; for this organ in the weasel has a bone.

  When man has arrived at maturity, his upper part is smaller than the lower

one,  but  with  all  other  blooded  animals  the  reverse  holds  good.  By  the

‘upper’ part we mean all extending from the head down to the parts used for

excretion of residuum, and by the ‘lower’ part else. With animals that have

feet the hind legs are to be rated as the lower part in our comparison of

magnitudes, and with animals devoid of feet, the tail, and the like.

  When animals arrive at maturity, their properties are as above stated; but

they differ greatly from one another in their growth towards maturity. For

instance, man, when young, has his upper part larger than the lower, but in

course of growth he comes to reverse this condition; and it is owing to this

circumstance that-an exceptional instance, by the way-he does not progress in

early life as he does at maturity, but in infancy creeps on all fours; but some

animals, in growth, retain the relative proportion of the parts, as the dog.

Some animals at first have the upper part smaller and the lower part larger,

and in course of growth the upper part gets to be the larger, as is the case with

the bushy-tailed animals such as the horse; for in their case there is never,

subsequently to birth, any increase in the part extending from the hoof to the

haunch.

  Again, in respect to the teeth, animals differ greatly both from one another

and from man. All animals that are quadrupedal, blooded and viviparous, are

furnished with teeth; but, to begin with, some are double-toothed (or fully

furnished with teeth in both jaws), and some are not. For instance, horned

quadrupeds are not double-toothed; for they have not got the front teeth in the

upper jaw; and some hornless animals, also, are not double toothed, as the

camel. Some animals have tusks, like the boar, and some have not. Further,

some animals are saw-toothed, such as the lion, the pard, and the dog; and

some have teeth that do not interlock but have flat opposing crowns, as the

horse and the ox; and by ‘saw-toothed’ we mean such animals as interlock

the sharp-pointed teeth in one jaw between the sharp-pointed ones in the

other. No animal is there that possesses both tusks and horns, nor yet do

either of these structures exist in any animal possessed of ‘saw-teeth’. The

front teeth are usually sharp, and the back ones blunt. The seal is saw-toothedthroughout, inasmuch as he is a sort of link with the class of fishes; for fishes

are almost all saw-toothed.

No animal of these genera is provided with double rows of teeth. There is,

however, an animal of the sort, if we are to believe Ctesias. He assures us that

the Indian wild beast called the ‘martichoras’ has a triple row of teeth in both

upper and lower jaw; that it is as big as a lion and equally hairy, and that its

feet resemble those of the lion; that it resembles man in its face and ears; that

its eyes are blue, and its colour vermilion; that its tail is like that of the land-

scorpion; that it has a sting in the tail, and has the faculty of shooting off

arrow-wise the spines that are attached to the tail; that the sound of its voice

is a something between the sound of a pan-pipe and that of a trumpet; that it

can run as swiftly as deer, and that it is savage and a man-eater.

Man sheds his teeth, and so do other animals, as the horse, the mule, and

the ass. And man sheds his front teeth; but there is no instance of an animal

that sheds its molars. The pig sheds none of its teeth at all.

<

div id="section19" class="section" title="2">


2


  With regard to dogs some doubts are entertained, as some contend that

they shed no teeth whatever, and others that they shed the canines, but those

alone; the fact being, that they do shed their teeth like man, but that the

circumstance  escapes  observation,  owing  to  the  fact  that  they  never  shed

them until equivalent teeth have grown within the gums to take the place of

the shed ones. We shall be justified in supposing that the case is similar with

wild beasts in general; for they are said to shed their canines only. Dogs can

be distinguished from one another, the young from the old, by their teeth; for

the teeth in young dogs are white and sharp-pointed; in old dogs, black and

blunt.

<

div id="section20" class="section" title="3">


3


In this particular, the horse differs entirely from animals in general: for,generally speaking, as animals grow older their teeth get blacker, but the

horse’s teeth grow whiter with age.

The so-called ‘canines’ come in between the sharp teeth and the broad or

blunt ones, partaking of the form of both kinds; for they are broad at the base

and sharp at the tip.

  Males have more teeth than females in the case of men, sheep, goats, and

swine; in the case of other animals observations have not yet been made: but

the more teeth they have the more long-lived are they, as a rule, while those

are short-lived in proportion that have teeth fewer in number and thinly set.

<

div id="section21" class="section" title="4">


4


The last teeth to come in man are molars called ‘wisdom-teeth’, which

come at the age of twenty years, in the case of both sexes. Cases have been

known in women upwards. of eighty years old where at the very close of life

the wisdom-teeth have come up, causing great pain in their coming; and cases

have been known of the like phenomenon in men too. This happens, when it

does happen, in the case of people where the wisdom-teeth have not come up

in early years.

<

div id="section22" class="section" title="5">


5


The elephant has four teeth on either side, by which it munches its food,

grinding it like so much barley-meal, and, quite apart from these, it has its

great  teeth,  or  tusks,  two  in  number.  In  the  male  these  tusks  are

comparatively  large  and  curved  upwards;  in  the  female,  they  are

comparatively small and point in the opposite direction; that is, they look

downwards towards the ground. The elephant is furnished with teeth at birth,

but the tusks are not then visible.

<

div id="section23" class="section" title="6">6


The tongue of the elephant is exceedingly small, and situated far back in

the mouth, so that it is difficult to get a sight of it.

<

div id="section24" class="section" title="7">


7


  Furthermore, animals differ from one another in the relative size of their

mouths. In some animals the mouth opens wide, as is the case with the dog,

the  lion,  and  with  all  the  saw-toothed  animals;  other  animals  have  small

mouths, as man; and others have mouths of medium capacity, as the pig and

his congeners.

  (The Egyptian hippopotamus has a mane like a horse, is cloven-footed like

an ox, and is snub-nosed. It has a huckle-bone like cloven-footed animals,

and tusks just visible; it has the tail of a pig, the neigh of a horse, and the

dimensions of an ass. The hide is so thick that spears are made out of it. In its

internal organs it resembles the horse and the ass.)

<

div id="section25" class="section" title="8">


8


  Some animals share the properties of man and the quadrupeds, as the ape,

the  monkey,  and  the  baboon.  The  monkey  is  a  tailed  ape.  The  baboon

resembles the ape in form, only that it is bigger and stronger, more like a dog

in face, and is more savage in its habits, and its teeth are more dog-like and

more powerful.

  Apes are hairy on the back in keeping with their quadrupedal nature, and

hairy on the belly in keeping with their human form-for, as was said above,

this characteristic is reversed in man and the quadruped-only that the hair is

coarse, so that the ape is thickly coated both on the belly and on the back. Its

face resembles that of man in many respects; in other words, it has similar

nostrils and ears, and teeth like those of man, both front teeth and molars.

Further, whereas quadrupeds in general are not furnished with lashes on oneof  the  two  eyelids,  this  creature  has  them  on  both,  only  very  thinly  set,

especially the under ones; in fact they are very insignificant indeed. And we

must bear in mind that all other quadrupeds have no under eyelash at all.

The ape has also in its chest two teats upon poorly developed breasts. It has

also arms like man, only covered with hair, and it bends these legs like man,

with the convexities of both limbs facing one another. In addition, it has

hands and fingers and nails like man, only that all these parts are somewhat

more beast-like in appearance. Its feet are exceptional in kind. That is, they

are like large hands, and the toes are like fingers, with the middle one the

longest of all, and the under part of the foot is like a hand except for its

length, and stretches out towards the extremities like the palm of the hand;

and this palm at the after end is unusually hard, and in a clumsy obscure kind

of way resembles a heel. The creature uses its feet either as hands or feet, and

doubles them up as one doubles a fist. Its upper-arm and thigh are short in

proportion to the forearm and the shin. It has no projecting navel, but only a

hardness in the ordinary locality of the navel. Its upper part is much larger

than its lower part, as is the case with quadrupeds; in fact, the proportion of

the former to the latter is about as five to three. Owing to this circumstance

and to the fact that its feet resemble hands and are composed in a manner of

hand and of foot: of foot in the heel extremity, of the hand in all else-for even

the toes have what is called a ‘palm’:-for these reasons the animal is oftener

to be found on all fours than upright. It has neither hips, inasmuch as it is a

quadruped, nor yet a tail, inasmuch as it is a biped, except nor yet a tal by the

way that it has a tail as small as small can be, just a sort of indication of a tail.

The genitals of the female resemble those of the female in the human species;

those of the male are more like those of a dog than are those of a man.

<

div id="section26" class="section" title="9">


9


The monkey, as has been observed, is furnished with a tail. In all such

creatures  the  internal  organs  are  found  under  dissection  to  correspond  to

those of man.

So much then for the properties of the organs of such animals as bring

forth their young into the world alive.

<div id="section27" class="section" title="10">


10


  Oviparous and blooded quadrupeds-and, by the way, no terrestrial blooded

animal is oviparous unless it is quadrupedal or is devoid of feet altogether-are

furnished with a head, a neck, a back, upper and under parts, the front legs

and  hind  legs,  and  the  part  analogous  to  the  chest,  all  as  in  the  case  of

viviparous quadrupeds, and with a tail, usually large, in exceptional cases

small. And all these creatures are many-toed, and the several toes are cloven

apart. Furthermore, they all have the ordinary organs of sensation, including a

tongue, with the exception of the Egyptian crocodile.

This latter animal, by the way, resembles certain fishes. For, as a general

rule, fishes have a prickly tongue, not free in its movements; though there are

some fishes that present a smooth undifferentiated surface where the tongue

should be, until you open their mouths wide and make a close inspection.

  Again,  oviparous  blooded  quadrupeds  are  unprovided  with  ears,  but

possess  only  the  passage  for  hearing;  neither  have  they  breasts,  nor  a

copulatory organ, nor external testicles, but internal ones only; neither are

they hair coated, but are in all cases covered with scaly plates. Moreover,

they are without exception saw-toothed.

  River crocodiles have pigs’ eyes, large teeth and tusks, and strong nails,

and  an  impenetrable  skin  composed  of  scaly  plates.  They  see  but  poorly

under water, but above the surface of it with remarkable acuteness. As a rule,

they  pass  the  day-time  on  land  and  the  nighttime  in  the  water;  for  the

temperature of the water is at night-time more genial than that of the open air.

<

div id="section28" class="section" title="11">


11


The  chameleon  resembles  the  lizard  in  the  general  configuration  of  its

body, but the ribs stretch downwards and meet together under the belly as is

the  case  with  fishes,  and  the  spine  sticks  up  as  with  the  fish.  Its  face

resembles that of the baboon. Its tail is exceedingly long, terminates in a

sharp point, and is for the most part coiled up, like a strap of leather. It standshigher off the ground than the lizard, but the flexure of the legs is the same in

both creatures. Each of its feet is divided into two parts, which bear the same

relation to one another that the thumb and the rest of the hand bear to one

another in man. Each of these parts is for a short distance divided after a

fashion into toes; on the front feet the inside part is divided into three and the

outside into two, on the hind feet the inside part into two and the outside into

three; it has claws also on these parts resembling those of birds of prey. Its

body is rough all over, like that of the crocodile. Its eyes are situated in a

hollow recess, and are very large and round, and are enveloped in a skin

resembling  that  which  covers  the  entire  body;  and  in  the  middle  a  slight

aperture is left for vision, through which the animal sees, for it never covers

up this aperture with the cutaneous envelope. It keeps twisting its eyes round

and shifting its line of vision in every direction, and thus contrives to get a

sight of any object that it wants to see. The change in its colour takes place

when it is inflated with air; it is then black, not unlike the crocodile, or green

like the lizard but black-spotted like the pard. This change of colour takes

place over the whole body alike, for the eyes and the tail come alike under its

influence. In its movements it is very sluggish, like the tortoise. It assumes a

greenish hue in dying, and retains this hue after death. It resembles the lizard

in the position of the oesophagus and the windpipe. It has no flesh anywhere

except a few scraps of flesh on the head and on the jaws and near to the root

of the tail. It has blood only round about the heart, the eyes, the region above

the heart, and in all the veins extending from these parts; and in all these there

is but little blood after all. The brain is situated a little above the eyes, but

connected with them. When the outer skin is drawn aside from off the eye, a

something is found surrounding the eye, that gleams through like a thin ring

of copper. Membranes extend well nigh over its entire frame, numerous and

strong, and surpassing in respect of number and relative strength those found

in any other animal. After being cut open along its entire length it continues

to breathe for a considerable time; a very slight motion goes on in the region

of  the  heart,  and,  while  contraction  is  especially  manifested  in  the

neighbourhood of the ribs, a similar motion is more or less discernible over

the whole body. It has no spleen visible. It hibernates, like the lizard.

<

div id="section29" class="section" title="12">


12  Birds also in some parts resemble the above mentioned animals; that is to

say,  they  have  in  all  cases  a  head,  a  neck,  a  back,  a  belly,  and  what  is

analogous to the chest. The bird is remarkable among animals as having two

feet, like man; only, by the way, it bends them backwards as quadrupeds

bend their hind legs, as was noticed previously. It has neither hands nor front

feet, but wings-an exceptional structure as compared with other animals. Its

haunch-bone is long, like a thigh, and is attached to the body as far as the

middle of the belly; so like to a thigh is it that when viewed separately it

looks like a real one, while the real thigh is a separate structure betwixt it and

the shin. Of all birds those that have crooked talons have the biggest thighs

and the strongest breasts. All birds are furnished with many claws, and all

have the toes separated more or less asunder; that is to say, in the greater part

the toes are clearly distinct from one another, for even the swimming birds,

although  they  are  web-footed,  have  still  their  claws  fully  articulated  and

distinctly differentiated from one another. Birds that fly high in air are in all

cases  four-toed:  that  is,  the  greater  part  have  three  toes  in  front  and  one

behind in place of a heel; some few have two in front and two behind, as the

wryneck.

This latter bird is somewhat bigger than the chaffinch, and is mottled in

appearance. It is peculiar in the arrangement of its toes, and resembles the

snake in the structure of its tongue; for the creature can protrude its tongue to

the extent of four finger-breadths, and then draw it back again. Moreover, it

can twist its head backwards while keeping all the rest of its body still, like

the serpent. It has big claws, somewhat resembling those of the woodpecker.

Its note is a shrill chirp.

  Birds are furnished with a mouth, but with an exceptional one, for they

have neither lips nor teeth, but a beak. Neither have they ears nor a nose, but

only passages for the sensations connected with these organs: that for the

nostrils in the beak, and that for hearing in the head. Like all other animals

they all have two eyes, and these are devoid of lashes. The heavy-bodied (or

gallinaceous) birds close the eye by means of the lower lid, and all birds blink

by means of a skin extending over the eye from the inner corner; the owl and

its  congeners  also  close  the  eye  by  means  of  the  upper  lid.  The  same

phenomenon is observable in the animals that are protected by horny scutes,

as in the lizard and its congeners; for they all without exception close the eye

with the lower lid, but they do not blink like birds. Further, birds have neither

scutes nor hair, but feathers; and the feathers are invariably furnished withquills. They have no tail, but a rump with tail-feathers, short in such as are

long-legged and web-footed, large in others. These latter kinds of birds fly

with their feet tucked up close to the belly; but the small rumped or short-

tailed birds fly with their legs stretched out at full length. All are furnished

with a tongue, but the organ is variable, being long in some birds and broad

in others. Certain species of birds above all other animals, and next after man,

possess the faculty of uttering articulate sounds; and this faculty is chiefly

developed in broad-tongued birds. No oviparous creature has an epiglottis

over the windpipe, but these animals so manage the opening and shutting of

the windpipe as not to allow any solid substance to get down into the lung.

  Some species of birds are furnished additionally with spurs, but no bird

with crooked talons is found so provided. The birds with talons are among

those that fly well, but those that have spurs are among the heavy-bodied.

  Again, some birds have a crest. As a general rule the crest sticks up, and is

composed of feathers only; but the crest of the barn-door cock is exceptional

in kind, for, whereas it is not just exactly flesh, at the same time it is not easy

to say what else it is.

<

div id="section30" class="section" title="13">


13


Of water animals the genus of fishes constitutes a single group apart from

the rest, and including many diverse forms.

In the first place, the fish has a head, a back, a belly, in the neighbourhood

of which last are placed the stomach and viscera; and behind it has a tail of

continuous, undivided shape, but not, by the way, in all cases alike. No fish

has a neck, or any limb, or testicles at all, within or without, or breasts. But,

by  the  way  this  absence  of  breasts  may  predicated  of  all  non-viviparous

animals; and in point of fact viviparous animals are not in all cases provided

with the organ, excepting such as are directly viviparous without being first

oviparous. Thus the dolphin is directly viviparous, and accordingly we find it

furnished with two breasts, not situated high up, but in the neighbourhood of

the genitals. And this creature is not provided, like quadrupeds, with visible

teats, but has two vents, one on each flank, from which the milk flows; and

its young have to follow after it to get suckled, and this phenomenon has been

actually witnessed.  Fishes, then, as has been observed, have no breasts and no passage for the

genitals visible externally. But they have an exceptional organ in the gills,

whereby, after taking the water in the mouth, they discharge it again; and in

the fins, of which the greater part have four, and the lanky ones two, as, for

instance, the eel, and these two situated near to the gills. In like manner the

grey mullet-as, for instance, the mullet found in the lake at Siphae-have only

two fins; and the same is the case with the fish called Ribbon-fish. Some of

the lanky fishes have no fins at all, such as the muraena, nor gills articulated

like those of other fish.

And of those fish that are provided with gills, some have coverings for this

organ, whereas all the selachians have the organ unprotected by a cover. And

those fishes that have coverings or opercula for the gills have in all cases

their gills placed sideways; whereas, among selachians, the broad ones have

the gills down below on the belly, as the torpedo and the ray, while the lanky

ones have the organ placed sideways, as is the case in all the dog-fish.

The fishing-frog has gills placed sideways, and covered not with a spiny

operculum, as in all but the selachian fishes, but with one of skin.

  Morever, with fishes furnished with gills, the gills in some cases are simple

in others duplicate; and the last gill in the direction of the body is always

simple.  And,  again,  some  fishes  have  few  gills,  and  others  have  a  great

number; but all alike have the same number on both sides. Those that have

the least number have one gill on either side, and this one duplicate, like the

boar-fish; others have two on either side, one simple and the other duplicate,

like the conger and the scarus; others have four on either side, simple, as the

elops, the synagris, the muraena, and the eel; others have four, all, with the

exception of the hindmost one, in double rows, as the wrasse, the perch, the

sheat-fish, and the carp. The dog-fish have all their gills double, five on a

side; and the sword-fish has eight double gills. So much for the number of

gills as found in fishes.

  Again, fishes differ from other animals in more ways than as regards the

gills. For they are not covered with hairs as are viviparous land animals, nor,

as is the case with certain oviparous quadrupeds, with tessellated scutes, nor,

like birds, with feathers; but for the most part they are covered with scales.

Some few are rough-skinned, while the smooth-skinned are very few indeed.

Of  the  Selachia  some  are  rough-skinned  and  some  smooth-skinned;  and

among the smooth-skinned fishes are included the conger, the eel, and the

tunny.All fishes are saw-toothed excepting the scarus; and the teeth in all cases

are sharp and set in many rows, and in some cases are placed on the tongue.

The tongue is hard and spiny, and so firmly attached that fishes in many

instances seem to be devoid of the organ altogether. The mouth in some cases

is wide-stretched, as it is with some viviparous quadrupeds… .

  With regard to organs of sense, all save eyes, fishes possess none of them,

neither the organs nor their passages, neither ears nor nostrils; but all fishes

are furnished with eyes, and the eyes devoid of lids, though the eyes are not

hard; with regard to the organs connected with the other senses, hearing and

smell,  they  are  devoid  alike  of  the  organs  themselves  and  of  passages

indicative of them.

  Fishes  without  exception  are  supplied  with  blood.  Some  of  them  are

oviparous,  and  some  viviparous;  scaly  fish  are  invariably  oviparous,  but

cartilaginous  fishes  are  all  viviparous,  with  the  single  exception  of  the

fishing-frog.

<

div id="section31" class="section" title="14">


14


Of blooded animals there now remains the serpent genus. This genus is

common to both elements, for, while most species comprehended therein are

land animals, a small minority, to wit the aquatic species, pass their lives in

fresh water. There are also sea-serpents, in shape to a great extent resembling

their congeners of the land, with this exception that the head in their case is

somewhat like the head of the conger; and there are several kinds of sea-

serpent, and the different kinds differ in colour; these animals are not found

in very deep water. Serpents, like fish, are devoid of feet.

  There are also sea-scolopendras, resembling in shape their land congeners,

but somewhat less in regard to magnitude. These creatures are found in the

neighbourhood  of  rocks;  as  compared  with  their  land  congeners  they  are

redder in colour, are furnished with feet in greater numbers and with legs of

more delicate structure. And the same remark applies to them as to the sea-

serpents, that they are not found in very deep water.

Of fishes whose habitat is in the vicinity of rocks there is a tiny one, which

some call the Echeneis, or ‘ship-holder’, and which is by some people used as

a charm to bring luck in affairs of law and love. The creature is unfit foreating. Some people assert that it has feet, but this is not the case: it appears,

however, to be furnished with feet from the fact that its fins resemble those

organs.

So much, then, for the external parts of blooded animals, as regards their

numbers, their properties, and their relative diversities.

<

div id="section32" class="section" title="15">


15


As for the properties of the internal organs, these we must first discuss in

the case of the animals that are supplied with blood. For the principal genera

differ from the rest of animals, in that the former are supplied with blood and

the  latter  are  not;  and  the  former  include  man,  viviparous  and  oviparous

quadrupeds, birds, fishes, cetaceans, and all the others that come under no

general  designation  by  reason  of  their  not  forming  genera,  but  groups  of

which simply the specific name is predicable, as when we say ‘the serpent,’

the ‘crocodile’.

All viviparous quadrupeds, then, are furnished with an oesophagus and a

windpipe, situated as in man; the same statement is applicable to oviparous

quadrupeds and to birds, only that the latter present diversities in the shapes

of these organs. As a general rule, all animals that take up air and breathe it in

and out are furnished with a lung, a windpipe, and an oesophagus, with the

windpipe and oesophagus not admitting of diversity in situation but admitting

of diversity in properties, and with the lung admitting of diversity in both

these respects. Further, all blooded animals have a heart and a diaphragm or

midriff;  but  in  small  animals  the  existence  of  the  latter  organ  is  not  so

obvious owing to its delicacy and minute size.

In regard to the heart there is an exceptional phenomenon observable in

oxen. In other words, there is one species of ox where, though not in all

cases, a bone is found inside the heart. And, by the way, the horse’s heart also

has a bone inside it.

The genera referred to above are not in all cases furnished with a lung: for

instance, the fish is devoid of the organ, as is also every animal furnished

with gills. All blooded animals are furnished with a liver. As a general rule

blooded animals are furnished with a spleen; but with the great majority of

non-viviparous but oviparous animals the spleen is so small as all but toescape observation; and this is the case with almost all birds, as with the

pigeon, the kite, the falcon, the owl: in point of fact, the aegocephalus is

devoid of the organ altogether. With oviparous quadrupeds the case is much

the same as with the viviparous; that is to say, they also have the spleen

exceedingly  minute,  as  the  tortoise,  the  freshwater  tortoise,  the  toad,  the

lizard, the crocodile, and the frog.

  Some animals have a gall-bladder close to the liver, and others have not.

Of viviparous quadrupeds the deer is without the organ, as also the roe, the

horse, the mule, the ass, the seal, and some kinds of pigs. Of deer those that

are called Achainae appear to have gall in their tail, but what is so called does

resemble gall in colour, though it is not so completely fluid, and the organ

internally resembles a spleen.

  However, without any exception, stags are found to have maggots living

inside the head, and the habitat of these creatures is in the hollow underneath

the root of the tongue and in the neighbourhood of the vertebra to which the

head is attached. These creatures are as large as the largest grubs; they grow

all together in a cluster, and they are usually about twenty in number.

Deer  then,  as  has  been  observed,  are  without  a  gall-bladder;  their  gut,

however, is so bitter that even hounds refuse to eat it unless the animal is

exceptionally fat. With the elephant also the liver is unfurnished with a gall-

bladder, but when the animal is cut in the region where the organ is found in

animals furnished with it, there oozes out a fluid resembling gall, in greater or

less quantities. Of animals that take in sea-water and are furnished with a

lung, the dolphin is unprovided with a gall-bladder. Birds and fishes all have

the organ, as also oviparous quadrupeds, all to a greater or a lesser extent. But

of fishes some have the organ close to the liver, as the dogfishes, the sheat-

fish, the rhine or angel-fish, the smooth skate, the torpedo, and, of the lanky

fishes, the eel, the pipe-fish, and the hammer-headed shark. The callionymus,

also, has the gall-bladder close to the liver, and in no other fish does the

organ attain so great a relative size. Other fishes have the organ close to the

gut, attached to the liver by certain extremely fine ducts. The bonito has the

gall-bladder stretched alongside the gut and equalling it in length, and often a

double fold of it. others have the organ in the region of the gut; in some cases

far  off,  in  others  near;  as  the  fishing-frog,  the  elops,  the  synagris,  the

muraena, and the sword-fish. Often animals of the same species show this

diversity of position; as, for instance, some congers are found with the organ

attached close to the liver, and others with it detached from and below it. Thecase is much the same with birds: that is, some have the gall-bladder close to

the stomach, and others close to the gut, as the pigeon, the raven, the quail,

the swallow, and the sparrow; some have it near at once to the liver and to the

stomach as the aegocephalus; others have it near at once to the liver and the

gut, as the falcon and the kite.

<

div id="section33" class="section" title="16">


16


  Again, all viviparous quadrupeds are furnished with kidneys and a bladder.

Of the ovipara that are not quadrupedal there is no instance known of an

animal, whether fish or bird, provided with these organs. Of the ovipara that

are quadrupedal, the turtle alone is provided with these organs of a magnitude

to correspond with the other organs of the animal. In the turtle the kidney

resembles the same organ in the ox; that is to say, it looks one single organ

composed of a number of small ones. (The bison also resembles the ox in all

its internal parts).

<

div id="section34" class="section" title="17">


17


  With all animals that are furnished with these parts, the parts are similarly

situated, and with the exception of man, the heart is in the middle; in man,

however, as has been observed, the heart is placed a little to the left-hand

side. In all animals the pointed end of the heart turns frontwards; only in fish

it  would  at  first  sight  seem  otherwise,  for  the  pointed  end  is  turned  not

towards the breast, but towards the head and the mouth. And (in fish) the

apex is attached to a tube just where the right and left gills meet together.

There are other ducts extending from the heart to each of the gills, greater in

the greater fish, lesser in the lesser; but in the large fishes the duct at the

pointed  end  of  the  heart  is  a  tube,  white-coloured  and  exceedingly  thick.

Fishes in some few cases have an oesophagus, as the conger and the eel; and

in these the organ is small.

In fishes that are furnished with an undivided liver, the organ lies entirelyon the right side; where the liver is cloven from the root, the larger half of the

organ is on the right side: for in some fishes the two parts are detached from

one  another,  without  any  coalescence  at  the  root,  as  is  the  case  with  the

dogfish. And there is also a species of hare in what is named the Fig district,

near Lake Bolbe, and elsewhere, which animal might be taken to have two

livers owing to the length of the connecting ducts, similar to the structure in

the lung of birds.

The spleen in all cases, when normally placed, is on the left-hand side, and

the kidneys also lie in the same position in all creatures that possess them.

There have been known instances of quadrupeds under dissection, where the

spleen was on the right hand and the liver on the left; but all such cases are

regarded as supernatural.

In all animals the wind-pipe extends to the lung, and the manner how, we

shall discuss hereafter; and the oesophagus, in all that have the organ, extends

through the midriff into the stomach. For, by the way, as has been observed,

most fishes have no oesophagus, but the stomach is united directly with the

mouth,  so  that  in  some  cases  when  big  fish  are  pursuing  little  ones,  the

stomach tumbles forward into the mouth.

All  the  afore-mentioned  animals  have  a  stomach,  and  one  similarly

situated, that is to say, situated directly under the midriff; and they have a gut

connected therewith and closing at the outlet of the residuum and at what is

termed the ‘rectum’. However, animals present diversities in the structure of

their stomachs. In the first place, of the viviparous quadrupeds, such of the

horned  animals  as  are  not  equally  furnished  with  teeth  in  both  jaws  are

furnished with four such chambers. These animals, by the way, are those that

are said to chew the cud. In these animals the oesophagus extends from the

mouth downwards along the lung, from the midriff to the big stomach (or

paunch);  and  this  stomach  is  rough  inside  and  semi-partitioned.  And

connected  with  it  near  to  the  entry  of  the  oesophagus  is  what  from  its

appearance is termed the ‘reticulum’ (or honeycomb bag); for outside it is

like the stomach, but inside it resembles a netted cap; and the reticulum is a

great deal smaller than the stomach. Connected with this is the ‘echinus’ (or

many-plies), rough inside and laminated, and of about the same size as the

reticulum.  Next  after  this  comes  what  is  called  the  ‘enystrum’  (or

abomasum),  larger  an  longer  than  the  echinus,  furnished  inside  with

numerous folds or ridges, large and smooth. After all this comes the gut.

  Such  is  the  stomach  of  those  quadrupeds  that  are  horned  and  have  anunsymmetrical dentition; and these animals differ one from another in the

shape and size of the parts, and in the fact of the oesophagus reaching the

stomach centralwise in some cases and sideways in others. Animals that are

furnished equally with teeth in both jaws have one stomach; as man, the pig,

the dog, the bear, the lion, the wolf. (The Thos, by the by, has all its internal

organs similar to the wolf’s.)

All  these,  then  have  a  single  stomach,  and  after  that  the  gut;  but  the

stomach  in  some  is  comparatively  large,  as  in  the  pig  and  bear,  and  the

stomach of the pig has a few smooth folds or ridges; others have a much

smaller stomach, not much bigger than the gut, as the lion, the dog, and man.

In the other animals the shape of the stomach varies in the direction of one or

other  of  those  already  mentioned;  that  is,  the  stomach  in  some  animals

resembles that of the pig; in others that of the dog, alike with the larger

animals and the smaller ones. In all these animals diversities occur in regard

to the size, the shape, the thickness or the thinness of the stomach, and also in

regard to the place where the oesophagus opens into it.

  There  is  also  a  difference  in  structure  in  the  gut  of  the  two  groups  of

animals  above  mentioned  (those  with  unsymmetrical  and  those  with

symmetrical dentition) in size, in thickness, and in foldings.

The intestines in those animals whose jaws are unequally furnished with

teeth are in all cases the larger, for the animals themselves are larger than

those in the other category; for very few of them are small, and no single one

of the horned animals is very small. And some possess appendages (or caeca)

to the gut, but no animal that has not incisors in both jaws has a straight gut.

The elephant has a gut constricted into chambers, so constructed that the

animal appears to have four stomachs; in it the food is found, but there is no

distinct and separate receptacle. Its viscera resemble those of the pig, only

that the liver is four times the size of that of the ox, and the other viscera in

like proportion, while the spleen is comparatively small.

  Much the same may be predicated of the properties of the stomach and the

gut in oviparous quadrupeds, as in the land tortoise, the turtle, the lizard, both

crocodiles, and, in fact, in all animals of the like kind; that is to say, their

stomach is one and simple, resembling in some cases that of the pig, and in

other cases that of the dog.

The serpent genus is similar and in almost all respects furnished similarly

to the saurians among land animals, if one could only imagine these saurians

to be increased in length and to be devoid of legs. That is to say, the serpentis coated with tessellated scutes, and resembles the saurian in its back and

belly; only, by the way, it has no testicles, but, like fishes, has two ducts

converging into one, and an ovary long and bifurcate. The rest of its internal

organs  are  identical  with  those  of  the  saurians,  except  that,  owing  to  the

narrowness and length of the animal, the viscera are correspondingly narrow

and elongated, so that they are apt to escape recognition from the similarities

in shape. Thus, the windpipe of the creature is exceptionally long, and the

oesophagus  is  longer  still,  and  the  windpipe  commences  so  close  to  the

mouth that the tongue appears to be underneath it; and the windpipe seems to

project over the tongue, owing to the fact that the tongue draws back into a

sheath  and  does  not  remain  in  its  place  as  in  other  animals.  The  tongue,

moreover,  is  thin  and  long  and  black,  and  can  be  protruded  to  a  great

distance.  And  both  serpents  and  saurians  have  this  altogether  exceptional

property  in  the  tongue,  that  it  is  forked  at  the  outer  extremity,  and  this

property is the more marked in the serpent, for the tips of his tongue are as

thin as hairs. The seal, also, by the way, has a split tongue.

The stomach of the serpent is like a more spacious gut, resembling the

stomach of the dog; then comes the gut, long, narrow, and single to the end.

The heart is situated close to the pharynx, small and kidney-shaped; and for

this reason the organ might in some cases appear not to have the pointed end

turned towards the breast. Then comes the lung, single, and articulated with a

membranous passage, very long, and quite detached from the heart. The liver

is  long  and  simple;  the  spleen  is  short  and  round:  as  is  the  case  in  both

respects with the saurians. Its gall resembles that of the fish; the water-snakes

have it beside the liver, and the other snakes have it usually beside the gut.

These creatures are all saw-toothed. Their ribs are as numerous as the days of

the month; in other words, they are thirty in number.

  Some affirm that the same phenomenon is observable with serpents as with

swallow chicks; in other words, they say that if you prick out a serpent’s eyes

they will grow again. And further, the tails of saurians and of serpents, if they

be cut off, will grow again.

  With fishes the properties of the gut and stomach are similar; that is, they

have a stomach single and simple, but variable in shape according to species.

For in some cases the stomach is gut-shaped, as with the scarus, or parrot-

fish; which fish, by the way, appears to be the only fish that chews the cud.

And the whole length of the gut is simple, and if it have a reduplication or

kink it loosens out again into a simple form.An exceptional property in fishes and in birds for the most part is the being

furnished with gut-appendages or caeca. Birds have them low down and few

in  number.  Fishes  have  them  high  up  about  the  stomach,  and  sometimes

numerous, as in the goby, the galeos, the perch, the scorpaena, the citharus,

the red mullet, and the sparus; the cestreus or grey mullet has several of them

on one side of the belly, and on the other side only one. Some fish possess

these appendages but only in small numbers, as the hepatus and the glaucus;

and, by the way, they are few also in the dorado. These fishes differ also from

one another within the same species, for in the dorado one individual has

many  and  another  few.  Some  fishes  are  entirely  without  the  part,  as  the

majority of the selachians. As for all the rest, some of them have a few and

some a great many. And in all cases where the gut-appendages are found in

fish, they are found close up to the stomach.

In regard to their internal parts birds differ from other animals and from

one another. Some birds, for instance, have a crop in front of the stomach, as

the barn-door cock, the cushat, the pigeon, and the partridge; and the crop

consists of a large hollow skin, into which the food first enters and where it

lies  ingested.  Just  where  the  crop  leaves  the  oesophagus  it  is  somewhat

narrow;  by  and  by  it  broadens  out,  but  where  it  communicates  with  the

stomach it narrows down again. The stomach (or gizzard) in most birds is

fleshy  and  hard,  and  inside  is  a  strong  skin  which  comes  away  from  the

fleshy part. Other birds have no crop, but instead of it an oesophagus wide

and roomy, either all the way or in the part leading to the stomach, as with

the daw, the raven, and the carrion-crow. The quail also has the oesophagus

widened out at the lower extremity, and in the aegocephalus and the owl the

organ is slightly broader at the bottom than at the top. The duck, the goose,

the gull, the catarrhactes, and the great bustard have the oesophagus wide and

roomy from one end to the other, and the same applies to a great many other

birds. In some birds there is a portion of the stomach that resembles a crop, as

in the kestrel. In the case of small birds like the swallow and the sparrow

neither the oesophagus nor the crop is wide, but the stomach is long. Some

few have neither a crop nor a dilated oesophagus, but the latter is exceedingly

long, as in long necked birds, such as the porphyrio, and, by the way, in the

case  of  all  these  birds  the  excrement  is  unusually  moist.  The  quail  is

exceptional in regard to these organs, as compared with other birds; in other

words, it has a crop, and at the same time its oesophagus is wide and spacious

in front of the stomach, and the crop is at some distance, relatively to its size,from the oesophagus at that part.

  Further, in most birds, the gut is thin, and simple when loosened out. The

gut-appendages or caeca in birds, as has been observed, are few in number,

and are not situated high up, as in fishes, but low down towards the extremity

of the gut. Birds, then, have caeca-not all, but the greater part of them, such

as the barn-door cock, the partridge, the duck, the night-raven, (the localus,)

the ascalaphus, the goose, the swan, the great bustard, and the owl. Some of

the little birds also have these appendages; but the caeca in their case are

exceedingly minute, as in the sparrow.                    The History of Animals, Book III


translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson


<

div id="book3" class="chapter" title="Book III">


1


Now that we have stated the magnitudes, the properties, and the relative

differences of the other internal organs, it remains for us to treat of the organs

that  contribute  to  generation.  These  organs  in  the  female  are  in  all  cases

internal; in the male they present numerous diversities.

In the blooded animals some males are altogether devoid of testicles, and

some have the organ but situated internally; and of those males that have the

organ internally situated, some have it close to the loin in the neighbourhood

of  the  kidney  and  others  close  to  the  belly.  Other  males  have  the  organ

situated  externally.  In  the  case  of  these  last,  the  penis  is  in  some  cases

attached to the belly, whilst in others it is loosely suspended, as is the case

also with the testicles; and, in the cases where the penis is attached to the

belly, the attachment varies accordingly as the animal is emprosthuretic or

opisthuretic.

No fish is furnished with testicles, nor any other creature that has gills, nor

any serpent whatever: nor, in short, any animal devoid of feet, save such only

as are viviparous within themselves. Birds are furnished with testicles, but

these  are  internally  situated,  close  to  the  loin.  The  case  is  similar  with

oviparous quadrupeds, such as the lizard, the tortoise and the crocodile; and

among  the  viviparous  animals  this  peculiarity  is  found  in  the  hedgehog.

Others among those creatures that have the organ internally situated have it

close to the belly, as is the case with the dolphin amongst animals devoid of

feet, and with the elephant among viviparous quadrupeds. In other cases these

organs are externally conspicuous.

We have already alluded to the diversities observed in the attachment of

these organs to the belly and the adjacent region; in other words, we have

stated that in some cases the testicles are tightly fastened back, as in the pigand its allies, and that in others they are freely suspended, as in man.

  Fishes, then, are devoid of testicles, as has been stated, and serpents also.

They are furnished, however, with two ducts connected with the midriff and

running on to either side of the backbone, coalescing into a single duct above

the outlet of the residuum, and by ‘above’ the outlet I mean the region near to

the spine. These ducts in the rutting season get filled with the genital fluid,

and, if the ducts be squeezed, the sperm oozes out white in colour. As to the

differences  observed  in  male  fishes  of  diverse  species,  the  reader  should

consult my treatise on Anatomy, and the subject will be hereafter more fully

discussed when we describe the specific character in each case.

The males of oviparous animals, whether biped or quadruped, are in all

cases furnished with testicles close to the loin underneath the midriff. With

some animals the organ is whitish, in others somewhat of a sallow hue; in all

cases it is entirely enveloped with minute and delicate veins. From each of

the two testicles extends a duct, and, as in the case of fishes, the two ducts

coalesce into one above the outlet of the residuum. This constitutes the penis,

which organ in the case of small ovipara is inconspicuous; but in the case of

the larger ovipara, as in the goose and the like, the organ becomes quite

visible just after copulation.

The ducts in the case of fishes and in biped and quadruped ovipara are

attached to the loin under the stomach and the gut, in betwixt them and the

great vein, from which ducts or blood-vessels extend, one to each of the two

testicles. And just as with fishes the male sperm is found in the seminal ducts,

and  the  ducts  become  plainly  visible  at  the  rutting  season  and  in  some

instances become invisible after the season is passed, so also is it with the

testicles of birds; before the breeding season the organ is small in some birds

and quite invisible in others, but during the season the organ in all cases is

greatly enlarged. This phenomenon is remarkably illustrated in the ring-dove

and the partridge, so much so that some people are actually of opinion that

these birds are devoid of the organ in the winter-time.

Of male animals that have their testicles placed frontwards, some have

them  inside,  close  to  the  belly,  as  the  dolphin;  some  have  them  outside,

exposed to view, close to the lower extremity of the belly. These animals

resemble one another thus far in respect to this organ; but they differ from

one  another  in  this  fact,  that  some  of  them  have  their  testicles  situated

separately  by  themselves,  while  others,  which  have  the  organ  situated

externally, have them enveloped in what is termed the scrotum.  Again,  in  all  viviparous  animals  furnished  with  feet  the  following

properties  are  observed  in  the  testicles  themselves.  From  the  aorta  there

extend vein-like ducts to the head of each of the testicles, and another two

from the kidneys; these two from the kidneys are supplied with blood, while

the two from the aorta are devoid of it. From the head of the testicle alongside

of the testicle itself is a duct, thicker and more sinewy than the other just

alluded to-a duct that bends back again at the end of the testicle to its head;

and from the head of each of the two testicles the two ducts extend until they

coalesce in front at the penis. The duct that bends back again and that which

is in contact with the testicle are enveloped in one and the same membrane,

so that, until you draw aside the membrane, they present all the appearance of

being a single undifferentiated duct. Further, the duct in contact with the

testicle has its moist content qualified by blood, but to a comparatively less

extent than in the case of the ducts higher up which are connected with the

aorta; in the ducts that bend back towards the tube of the penis, the liquid is

white-coloured. There also runs a duct from the bladder, opening into the

upper part of the canal, around which lies, sheathwise, what is called the

‘penis’.

All  these  descriptive  particulars  may  be  regarded  by  the  light  of  the

accompanying diagram; wherein the letter A marks the starting-point of the

ducts that extend from the aorta; the letters KK mark the heads of the testicles

and the ducts descending thereunto; the ducts extending from these along the

testicles are marked MM; the ducts turning back, in which is the white fluid,

are marked BB; the penis D; the bladder E; and the testicles XX.

  (By the way, when the testicles are cut off or removed, the ducts draw

upwards  by  contraction.  Moreover,  when  male  animals  are  young,  their

owner sometimes destroys the organ in them by attrition; sometimes they

castrate them at a later period. And I may here add, that a bull has been

known  to  serve  a  cow  immediately  after  castration,  and  actually  to

impregnate her.)

So much then for the properties of testicles in male animals.

In female animals furnished with a womb, the womb is not in all cases the

same in form or endowed with the same properties, but both in the vivipara

and the ovipara great diversities present themselves. In all creatures that have

the womb close to the genitals, the womb is two-horned, and one horn lies to

the right-hand side and the other to the left; its commencement, however, is

single, and so is the orifice, resembling in the case of the most numerous andlargest animals a tube composed of much flesh and gristle. Of these parts one

is termed the hystera or delphys, whence is derived the word adelphos, and

the other part, the tube or orifice, is termed metra. In all biped or quadruped

vivipara the womb is in all cases below the midriff, as in man, the dog, the

pig, the horse, and the ox; the same is the case also in all horned animals. At

the extremity of the so-called ceratia, or horns, the wombs of most animals

have a twist or convolution.

In the case of those ovipara that lay eggs externally, the wombs are not in

all cases similarly situated. Thus the wombs of birds are close to the midriff,

and  the  wombs  of  fishes  down  below,  just  like  the  wombs  of  biped  and

quadruped  vivipara,  only  that,  in  the  case  of  the  fish,  the  wombs  are

delicately formed, membranous, and elongated; so much so that in extremely

small fish, each of the two bifurcated parts looks like a single egg, and those

fishes whose egg is described as crumbling would appear to have inside them

a pair of eggs, whereas in reality each of the two sides consists not of one but

of many eggs, and this accounts for their breaking up into so many particles.

The womb of birds has the lower and tubular portion fleshy and firm, and

the part close to the midriff membranous and exceedingly thin and fine: so

thin and fine that the eggs might seem to be outside the womb altogether. In

the  larger  birds  the  membrane  is  more  distinctly  visible,  and,  if  inflated

through the tube, lifts and swells out; in the smaller birds all these parts are

more indistinct.

The properties of the womb are similar in oviparous quadrupeds, as the

tortoise, the lizard, the frog and the like; for the tube below is single and

fleshy, and the cleft portion with the eggs is at the top close to the midriff.

With  animals  devoid  of  feet  that  are  internally  oviparous  and  viviparous

externally, as is the case with the dogfish and the other so-called Selachians

(and by this title we designate such creatures destitute of feet and furnished

with gills as are viviparous), with these animals the womb is bifurcate, and

beginning down below it extends as far as the midriff, as in the case of birds.

There is also a narrow part between the two horns running up as far as the

midriff, and the eggs are engendered here and above at the origin of the

midriff; afterwards they pass into the wider space and turn from eggs into

young animals. However, the differences in respect to the wombs of these

fishes as compared with others of their own species or with fishes in general,

would  be  more  satisfactorily  studied  in  their  various  forms  in  specimens

under dissection.The members of the serpent genus also present divergencies either when

compared with the above-mentioned creatures or with one another. Serpents

as a rule are oviparous, the viper being the only viviparous member of the

genus. The viper is, previously to external parturition, oviparous internally;

and owing to this perculiarity the properties of the womb in the viper are

similar to those of the womb in the selachians. The womb of the serpent is

long, in keeping with the body, and starting below from a single duct extends

continuously on both sides of the spine, so as to give the impression of thus

being a separate duct on each side of the spine, until it reaches the midriff,

where the eggs are engendered in a row; and these eggs are laid not one by

one,  but  all  strung  together.  (And  all  animals  that  are  viviparous  both

internally and externally have the womb situated above the stomach, and all

the  ovipara  underneath,  near  to  the  loin.  Animals  that  are  viviparous

externally and internally oviparous present an intermediate arrangement; for

the underneath portion of the womb, in which the eggs are, is placed near to

the loin, but the part about the orifice is above the gut.)

  Further, there is the following diversity observable in wombs as compared

with one another: namely that the females of horned nonambidental animals

are furnished with cotyledons in the womb when they are pregnant, and such

is  the  case,  among  ambidentals,  with  the  hare,  the  mouse,  and  the  bat;

whereas all other animals that are ambidental, viviparous, and furnished with

feet, have the womb quite smooth, and in their case the attachment of the

embryo is to the womb itself and not to any cotyledon inside it.

The parts, then, in animals that are not homogeneous with themselves and

uniform  in  their  texture,  both  parts  external  and  parts  internal,  have  the

properties above assigned to them.

<

div id="section36" class="section" title="2">


2


In sanguineous animals the homogeneous or uniform part most universally

found is the blood, and its habitat the vein; next in degree of universality,

their  analogues,  lymph  and  fibre,  and,  that  which  chiefly  constitutes  the

frame of animals, flesh and whatsoever in the several parts is analogous to

flesh;  then  bone,  and  parts  that  are  analogous  to  bone,  as  fish-bone  and

gristle;  and  then,  again,  skin,  membrane,  sinew,  hair,  nails,  and  whatevercorresponds to these; and, furthermore, fat, suet, and the excretions: and the

excretions are dung, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile.

Now,  as  the  nature  of  blood  and  the  nature  of  the  veins  have  all  the

appearance of being primitive, we must discuss their properties first of all,

and  all  the  more  as  some  previous  writers  have  treated  them  very

unsatisfactorily.  And  the  cause  of  the  ignorance  thus  manifested  is  the

extreme difficulty experienced in the way of observation. For in the dead

bodies of animals the nature of the chief veins is undiscoverable, owing to the

fact that they collapse at once when the blood leaves them; for the blood

pours out of them in a stream, like liquid out of a vessel, since there is no

blood separately situated by itself, except a little in the heart, but it is all

lodged in the veins. In living animals it is impossible to inspect these parts,

for of their very nature they are situated inside the body and out of sight. For

this  reason  anatomists  who  have  carried  on  their  investigations  on  dead

bodies in the dissecting room have failed to discover the chief roots of the

veins, while those who have narrowly inspected bodies of living men reduced

to extreme attenuation have arrived at conclusions regarding the origin of the

veins  from  the  manifestations  visible  externally.  Of  these  investigators,

Syennesis, the physician of Cyprus, writes as follows:—

  ‘The big veins run thus:-from the navel across the loins, along the back,

past the lung, in under the breasts; one from right to left, and the other from

left to right; that from the left, through the liver to the kidney and the testicle,

that from the right, to the spleen and kidney and testicle, and from thence to

the penis.’ Diogenes of Apollonia writes thus:—

  ‘The  veins  in  man  are  as  follows:-There  are  two  veins  pre-eminent  in

magnitude. These extend through the belly along the backbone, one to right,

one to left; either one to the leg on its own side, and upwards to the head, past

the collar bones, through the throat. From these, veins extend all over the

body, from that on the right hand to the right side and from that on the left

hand to the left side; the most important ones, two in number, to the heart in

the region of the backbone; other two a little higher up through the chest in

underneath the armpit, each to the hand on its side: of these two, one being

termed the vein splenitis, and the other the vein hepatitis. Each of the pair

splits at its extremity; the one branches in the direction of the thumb and the

other in the direction of the palm; and from these run off a number of minute

veins branching off to the fingers and to all parts of the hand. Other veins,

more minute, extend from the main veins; from that on the right towards theliver, from that on the left towards the spleen and the kidneys. The veins that

run to the legs split at the juncture of the legs with the trunk and extend right

down the thigh. The largest of these goes down the thigh at the back of it, and

can be discerned and traced as a big one; the second one runs inside the thigh,

not quite as big as the one just mentioned. After this they pass on along the

knee to the shin and the foot (as the upper veins were described as passing

towards  the  hands),  and  arrive  at  the  sole  of  the  foot,  and  from  thence

continue to the toes. Moreover, many delicate veins separate off from the

great veins towards the stomach and towards the ribs.

  ‘The veins that run through the throat to the head can be discerned and

traced in the neck as large ones; and from each one of the two, where it

terminates, there branch off a number of veins to the head; some from the

right side towards the left, and some from the left side towards the right; and

the two veins terminate near to each of the two ears. There is another pair of

veins in the neck running along the big vein on either side, slightly less in

size than the pair just spoken of, and with these the greater part of the veins in

the head are connected. This other pair runs through the throat inside; and

from either one of the two there extend veins in underneath the shoulder

blade and towards the hands; and these appear alongside the veins splenitis

and hepatitis as another pair of veins smaller in size. When there is a pain

near the surface of the body, the physician lances these two latter veins; but

when the pain is within and in the region of the stomach he lances the veins

splenitis and hepatitis. And from these, other veins depart to run below the

breasts.

  ‘There is also another pair running on each side through the spinal marrow

to the testicles, thin and delicate. There is, further, a pair running a little

underneath the cuticle through the flesh to the kidneys, and these with men

terminate  at  the  testicle,  and  with  women  at  the  womb.  These  veins  are

termed  the  spermatic  veins.  The  veins  that  leave  the  stomach  are

comparatively broad just as they leave; but they become gradually thinner,

until they change over from right to left and from left to right.

  ‘Blood  is  thickest  when  it  is  imbibed  by  the  fleshy  parts;  when  it  is

transmitted  to  the  organs  above-mentioned,  it  becomes  thin,  warm,  and

frothy.’

<

div id="section37" class="section" title="3">3


  Such are the accounts given by Syennesis and Diogenes. Polybus writes to

the following effect:—

  ‘There are four pairs of veins. The first extends from the back of the head,

through the neck on the outside, past the backbone on either side, until it

reaches the loins and passes on to the legs, after which it goes on through the

shins to the outer side of the ankles and on to the feet. And it is on this

account that surgeons, for pains in the back and loin, bleed in the ham and in

the outer side of the ankle. Another pair of veins runs from the head, past

ears, through the neck; which veins are termed the jugular veins. This pair

goes on inside along the backbone, past the muscles of the loins, on to the

testicles, and onwards to the thighs, and through the inside of the hams and

through the shins down to the inside of the ankles and to the feet; and for this

reason, surgeons, for pains in the muscles of the loins and in the testicles,

bleed on the hams and the inner side of the ankles. The third pair extends

from the temples, through the neck, in underneath the shoulder-blades, into

the lung; those from right to left going in underneath the breast and on to the

spleen  and  the  kidney;  those  from  left  to  right  running  from  the  lung  in

underneath the breast and into the liver and the kidney; and both terminate in

the fundament. The fourth pair extend from the front part of the head and the

eyes in underneath the neck and the collar-bones; from thence they stretch on

through the upper part of the upper arms to the elbows and then through the

fore-arms on to the wrists and the jointings of the fingers, and also through

the lower part of the upper-arms to the armpits, and so on, keeping above the

ribs, until one of the pair reaches the spleen and the other reaches the liver;

and after this they both pass over the stomach and terminate at the penis.’

The above quotations sum up pretty well the statements of all previous

writers. Furthermore, there are some writers on Natural History who have not

ventured to lay down the law in such precise terms as regards the veins, but

who all alike agree in assigning the head and the brain as the starting-point of

the veins. And in this opinion they are mistaken.

The investigation of such a subject, as has been remarked, is one fraught

with difficulties; but, if any one be keenly interested in the matter, his best

plan will be to allow his animals to starve to emaciation, then to strangle

them on a sudden, and thereupon to prosecute his investigations.

We now proceed to give particulars regarding the properties and functionsof the veins. There are two blood-vessels in the thorax by the backbone, and

lying to its inner side; and of these two the larger one is situated to the front,

and the lesser one is to the rear of it; and the larger is situated rather to the

right hand side of the body, and the lesser one to the left; and by some this

vein is termed the ‘aorta’, from the fact that even in dead bodies part of it is

observed to be full of air. These blood-vessels have their origins in the heart,

for they traverse the other viscera, in whatever direction they happen to run,

without in any way losing their distinctive characteristic as blood-vessels,

whereas the heart is as it were a part of them (and that too more in respect to

the frontward and larger one of the two), owing to the fact that these two

veins are above and below, with the heart lying midway.

The heart in all animals has cavities inside it. In the case of the smaller

animals even the largest of the chambers is scarcely discernible; the second

larger is scarcely discernible in animals of medium size; but in the largest

animals  all  three  chambers  are  distinctly  seen.  In  the  heart  then  (with  its

pointed end directed frontwards, as has been observed) the largest of the three

chambers is on the right-hand side and highest up; the least one is on the left-

hand side; and the medium-sized one lies in betwixt the other two; and the

largest one of the three chambers is a great deal larger than either of the two

others.  All  three,  however,  are  connected  with  passages  leading  in  the

direction of the lung, but all these communications are indistinctly discernible

by reason of their minuteness, except one.

The  great  blood-vessel,  then,  is  attached  to  the  biggest  of  the  three

chambers, the one that lies uppermost and on the right-hand side; it then

extends right through the chamber, coming out as blood-vessel again; just as

though the cavity of the heart were a part of the vessel, in which the blood

broadens its channel as a river that widens out in a lake. The aorta is attached

to the middle chamber; only, by the way, it is connected with it by much

narrower pipe.

The great blood-vessel then passes through the heart (and runs from the

heart into the aorta). The great vessel looks as though made of membrane or

skin,  while  the  aorta  is  narrower  than  it,  and  is  very  sinewy;  and  as  it

stretches away to the head and to the lower parts it becomes exceedingly

narrow and sinewy.

First of all, then, upwards from the heart there stretches a part of the great

blood-vessel  towards  the  lung  and  the  attachment  of  the  aorta,  a  part

consisting of a large undivided vessel. But there split off from it two parts;one towards the lung and the other towards the backbone and the last vertebra

of the neck.

The vessel, then, that extends to the lung, as the lung itself is duplicate,

divides at first into two; and then extends along by every pipe and every

perforation,  greater  along  the  greater  ones,  lesser  along  the  less,  so

continuously that it is impossible to discern a single part wherein there is not

perforation  and  vein;  for  the  extremities  are  indistinguishable  from  their

minuteness, and in point of fact the whole lung appears to be filled with

blood.

The branches of the blood-vessels lie above the tubes that extend from the

windpipe. And that vessel which extends to the vertebra of the neck and the

backbone, stretches back again along the backbone; as Homer represents in

the lines:—

<

div class="quote">

  (Antilochus, as Thoon turned him round),

Transpierc’d his back with a dishonest wound;

The hollow vein that to the neck extends,

Along the chine, the eager javelin rends.

  From this vessel there extend small blood-vessels at each rib and each

vertebra; and at the vertebra above the kidneys the vessel bifurcates. And in

the above way the parts branch off from the great blood-vessel.

But up above all these, from that part which is connected with the heart,

the entire vein branches off in two directions. For its branches extend to the

sides and to the collarbones, and then pass on, in men through the armpits to

the arms, in quadrupeds to the forelegs, in birds to the wings, and in fishes to

the upper or pectoral fins. (See diagram.) The trunks of these veins, where

they first branch off, are called the ‘jugular’ veins; and, where they branch off

to the neck the great vein run alongside the windpipe; and, occasionally, if

these veins are pressed externally, men, though not actually choked, become

insensible, shut their eyes, and fall flat on the ground. Extending in the way

described and keeping the windpipe in betwixt them, they pass on until they

reach the ears at the junction of the lower jaw with the skull. Hence again

they  branch  off  into  four  veins,  of  which  one  bends  back  and  descends

through the neck and the shoulder, and meets the previous branching off of

the vein at the bend of the arm, while the rest of it terminates at the hand and

fingers. (See diagram.)Each vein of the other pair stretches from the region of the ear to the brain,

and branches off in a number of fine and delicate veins into the so-called

meninx,  or  membrane,  which  surrounds  the  brain.  The  brain  itself  in  all

animals is destitute of blood, and no vein, great or small, holds its course

therein. But of the remaining veins that branch off from the last mentioned

vein some envelop the head, others close their courses in the organs of sense

and at the roots of the teeth in veins exceedingly fine and minute.

<

div id="section38" class="section" title="4">


4


And in like manner the parts of the lesser one of the two chief blood-

vessels, designated the aorta, branch off, accompanying the branches from

the big vein; only that, in regard to the aorta, the passages are less in size, and

the branches very considerably less than are those of the great vein. So much

for the veins as observed in the regions above the heart.

The part of the great vein that lies underneath the heart extends, freely

suspended, right through the midriff, and is united both to the aorta and the

backbone by slack membranous communications. From it one vein, short and

wide, extends through the liver, and from it a number of minute veins branch

off into the liver and disappear. From the vein that passes through the liver

two branches separate off, of which one terminates in the diaphragm or so-

called midriff, and the other runs up again through the armpit into the right

arm and unites with the other veins at the inside of the bend of the arm; and it

is in consequence of this local connexion that, when the surgeon opens this

vein in the forearm, the patient is relieved of certain pains in the liver; and

from the left-hand side of it there extends a short but thick vein to the spleen

and the little veins branching off it disappear in that organ. Another part

branches off from the left-hand side of the great vein, and ascends, by a

course similar to the course recently described, into the left arm; only that the

ascending vein in the one case is the vein that traverses the liver, while in this

case it is distinct from the vein that runs into the spleen. Again, other veins

branch  off  from  the  big  vein;  one  to  the  omentum,  and  another  to  the

pancreas, from which vein run a number of veins through the mesentery. All

these veins coalesce in a single large vein, along the entire gut and stomach to

the  oesophagus;  about  these  parts  there  is  a  great  ramification  of  branchveins.

As far as the kidneys, each of the two remaining undivided, the aorta and

the big vein extend; and here they get more closely attached to the backbone,

and branch off, each of the two, into a A shape, and the big vein gets to the

rear of the aorta. But the chief attachment of the aorta to the backbone takes

place in the region of the heart; and the attachment is effected by means of

minute and sinewy vessels. The aorta, just as it draws off from the heart, is a

tube of considerable volume, but, as it advances in its course, it gets narrower

and more sinewy. And from the aorta there extend veins to the mesentery just

like the veins that extend thither from the big vein, only that the branches in

the case of the aorta are considerably less in magnitude; they are, indeed,

narrow and fibrillar, and they end in delicate hollow fibre-like veinlets.

  There is no vessel that runs from the aorta into the liver or the spleen.

  From each of the two great blood-vessels there extend branches to each of

the two flanks, and both branches fasten on to the bone. Vessels also extend

to the kidneys from the big vein and the aorta; only that they do not open into

the cavity of the organ, but their ramifications penetrate into its substance.

From the aorta run two other ducts to the bladder, firm and continuous; and

there  are  other  ducts  from  the  hollow  of  the  kidneys,  in  no  way

communicating with the big vein. From the centre of each of the two kidneys

springs a hollow sinewy vein, running along the backbone right through the

loins; by and by each of the two veins first disappears in its own flank, and

soon  afterwards  reappears  stretching  in  the  direction  of  the  flank.  The

extremities of these attach to the bladder, and also in the male to the penis

and in the female to the womb. From the big vein no vein extends to the

womb,  but  the  organ  is  connected  with  the  aorta  by  veins  numerous  and

closely packed.

  Furthermore, from the aorta and the great vein at the points of divarication

there branch off other veins. Some of these run to the groins-large hollow

veins-and then pass on down through the legs and terminate in the feet and

toes. And, again, another set run through the groins and the thighs cross-

garter fashion, from right to left and from left to right, and unite in the hams

with the other veins.

In the above description we have thrown light upon the course of the veins

and their points of departure.

In all sanguineous animals the case stands as here set forth in regard to the

points of departure and the courses of the chief veins. But the descriptiondoes not hold equally good for the entire vein-system in all these animals.

For, in point of fact, the organs are not identically situated in them all; and,

what is more, some animals are furnished with organs of which other animals

are destitute. At the same time, while the description so far holds good, the

proof of its accuracy is not equally easy in all cases, but is easiest in the case

of animals of considerable magnitude and supplied abundantly with blood.

For  in  little  animals  and  those  scantily  supplied  with  blood,  either  from

natural and inherent causes or from a prevalence of fat in the body, thorough

accuracy in investigation is not equally attainable; for in the latter of these

creatures the passages get clogged, like water-channels choked with slush;

and the others have a few minute fibres to serve instead of veins. But in all

cases the big vein is plainly discernible, even in creatures of insignificant

size.

<

div id="section39" class="section" title="5">


5


The sinews of animals have the following properties. For these also the

point of origin is the heart; for the heart has sinews within itself in the largest

of  its  three  chambers,  and  the  aorta  is  a  sinew-like  vein;  in  fact,  at  its

extremity  it  is  actually  a  sinew,  for  it  is  there  no  longer  hollow,  and  is

stretched like the sinews where they terminate at the jointings of the bones.

Be  it  remembered,  however,  that  the  sinews  do  not  proceed  in  unbroken

sequence from one point of origin, as do the blood-vessels.

For  the  veins  have  the  shape  of  the  entire  body,  like  a  sketch  of  a

mannikin; in such a way that the whole frame seems to be filled up with little

veins in attenuated subjects-for the space occupied by flesh in fat individuals

is filled with little veins in thin ones-whereas the sinews are distributed about

the joints and the flexures of the bones. Now, if the sinews were derived in

unbroken sequence from a common point of departure, this continuity would

be discernible in attenuated specimens.

In the ham, or the part of the frame brought into full play in the effort of

leaping, is an important system of sinews; and another sinew, a double one, is

that called ‘the tendon’, and others are those brought into play when a great

effort of physical strength is required; that is to say, the epitonos or back-stay

and the shoulder-sinews. Other sinews, devoid of specific designation, aresituated in the region of the flexures of the bones; for all the bones that are

attached to one another are bound together by sinews, and a great quantity of

sinews are placed in the neighbourhood of all the bones. Only, by the way, in

the head there is no sinew; but the head is held together by the sutures of the

bones.

  Sinew is fissile lengthwise, but crosswise it is not easily broken, but admits

of a considerable amount of hard tension. In connexion with sinews a liquid

mucus is developed, white and glutinous, and the organ, in fact, is sustained

by  it  and  appears  to  be  substantially  composed  of  it.  Now,  vein  may  be

submitted to the actual cautery, but sinew, when submitted to such action,

shrivels up altogether; and, if sinews be cut asunder, the severed parts will

not again cohere. A feeling of numbness is incidental only to parts of the

frame where sinew is situated.

  There is a very extensive system of sinews connected severally with the

feet, the hands, the ribs, the shoulder-blades, the neck, and the arms.

All animals supplied with blood are furnished with sinews; but in the case

of animals that have no flexures to their limbs, but are, in fact, destitute of

either feet or hands, the sinews are fine and inconspicuous; and so, as might

have  been  anticipated,  the  sinews  in  the  fish  are  chiefly  discernible  in

connexion with the fin.

<

div id="section40" class="section" title="6">


6


The  ines  (or  fibrous  connective  tissue)  are  a  something  intermediate

between sinew and vein. Some of them are supplied with fluid, the lymph;

and they pass from sinew to vein and from vein to sinew. There is another

kind of ines or fibre that is found in blood, but not in the blood of all animals

alike.  If  this  fibre  be  left  in  the  blood,  the  blood  will  coagulate;  if  it  be

removed  or  extracted,  the  blood  is  found  to  be  incapable  of  coagulation.

While, however, this fibrous matter is found in the blood of the great majority

of animals, it is not found in all. For instance, we fail to find it in the blood of

the deer, the roe, the antelope, and some other animals; and, owing to this

deficiency of the fibrous tissue, the blood of these animals does not coagulate

to the extent observed in the blood of other animals. The blood of the deer

coagulates to about the same extent as that of the hare: that is to the blood ineither case coagulates, but not into a stiff or jelly-like substance, like the

blood of ordinary animals, but only into a flaccid consistency like that of

milk which is not subjected to the action of rennet. The blood of the antelope

admits of a firmer consistency in coagulation; for in this respect it resembles,

or only comes a little short of, the blood of sheep. Such are the properties of

vein, sinew, and fibrous tissue.

<

div id="section41" class="section" title="7">


7


The  bones  in  animals  are  all  connected  with  one  single  bone,  and  are

interconnected, like the veins, in one unbroken sequence; and there is no

instance  of  a  bone  standing  apart  by  itself.  In  all  animals  furnished  with

bones, the spine or backbone is the point of origin for the entire osseous

system. The spine is composed of vertebrae, and it extends from the head

down to the loins. The vertebrae are all perforated, and, above, the bony

portion of the head is connected with the topmost vertebrae, and is designated

the ‘skull’. And the serrated lines on the skull are termed ‘sutures’.

The skull is not formed alike in all animals. In some animals the skull

consists of one single undivided bone, as in the case of the dog; in others it is

composite in structure, as in man; and in the human species the suture is

circular  in  the  female,  while  in  the  male  it  is  made  up  of  three  separate

sutures,  uniting  above  in  three-corner  fashion;  and  instances  have  been

known  of  a  man’s  skull  being  devoid  of  suture  altogether.  The  skull  is

composed not of four bones, but of six; two of these are in the region of the

ears, small in comparison with the other four. From the skull extend the jaws,

constituted  of  bone.  (Animals  in  general  move  the  lower  jaw;  the  river

crocodile is the only animal that moves the upper one.) In the jaws is the

tooth-system;  and  the  teeth  are  constituted  of  bone,  and  are  half-way

perforated; and the bone in question is the only kind of bone which it is found

impossible to grave with a graving tool.

On the upper part of the course of the backbone are the collar-bones and

the ribs. The chest rests on ribs; and these ribs meet together, whereas the

others do not; for no animal has bone in the region of the stomach. Then

come the shoulder-bones, or blade-bones, and the arm-bones connected with

these, and the bones in the hands connected with the bones of the arms. Withanimals that have forelegs, the osseous system of the foreleg resembles that

of the arm in man.

  Below the level of the backbone, after the haunch-bone, comes the hip-

socket; then the leg-bones, those in the thighs and those in the shins, which

are termed colenes or limb-bones, a part of which is the ankle, while a part of

the same is the so-called ‘plectrum’ in those creatures that have an ankle; and

connected with these bones are the bones in the feet.

Now, with all animals that are supplied with blood and furnished with feet,

and are at the same time viviparous, the bones do not differ greatly one from

another, but only in the way of relative hardness, softness, or magnitude. A

further difference, by the way, is that in one and the same animal certain

bones  are  supplied  with  marrow,  while  others  are  destitute  of  it.  Some

animals might on casual observation appear to have no marrow whatsoever in

their bones: as is the case with the lion, owing to his having marrow only in

small amount, poor and thin, and in very few bones; for marrow is found in

his thigh and armbones. The bones of the lion are exceptionally hard; so hard,

in fact, that if they are rubbed hard against one another they emit sparks like

flint-stones. The dolphin has bones, and not fish-spine.

Of the other animals supplied with blood, some differ but little, as is the

case  with  birds;  others  have  systems  analogous,  as  fishes;  for  viviparous

fishes, such as the cartilaginous species, are gristle-spined, while the ovipara

have  a  spine  which  corresponds  to  the  backbone  in  quadrupeds.  This

exceptional property has been observed in fishes, that in some of them there

are found delicate spines scattered here and there throughout the fleshy parts.

The serpent is similarly constructed to the fish; in other words, his backbone

is spinous. With oviparous quadrupeds, the skeleton of the larger ones is

more  or  less  osseous;  of  the  smaller  ones,  more  or  less  spinous.  But  all

sanguineous animals have a backbone of either one kind or other: that is,

composed either of bone or of spine.

The other portions of the skeleton are found in some animals and not found

in others, but the presence or the absence of this and that part carries with it,

as a matter of course, the presence or the absence of the bones or the spines

corresponding to this or that part. For animals that are destitute of arms and

legs cannot be furnished with limb-bones: and in like manner with animals

that  have  the  same  parts,  but  yet  have  them  unlike  in  form;  for  in  these

animals  the  corresponding  bones  differ  from  one  another  in  the  way  of

relative excess or relative defect, or in the way of analogy taking the place ofidentity. So much for the osseous or spinous systems in animals.

<

div id="section42" class="section" title="8">


8


Gristle is of the same nature as bone, but differs from it in the way of

relative excess or relative defect. And just like bone, cartilage also, if cut,

does not grow again. In terrestrial viviparous sanguinea the gristle formations

are unperforated, and there is no marrow in them as there is in bones; in the

selachia,  however—for,  be  it  observed,  they  are  gristle-spined—there  is

found in the case of the flat space in the region of the backbone, a gristle-like

substance  analogous  to  bone,  and  in  this  gristle-like  substance  there  is  a

liquid resembling marrow. In viviparous animals furnished with feet, gristle

formations are found in the region of the ears, in the nostrils, and around

certain extremities of the bones.

<

div id="section43" class="section" title="9">


9


  Furthermore,  there  are  parts  of  other  kinds,  neither  identical  with,  nor

altogether diverse from, the parts above enumerated: such as nails, hooves,

claws, and horns; and also, by the way, beaks, such as birds are furnished

with-all in the several animals that are furnished therewithal. All these parts

are flexible and fissile; but bone is neither flexible nor fissile, but frangible.

And the colours of horns and nails and claw and hoof follow the colour of

the skin and the hair. For according as the skin of an animal is black, or

white, or of medium hue, so are the horns, the claws, or the hooves, as the

case  may  be,  of  hue  to  match.  And  it  is  the  same  with  nails.  The  teeth,

however, follow after the bones. Thus in black men, such as the Aethiopians

and the like, the teeth and bones are white, but the nails are black, like the

whole of the skin.

  Horns in general are hollow at their point of attachment to the bone which

juts out from the head inside the horn, but they have a solid portion at the tip,

and they are simple and undivided in structure. In the case of the stag aloneof all animals the horns are solid throughout, and ramify into branches (or

antlers). And, whereas no other animal is known to shed its horns, the deer

sheds its horns annually, unless it has been castrated; and with regard to the

effects of castration in animals we shall have much to say hereafter. Horns

attach rather to the skin than to the bone; which will account for the fact that

there are found in Phrygia and elsewhere cattle that can move their horns as

freely as their ears.

Of animals furnished with nails-and, by the way, all animals have nails that

have toes, and toes that have feet, except the elephant; and the elephant has

toes  undivided  and  slightly  articulated,  but  has  no  nails  whatsoever—of

animals furnished with nails, some are straight-nailed, like man; others are

crooked nailed, as the lion among animals that walk, and the eagle among

animals that fly.

<

div id="section44" class="section" title="10">


10


The following are the properties of hair and of parts analogous to hair, and

of  skin  or  hide.  All  viviparous  animals  furnished  with  feet  have  hair;  all

oviparous animals furnished with feet have horn-like tessellates; fishes, and

fishes only, have scales-that is, such oviparous fishes as have the crumbling

egg or roe. For of the lanky fishes, the conger has no such egg, nor the

muraena, and the eel has no egg at all.

The  hair  differs  in  the  way  of  thickness  and  fineness,  and  of  length,

according to the locality of the part in which it is found, and according to the

quality of skin or hide on which it grows. For, as a general rule, the thicker

the hide, the harder and the thicker is the hair; and the hair is inclined to grow

in abundance and to a great length in localities of the bodies hollow and

moist, if the localities be fitted for the growth of hair at all. The facts are

similar in the case of animals whether coated with scales or with tessellates.

With soft-haired animals the hair gets harder with good feeding, and with

hard-haired or bristly animals it gets softer and scantier from the same cause.

Hair differs in quality also according to the relative heat or warmth of the

locality: just as the hair in man is hard in warm places and soft in cold ones.

Again, straight hair is inclined to be soft, and curly hair to be bristly.

<div id="section45" class="section" title="11">


11


Hair is naturally fissile, and in this respect it differs in degree in diverse

animals. In some animals the hair goes on gradually hardening into bristle

until it no longer resembles hair but spine, as in the case of the hedgehog.

And in like manner with the nails; for in some animals the nail differs as

regards solidity in no way from bone.

Of  all  animals  man  has  the  most  delicate  skin:  that  is,  if  we  take  into

consideration his relative size. In the skin or hide of all animals there is a

mucous  liquid,  scanty  in  some  animals  and  plentiful  in  others,  as,  for

instance, in the hide of the ox; for men manufacture glue out of it. (And, by

the way, in some cases glue is manufactured from fishes also.) The skin,

when cut, is in itself devoid of sensation; and this is especially the case with

the skin on the head, owing to there being no flesh between it and the skull.

And wherever the skin is quite by itself, if it be cut asunder, it does not grow

together again, as is seen in the thin part of the jaw, in the prepuce, and the

eyelid. In all animals the skin is one of the parts that extends continuous and

unbroken, and it comes to a stop only where the natural ducts pour out their

contents, and at the mouth and nails.

All sanguineous animals, then, have skin; but not all such animals have

hair, save only under the circumstances described above. The hair changes its

colour as animals grow old, and in man it turns white or grey. With animals,

in general, the change takes place, but not very obviously, or not so obviously

as in the case of the horse. Hair turns grey from the point backwards to the

roots. But, in the majority of cases, grey hairs are white from the beginning;

and this is a proof that greyness of hair does not, as some believe to be the

case, imply withering or decrepitude, for no part is brought into existence in a

withered or decrepit condition.

In the eruptive malady called the white-sickness all the hairs get grey; and

instances have been known where the hair became grey while the patients

were  ill  of  the  malady,  whereas  the  grey  hairs  shed  off  and  black  ones

replaced them on their recovery. (Hair is more apt to turn grey when it is kept

covered than when exposed to the action of the outer air.) In men, the hair

over the temples is the first to turn grey, and the hair in the front grows grey

sooner than the hair at the back; and the hair on the pubes is the last to changecolour.

  Some hairs are congenital, others grow after the maturity of the animal; but

this occurs in man only. The congenital hairs are on the head, the eyelids, and

the eyebrows; of the later growths the hairs on the pubes are the first to come,

then those under the armpits, and, thirdly, those on the chin; for, singularly

enough, the regions where congenital growths and the subsequent growths

are found are equal in number. The hair on the head grows scanty and sheds

out to a greater extent and sooner than all the rest. But this remark applies

only to hair in front; for no man ever gets bald at the back of his head.

Smoothness on the top of the head is termed ‘baldness’, but smoothness on

the eyebrows is denoted by a special term which means ‘forehead-baldness’;

and neither of these conditions of baldness supervenes in a man until he shall

have come under the influence of sexual passion. For no boy ever gets bald,

no  woman,  and  no  castrated  man.  In  fact,  if  a  man  be  castrated  before

reaching  puberty,  the  later  growths  of  hair  never  come  at  all;  and,  if  the

operation take place subsequently, the aftergrowths, and these only, shed off;

or, rather, two of the growths shed off, but not that on the pubes.

  Women do not grow hairs on the chin; except that a scanty beard grows on

some  women  after  the  monthly  courses  have  stopped;  and  similar

phenomenon is observed at times in priestesses in Caria, but these cases are

looked upon as portentous with regard to coming events. The other after-

growths are found in women, but more scanty and sparse. Men and women

are  at  times  born  constitutionally  and  congenitally  incapable  of  the  after-

growths; and individuals that are destitute even of the growth upon the pubes

are constitutionally impotent.

Hair as a rule grows more or less in length as the wearer grows in age;

chiefly  the  hair  on  the  head,  then  that  in  the  beard,  and  fine  hair  grows

longest of all. With some people as they grow old the eyebrows grow thicker,

to such an extent that they have to be cut off; and this growth is owing to the

fact that the eyebrows are situated at a conjuncture of bones, and these bones,

as age comes on, draw apart and exude a gradual increase of moisture or

rheum. The eyelashes do not grow in size, but they shed when the wearer

comes first under the influence of sexual feelings, and shed all the quicker as

this influence is the more powerful; and these are the last hairs to grow grey.

  Hairs if plucked out before maturity grow again; but they do not grow

again  if  plucked  out  afterwards.  Every  hair  is  supplied  with  a  mucous

moisture at its root, and immediately after being plucked out it can lift lightarticles if it touch them with this mucus.

  Animals that admit of diversity of colour in the hair admit of a similar

diversity to start with in the skin and in the cuticle of the tongue.

In some cases among men the upper lip and the chin is thickly covered

with hair, and in other cases these parts are smooth and the cheeks are hairy;

and, by the way, smooth-chinned men are less inclined than bearded men to

baldness.

The hair is inclined to grow in certain diseases, especially in consumption,

and  in  old  age,  and  after  death;  and  under  these  circumstances  the  hair

hardens concomitantly with its growth, and the same duplicate phenomenon

is observable in respect of the nails.

In the case of men of strong sexual passions the congenital hairs shed the

sooner, while the hairs of the after-growths are the quicker to come. When

men  are  afflicted  with  varicose  veins  they  are  less  inclined  to  take  on

baldness; and if they be bald when they become thus afflicted, they have a

tendency to get their hair again.

If a hair be cut, it does not grow at the point of section; but it gets longer

by growing upward from below. In fishes the scales grow harder and thicker

with age, and when the amimal gets emaciated or is growing old the scales

grow harder. In quadrupeds as they grow old the hair in some and the wool in

others gets deeper but scantier in amount: and the hooves or claws get larger

in size; and the same is the case with the beaks of birds. The claws also

increase in size, as do also the nails.

<

div id="section46" class="section" title="12">


12


  With  regard  to  winged  animals,  such  as  birds,  no  creature  is  liable  to

change of colour by reason of age, excepting the crane. The wings of this bird

are  ash-coloured  at  first,  but  as  it  grows  old  the  wings  get  black.  Again,

owing to special climatic influences, as when unusual frost prevails, a change

is  sometimes  observed  to  take  place  in  birds  whose  plumage  is  of  one

uniform colour; thus, birds that have dusky or downright black plumage turn

white or grey, as the raven, the sparrow, and the swallow; but no case has

ever yet been known of a change of colour from white to black. (Further,

most birds change the colour of their plumage at different seasons of the year,so much so that a man ignorant of their habits might be mistaken as to their

identity.) Some animals change the colour of their hair with a change in their

drinking-water, for in some countries the same species of animal is found

white in one district and black in another. And in regard to the commerce of

the sexes, water in many places is of such peculiar quality that rams, if they

have intercourse with the female after drinking it, beget black lambs, as is the

case with the water of the Psychrus (so-called from its coldness), a river in

the district of Assyritis in the Chalcidic Peninsula, on the coast of Thrace;

and in Antandria there are two rivers of which one makes the lambs white

and the other black. The river Scamander also has the reputation of making

lambs yellow, and that is the reason, they say, why Homer designates it the

‘Yellow  River.’  Animals  as  a  general  rule  have  no  hair  on  their  internal

surfaces, and, in regard to their extremities, they have hair on the upper, but

not on the lower side.

The hare, or dasypod, is the only animal known to have hair inside its

mouth and underneath its feet. Further, the so-called mousewhale instead of

teeth has hairs in its mouth resembling pigs’ bristles.

  Hairs after being cut grow at the bottom but not at the top; if feathers be

cut off, they grow neither at top nor bottom, but shed and fall out. Further, the

bee’s wing will not grow again after being plucked off, nor will the wing of

any creature that has undivided wings. Neither will the sting grow again if the

bee lose it, but the creature will die of the loss.

<

div id="section47" class="section" title="13">


13


In  all  sanguineous  animals  membranes  are  found.  And  membrane

resembles a thin close-textured skin, but its qualities are different, as it admits

neither of cleavage nor of extension. Membrane envelops each one of the

bones and each one of the viscera, both in the larger and the smaller animals;

though in the smaller animals the membranes are indiscernible from their

extreme tenuity and minuteness. The largest of all the membranes are the two

that surround the brain, and of these two the one that lines the bony skull is

stronger and thicker than the one that envelops the brain; next in order of

magnitude  comes  the  membrane  that  encloses  the  heart.  If  membrane  be

bared and cut asunder it will not grow together again, and the bone thusstripped of its membrane mortifies.

<

div id="section48" class="section" title="14">


14


The omentum or caul, by the way, is membrane. All sanguineous animals

are furnished with this organ; but in some animals the organ is supplied with

fat, and in others it is devoid of it. The omentum has both its starting-point

and its attachment, with ambidental vivipara, in the centre of the stomach,

where the stomach has a kind of suture; in non-ambidental vivipara it has its

starting-point and attachment in the chief of the ruminating stomachs.

<

div id="section49" class="section" title="15">


15


The bladder also is of the nature of membrane, but of membrane peculiar

in kind, for it is extensile. The organ is not common to all animals, but, while

it is found in all the vivipara, the tortoise is the only oviparous animal that is

furnished therewithal. The bladder, like ordinary membrane, if cut asunder

will not grow together again, unless the section be just at the commencement

of the urethra: except indeed in very rare cases, for instances of healing have

been known to occur. After death, the organ passes no liquid excretion; but in

life, in addition to the normal liquid excretion, it passes at times dry excretion

also,  which  turns  into  stones  in  the  case  of  sufferers  from  that  malady.

Indeed, instances have been known of concretions in the bladder so shaped as

closely to resemble cockleshells.

  Such  are  the  properties,  then,  of  vein,  sinew  and  skin,  of  fibre  and

membrane, of hair, nail, claw and hoof, of horns, of teeth, of beak, of gristle,

of bones, and of parts that are analogous to any of the parts here enumerated.

<

div id="section50" class="section" title="16">


16Flesh, and that which is by nature akin to it in sanguineous animals, is in

all  cases  situated  in  between  the  skin  and  the  bone,  or  the  substance

analogous to bone; for just as spine is a counterpart of bone, so is the flesh-

like  substance  of  animals  that  are  constructed  a  spinous  system  the

counterpart of the flesh of animals constructed on an osseous one.

  Flesh can be divided asunder in any direction, not lengthwise only as is the

case with sinew and vein. When animals are subjected to emaciation the flesh

disappears, and the creatures become a mass of veins and fibres; when they

are over fed, fat takes the place of flesh. Where the flesh is abundant in an

animal,  its  veins  are  somewhat  small  and  the  blood  abnormally  red;  the

viscera also and the stomach are diminutive; whereas with animals whose

veins are large the blood is somewhat black, the viscera and the stomach are

large, and the flesh is somewhat scanty. And animals with small stomachs are

disposed to take on flesh.

<

div id="section51" class="section" title="17">


17


  Again,  fat  and  suet  differ  from  one  another.  Suet  is  frangible  in  all

directions and congeals if subjected to extreme cold, whereas fat can melt but

cannot freeze or congeal; and soups made of the flesh of animals supplied

with fat do not congeal or coagulate, as is found with horse-flesh and pork;

but soups made from the flesh of animals supplied with suet do coagulate, as

is seen with mutton and goat’s flesh. Further, fat and suet differ as to their

localities: for fat is found between the skin and flesh, but suet is found only at

the limit of the fleshy parts. Also, in animals supplied with fat the omentum

or caul is supplied with fat, and it is supplied with suet in animals supplied

with  suet.  Moreover,  ambidental  animals  are  supplied  with  fat,  and  non-

ambidentals with suet.

Of the viscera the liver in some animals becomes fatty, as, among fishes, is

the  case  with  the  selachia,  by  the  melting  of  whose  livers  an  oil  is

manufactured. These cartilaginous fish themselves have no free fat at all in

connexion with the flesh or with the stomach. The suet in fish is fatty, and

does  not  solidify  or  congeal.  All  animals  are  furnished  with  fat,  either

intermingled with their flesh, or apart. Such as have no free or separate fat are

less fat than others in stomach and omentum, as the eel; for it has only ascanty supply of suet about the omentum. Most animals take on fat in the

belly, especially such animals as are little in motion.

The brains of animals supplied with fat are oily, as in the pig; of animals

supplied with suet, parched and dry. But it is about the kidneys more than any

other viscera that animals are inclined to take on fat; and the right kidney is

always less supplied with fat than the left kidney, and, be the two kidneys

ever so fat, there is always a space devoid of fat in between the two. Animals

supplied  with  suet  are  specially  apt  to  have  it  about  the  kidneys,  and

especially  the  sheep;  for  this  animal  is  apt  to  die  from  its  kidneys  being

entirely  enveloped.  Fat  or  suet  about  the  kidney  is  superinduced  by

overfeeding, as is found at Leontini in Sicily; and consequently in this district

they defer driving out sheep to pasture until the day is well on, with the view

of limiting their food by curtailment of the hours of pasture.

<

div id="section52" class="section" title="18">


18


The part around the pupil of the eye is fatty in all animals, and this part

resembles  suet  in  all  animals  that  possess  such  a  part  and  that  are  not

furnished with hard eyes.

Fat animals, whether male or female, are more or less unfitted for breeding

purposes. Animals are disposed to take on fat more when old than when

young, and especially when they have attained their full breadth and their full

length and are beginning to grow depthways.

<

div id="section53" class="section" title="19">


19


And  now  to  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  the  blood.  In  sanguineous

animals blood is the most universal and the most indispensable part; and it is

not  an  acquired  or  adventitious  part,  but  it  is  a  consubstantial  part  of  all

animals that are not corrupt or moribund. All blood is contained in a vascular

system, to wit, the veins, and is found nowhere else, excepting in the heart.

Blood is not sensitive to touch in any animal, any more than the excretions ofthe stomach; and the case is similar with the brain and the marrow. When

flesh is lacerated, blood exudes, if the animal be alive and unless the flesh be

gangrened. Blood in a healthy condition is naturally sweet to the taste, and

red in colour, blood that deteriorates from natural decay or from disease more

or less black. Blood at its best, before it undergoes deterioration from either

natural decay or from disease, is neither very thick nor very thin. In the living

animal  it  is  always  liquid  and  warm,  but,  on  issuing  from  the  body,  it

coagulates in all cases except in the case of the deer, the roe, and the like

animals; for, as a general rule, blood coagulates unless the fibres be extracted.

Bull’s blood is the quickest to coagulate.

  Animals that are internally and externally viviparous are more abundantly

supplied with blood than the sanguineous ovipara. Animals that are in good

condition,  either  from  natural  causes  or  from  their  health  having  been

attended  to,  have  the  blood  neither  too  abundant-as  creatures  just  after

drinking have the liquid inside them in abundance-nor again very scanty, as is

the case with animals when exceedingly fat. For animals in this condition

have pure blood, but very little of it, and the fatter an animal gets the less

becomes its supply of blood; for whatsoever is fat is destitute of blood.

A  fat  substance  is  incorruptible,  but  blood  and  all  things  containing  it

corrupt rapidly, and this property characterizes especially all parts connected

with the bones. Blood is finest and purest in man; and thickest and blackest in

the bull and the ass, of all vivipara. In the lower and the higher parts of the

body blood is thicker and blacker than in the central parts.

  Blood beats or palpitates in the veins of all animals alike all over their

bodies, and blood is the only liquid that permeates the entire frames of living

animals, without exception and at all times, as long as life lasts. Blood is

developed first of all in the heart of animals before the body is differentiated

as a whole. If blood be removed or if it escape in any considerable quantity,

animals fall into a faint or swoon; if it be removed or if it escape in an

exceedingly  large  quantity  they  die.  If  the  blood  get  exceedingly  liquid,

animals fall sick; for the blood then turns into something like ichor, or a

liquid so thin that it at times has been known to exude through the pores like

sweat. In some cases blood, when issuing from the veins, does not coagulate

at all, or only here and there. Whilst animals are sleeping the blood is less

abundantly supplied near the exterior surfaces, so that, if the sleeping creature

be pricked with a pin, the blood does not issue as copiously as it would if the

creature were awake. Blood is developed out of ichor by coction, and fat inlike manner out of blood. If the blood get diseased, haemorrhoids may ensue

in the nostril or at the anus, or the veins may become varicose. Blood, if it

corrupt in the body, has a tendency to turn into pus, and pus may turn into a

solid concretion.

  Blood in the female differs from that in the male, for, supposing the male

and female to be on a par as regards age and general health, the blood in the

female is thicker and blacker than in the male; and with the female there is a

comparative superabundance of it in the interior. Of all female animals the

female  in  man  is  the  most  richly  supplied  with  blood,  and  of  all  female

animals  the  menstruous  discharges  are  the  most  copious  in  woman.  The

blood  of  these  discharges  under  disease  turns  into  flux.  Apart  from  the

menstrual  discharges,  the  female  in  the  human  species  is  less  subject  to

diseases of the blood than the male.

  Women are seldom afflicted with varicose veins, with haemorrhoids, or

with bleeding at the nose, and, if any of these maladies supervene, the menses

are imperfectly discharged.

  Blood differs in quantity and appearance according to age; in very young

animals it resembles ichor and is abundant, in the old it is thick and black and

scarce,  and  in  middle-aged  animals  its  qualities  are  intermediate.  In  old

animals the blood coagulates rapidly, even blood at the surface of the body;

but this is not the case with young animals. Ichor is, in fact, nothing else but

unconcocted blood: either blood that has not yet been concocted, or that has

become fluid again.

<

div id="section54" class="section" title="20">


20


We now proceed to discuss the properties of marrow; for this is one of the

liquids found in certain sanguineous animals. All the natural liquids of the

body  are  contained  in  vessels:  as  blood  in  veins,  marrow  in  bones  other

moistures in membranous structures of the skin

In young animals the marrow is exceedingly sanguineous, but, as animals

grow  old,  it  becomes  fatty  in  animals  supplied  with  fat,  and  suet-like  in

animals with suet. All bones, however, are not supplied with marrow, but

only the hollow ones, and not all of these. For of the bones in the lion some

contain no marrow at all, and some are only scantily supplied therewith; andthat accounts, as was previously observed, for the statement made by certain

writers that the lion is marrowless. In the bones of pigs it is found in small

quantities; and in the bones of certain animals of this species it is not found at

all.

  These liquids, then, are nearly always congenital in animals, but milk and

sperm  come  at  a  later  time.  Of  these  latter,  that  which,  whensoever  it  is

present, is secreted in all cases ready-made, is the milk; sperm, on the other

hand, is not secreted out in all cases, but in some only, as in the case of what

are designated thori in fishes.

  Whatever animals have milk, have it in their breasts. All animals have

breasts  that  are  internally  and  externally  viviparous,  as  for  instance  all

animals  that  have  hair,  as  man  and  the  horse;  and  the  cetaceans,  as  the

dolphin, the porpoise, and the whale-for these animals have breasts and are

supplied with milk. Animals that are oviparous or only externally viviparous

have neither breasts nor milk, as the fish and the bird.

All milk is composed of a watery serum called ‘whey’, and a consistent

substance called curd (or cheese); and the thicker the milk, the more abundant

the  curd.  The  milk,  then,  of  non-ambidentals  coagulates,  and  that  is  why

cheese is made of the milk of such animals under domestication; but the milk

of ambidentals does not coagulate, nor their fat either, and the milk is thin

and  sweet.  Now  the  camel’s  milk  is  the  thinnest,  and  that  of  the  human

species next after it, and that of the ass next again, but cow’s milk is the

thickest. Milk does not coagulate under the influence of cold, but rather runs

to whey; but under the influence of heat it coagulates and thickens. As a

general rule milk only comes to animals in pregnancy. When the animal is

pregnant milk is found, but for a while it is unfit for use, and then after an

interval of usefulness it becomes unfit for use again. In the case of female

animals  not  pregnant  a  small  quantity  of  milk  has  been  procured  by  the

employment  of  special  food,  and  cases  have  been  actually  known  where

women advanced in years on being submitted to the process of milking have

produced milk, and in some cases have produced it in sufficient quantities to

enable them to suckle an infant.

The  people  that  live  on  and  about  Mount  Oeta  take  such  she-goats  as

decline the male and rub their udders hard with nettles to cause an irritation

amounting to pain; hereupon they milk the animals, procuring at first a liquid

resembling blood, then a liquid mixed with purulent matter, and eventually

milk, as freely as from females submitting to the male.As a general rule, milk is not found in the male of man or of any other

animal, though from time to time it has been found in a male; for instance,

once in Lemnos a he-goat was milked by its dugs (for it has, by the way, two

dugs close to the penis), and was milked to such effect that cheese was made

of the produce, and the same phenomenon was repeated in a male of its own

begetting.  Such  occurrences,  however,  are  regarded  as  supernatural  and

fraught  with  omen  as  to  futurity,  and  in  point  of  fact  when  the  Lemnian

owner of the animal inquired of the oracle, the god informed him that the

portent  foreshadowed  the  acquisition  of  a  fortune.  With  some  men,  after

puberty, milk can be produced by squeezing the breasts; cases have been

known  where  on  their  being  subjected  to  a  prolonged  milking  process  a

considerable quantity of milk has been educed.

In milk there is a fatty element, which in clotted milk gets to resemble oil.

Goat’s milk is mixed with sheep’s milk in Sicily, and wherever sheep’s milk

is abundant. The best milk for clotting is not only that where the cheese is

most abundant, but that also where the cheese is driest.

Now some animals produce not only enough milk to rear their young, but a

superfluous amount for general use, for cheese-making and for storage. This

is especially the case with the sheep and the goat, and next in degree with the

cow. Mare’s milk, by the way, and milk of the she-ass are mixed in with

Phrygian cheese. And there is more cheese in cow’s milk than in goat’s milk;

for graziers tell us that from nine gallons of goat’s milk they can get nineteen

cheeses at an obol apiece, and from the same amount of cow’s milk, thirty.

Other animals give only enough of milk to rear their young withal, and no

superfluous amount and none fitted for cheese-making, as is the case with all

animals  that  have  more  than  two  breasts  or  dugs;  for  with  none  of  such

animals is milk produced in superabundance or used for the manufacture of

cheese.

The juice of the fig and rennet are employed to curdle milk. The fig-juice

is first squeezed out into wool; the wool is then washed and rinsed, and the

rinsing put into a little milk, and if this be mixed with other milk it curdles

Rennet is a kind of milk, for it is found in the stomach of the animal while it

is yet suckling.

<

div id="section55" class="section" title="21">


21  Rennet then consists of milk with an admixture of fire, which comes from

the  natural  heat  of  the  animal,  as  the  milk  is  concocted.  All  ruminating

animals produce rennet, and, of ambidentals, the hare. Rennet improves in

quality the longer it is kept; and cow’s rennet, after being kept a good while,

and also hare’s rennet, is good for diarrhoea, and the best of all rennet is that

of the young deer.

In milk-producing animals the comparative amount of the yield varies with

the size of the animal and the diversities of pasturage. For instance, there are

in Phasis small cattle that in all cases give a copious supply of milk, and the

large cows in Epirus yield each one daily some nine gallons of milk, and half

of this from each pair of teats, and the milker has to stand erect, stooping

forward a little, as otherwise, if he were seated, he would be unable to reach

up to the teats. But, with the exception of the ass, all the quadrupeds in Epirus

are of large size, and relatively, the cattle and the dogs are the largest. Now

large animals require abundant pasture, and this country supplies just such

pasturage,  and  also  supplies  diverse  pasture  grounds  to  suit  the  diverse

seasons of the year. The cattle are particularly large, and likewise the sheep

of  the  so-called  Pyrrhic  breed,  the  name  being  given  in  honour  of  King

Pyrrhus.

  Some  pasture  quenches  milk,  as  Median  grass  or  lucerne,  and  that

especially  in  ruminants;  other  feeding  renders  it  copious,  as  cytisus  and

vetch; only, by the way, cytisus in flower is not recommended, as it has

burning  properties,  and  vetch  is  not  good  for  pregnant  kine,  as  it  causes

increased difficulty in parturition. However, beasts that have access to good

feeding, as they are benefited thereby in regard to pregnancy, so also being

well nourished produce milk in plenty. Some of the leguminous plants bring

milk in abundance, as for instance, a large feed of beans with the ewe, the

common she-goat, the cow, and the small she-goat; for this feeding makes

them drop their udders. And, by the way, the pointing of the udder to the

ground before parturition is a sign of there being plenty of milk coming.

Milk remains for a long time in the female, if she be kept from the male

and be properly fed, and, of quadrupeds, this is especially true of the ewe; for

the  ewe  can  be  milked  for  eight  months.  As  a  general  rule,  ruminating

animals give milk in abundance, and milk fitted for cheese manufacture. In

the neighbourhood of Torone cows run dry for a few days before calving, and

have milk all the rest of the time. In women, milk of a livid colour is better

than white for nursing purposes; and swarthy women give healthier milk thanfair ones. Milk that is richest in cheese is the most nutritious, but milk with a

scanty supply of cheese is the more wholesome for children.

<

div id="section56" class="section" title="22">


22


All sanguineous animals eject sperm. As to what, and how, it contributes to

generation, these questions will be discussed in another treatise. Taking the

size of his body into account, man emits more sperm than any other animal.

In hairy-coated animals the sperm is sticky, but in other animals it is not so. It

is white in all cases, and Herodotus is under a misapprehension when he

states that the Aethiopians eject black sperm.

  Sperm issues from the body white and consistent, if it be healthy, and after

quitting  the  body  becomes  thin  and  black.  In  frosty  weather  it  does  not

coagulate,  but  gets  exceedingly  thin  and  watery  both  in  colour  and

consistency; but it coagulates and thickens under the influence of heat. If it be

long in the womb before issuing out, it comes more than usually thick; and

sometimes it comes out dry and compact. Sperm capable of impregnating or

of  fructification  sinks  in  water;  sperm  incapable  Of  producing  that  result

dissolves away. But there is no truth in what Ctesias has written about the

sperm of the elephant.                    The History of Animals, Book IV


translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson


<

div id="book4" class="chapter" title="Book IV">


1


We have now treated, in regard to blooded animals of the parts they have

in common and of the parts peculiar to this genus or that, and of the parts

both composite and simple, whether without or within. We now proceed to

treat  of  animals  devoid  of  blood.  These  animals  are  divided  into  several

genera.

One genus consists of so-called ‘molluscs’; and by the term ‘mollusc’ we

mean  an  animal  that,  being  devoid  of  blood,  has  its  flesh-like  substance

outside, and any hard structure it may happen to have, inside-in this respect

resembling the red-blooded animals, such as the genus of the cuttle-fish.

  Another genus is that of the malacostraca. These are animals that have

their hard structure outside, and their soft or fleshlike substance inside, and

the hard substance belonging to them has to be crushed rather than shattered;

and to this genus belongs the crawfish and the crab.

A third genus is that of the ostracoderms or ‘testaceans’. These are animals

that have their hard substance outside and their flesh-like substance within,

and their hard substance can be shattered but not crushed; and to this genus

belong the snail and the oyster.

The fourth genus is that of insects; and this genus comprehends numerous

and dissimilar species. Insects are creatures that, as the name implies, have

nicks either on the belly or on the back, or on both belly and back, and have

no  one  part  distinctly  osseous  and  no  one  part  distinctly  fleshy,  but  are

throughout a something intermediate between bone and flesh; that is to say,

their body is hard all through, inside and outside. Some insects are wingless,

such  as  the  iulus  and  the  centipede;  some  are  winged,  as  the  bee,  the

cockchafer, and the wasp; and the same kind is in some cases both winged

and wingless, as the ant and the glow-worm.In molluscs the external parts are as follows: in the first place, the so-called

feet;  secondly,  and  attached  to  these,  the  head;  thirdly,  the  mantle-sac,

containing the internal parts, and incorrectly designated by some writers the

head; and, fourthly, fins round about the sac. (See diagram.) In all molluscs

the  head  is  found  to  be  between  the  feet  and  the  belly.  All  molluscs  are

furnished with eight feet, and in all cases these feet are severally furnished

with a double row of suckers, with the exception of one single species of

poulpe or octopus. The sepia, the small calamary and the large calamary have

an  exceptional  organ  in  a  pair  of  long  arms  or  tentacles,  having  at  their

extremities a portion rendered rough by the presence of two rows of suckers;

and with these arms or tentacles they apprehend their food and draw it into

their mouths, and in stormy weather they cling by them to a rock and sway

about in the rough water like ships lying at anchor. They swim by the aid of

the fins that they have about the sac. In all cases their feet are furnished with

suckers.

The octopus, by the way, uses his feelers either as feet or hands; with the

two which stand over his mouth he draws in food, and the last of his feelers

he  employs  in  the  act  of  copulation;  and  this  last  one,  by  the  way,  is

extremely  sharp,  is  exceptional  as  being  of  a  whitish  colour,  and  at  its

extremity is bifurcate; that is to say, it has an additional something on the

rachis, and by rachis is meant the smooth surface or edge of the arm on the

far side from the suckers. (See diagram.)

In front of the sac and over the feelers they have a hollow tube, by means

of which they discharge any sea-water that they may have taken into the sac

of the body in the act of receiving food by the mouth. They can shift the tube

from side to side, and by means of it they discharge the black liquid peculiar

to the animal.

  Stretching out its feet, it swims obliquely in the direction of the so-called

head, and by this mode of swimming it can see in front, for its eyes are at the

top, and in this attitude it has its mouth at the rear. The ‘head’, while the

creature is alive, is hard, and looks as though it were inflated. It apprehends

and  retains  objects  by  means  of  the  under-surface  of  its  arms,  and  the

membrane in between its feet is kept at full tension; if the animal get on to the

sand it can no longer retain its hold.

  There is a difference between the octopus and the other molluscs above

mentioned: the body of the octopus is small, and his feet are long, whereas in

the others the body is large and the feet short; so short, in fact, that theycannot walk on them. Compared with one another, the teuthis, or calamary, is

long-shaped, and the sepia flat-shaped; and of the calamaries the so-called

teuthus is much bigger than the teuthis; for teuthi have been found as much as

five ells long. Some sepiae attain a length of two ells, and the feelers of the

octopus are sometimes as long, or even longer. The species teuthus is not a

numerous one; the teuthus differs from the teuthis in shape; that is, the sharp

extremity of the teuthus is broader than that of the other, and, further, the

encircling fin goes all round the trunk, whereas it is in part lacking in the

teuthis; both animals are pelagic.

In all cases the head comes after the feet, in the middle of the feet that are

called arms or feelers. There is here situated a mouth, and two teeth in the

mouth; and above these two large eyes, and betwixt the eyes a small cartilage

enclosing a small brain; and within the mouth it has a minute organ of a

fleshy nature, and this it uses as a tongue, for no other tongue does it possess.

Next after this, on the outside, is what looks like a sac; the flesh of which it is

made is divisible, not in long straight strips, but in annular flakes; and all

molluscs have a cuticle around this flesh. Next after or at the back of the

mouth comes a long and narrow oesophagus, and close after that a crop or

craw, large and spherical, like that of a bird; then comes the stomach, like the

fourth  stomach  in  ruminants;  and  the  shape  of  it  resembles  the  spiral

convolution in the trumpet-shell; from the stomach there goes back again, in

the  direction  of  the  mouth,  thin  gut,  and  the  gut  is  thicker  than  the

oesophagus. (See diagram.)

  Molluscs have no viscera, but they have what is called a mytis, and on it a

vessel containing a thick black juice; in the sepia or cuttle-fish this vessel is

the largest, and this juice is most abundant. All molluscs, when frightened,

discharge such a juice, but the discharge is most copious in the cuttle-fish.

The  mytis,  then,  is  situated  under  the  mouth,  and  the  oesophagus  runs

through  it;  and  down  below  at  the  point  to  which  the  gut  extends  is  the

vesicle  of  the  black  juice,  and  the  animal  has  the  vesicle  and  the  gut

enveloped in one and the same membrane, and by the same membrane, same

orifice discharges both the black juice and the residuum. The animals have

also certain hair-like or furry growths in their bodies.

In the sepia, the teuthis, and the teuthus the hard parts are within, towards

the back of the body; those parts are called in one the sepium, and in the other

the ‘sword’. They differ from one another, for the sepium in the cuttle-fish

and teuthus is hard and flat, being a substance intermediate between bone andfishbone, with (in part) a crumbling, spongy texture, but in the teuthis the part

is thin and somewhat gristly. These parts differ from one another in shape, as

do also the bodies of the animals. The octopus has nothing hard of this kind

in its interior, but it has a gristly substance round the head, which, if the

animal grows old, becomes hard.

The females differ from the males. The males have a duct in under the

oesophagus, extending from the mantle-cavity to the lower portion of the sac,

and there is an organ to which it attaches, resembling a breast; (see diagram)

in the female there are two of these organs, situated higher up; (see diagram)

with both sexes there are underneath these organs certain red formations. The

egg of the octopus is single, uneven on its surface, and of large size; the fluid

substance within is all uniform in colour, smooth, and in colour white; the

size of the egg is so great as to fill a vessel larger than the creature’s head.

The sepia has two sacs, and inside them a number of eggs, like in appearance

to  white  hailstones.  For  the  disposition  of  these  parts  I  must  refer  to  my

anatomical diagrams.

The males of all these animals differ from the females, and the difference

between the sexes is most marked in the sepia; for the back of the trunk,

which is blacker than the belly, is rougher in the male than in the female, and

in the male the back is striped, and the rump is more sharply pointed.

  There are several species of the octopus. One keeps close to the surface,

and is the largest of them all, and near the shore the size is larger than in deep

water; and there are others, small, variegated in colour, which are not articles

of food. There are two others, one called the heledone, which differs from its

congeners in the length of its legs and in having one row of suckers-all the

rest of the molluscs having two,-the other nicknamed variously the bolitaina

or the ‘onion,’ and the ozolis or the ‘stinkard’.

  There are two others found in shells resembling those of the testaceans.

One of them is nicknamed by some persons the nautilus or the pontilus, or by

others the ‘polypus’ egg’; and the shell of this creature is something like a

separate valve of a deep scallop-shell. This polypus lives very often near to

the shore, and is apt to be thrown up high and dry on the beach; under these

circumstances it is found with its shell detached, and dies by and by on dry

land. These polypods are small, and are shaped, as regards the form of their

bodies, like the bolbidia. There is another polypus that is placed within a shell

like a snail; it never comes out of the shell, but lives inside the shell like the

snail, and from time to time protrudes its feelers.So much for molluscs.

<

div id="section58" class="section" title="2">


2


  With regard to the Malacostraca or crustaceans, one species is that of the

crawfish, and a second, resembling the first, is that of the lobster; the lobster

differing from the crawfish in having claws, and in a few other respects as

well. Another species is that of the carid, and another is that of the crab, and

there are many kinds both of carid and of crab.

Of carids there are the so-called cyphae, or ‘hunch-backs’, the crangons, or

squillae, and the little kind, or shrimps, and the little kind do not develop into

a larger kind.

Of the crab, the varieties are indefinite and incalculable. The largest of all

crabs is one nicknamed Maia, a second variety is the pagarus and the crab of

Heracleotis, and a third variety is the fresh-water crab; the other varieties are

smaller in size and destitute of special designations. In the neighbourhood of

Phoenice there are found on the beach certain crabs that are nicknamed the

‘horsemen’, from their running with such speed that it is difficult to overtake

them; these crabs, when opened, are usually found empty, and this emptiness

may be put down to insufficiency of nutriment. (There is another variety,

small like the crab, but resembling in shape the lobster.) All these animals, as

has been stated, have their hard and shelly part outside, where the skin is in

other  animals,  and  the  fleshy  part  inside;  and  the  belly  is  more  or  less

provided  with  lamellae,  or  little  flaps,  and  the  female  here  deposits  her

spawn.

The crawfishes have five feet on either side, including the claws at the end;

and in like manner the crabs have ten feet in all, including the claws. Of the

carids, the hunch-backed, or prawns, have five feet on either side, which are

sharp-pointed-those towards the head; and five others on either side in the

region of the belly, with their extremities flat; they are devoid of flaps on the

under  side  such  as  the  crawfish  has,  but  on  the  back  they  resemble  the

crawfish. (See diagram.)It is very different with the crangon, or squilla; it has

four front legs on either side, then three thin ones close behind on either side,

and the rest of the body is for the most part devoid of feet. (See diagram.) Of

all these animals the feet bend out obliquely, as is the case with insects; andthe claws, where claws are found, turn inwards. The crawfish has a tail, and

five fins on it; and the round-backed carid has a tail and four fins; the squilla

also has fins at the tail on either side. In the case of both the hump-backed

carid and the squilla the middle art of the tail is spinous: only that in the

squilla the part is flattened and in the carid it is sharp-pointed. Of all animals

of this genus the crab is the only one devoid of a rump; and, while the body

of the carid and the crawfish is elongated, that of the crab is rotund.

In the crawfish the male differs from the female: in the female the first foot

is bifurcate, in the male it is undivided; the belly-fins in the female are large

and overlapping on the neck, while in the male they are smaller and do not

overlap;  and,  further,  on  the  last  feet  of  the  male  there  are  spur-like

projections, large and sharp, which projections in the female are small and

smooth. Both male and female have two antennae in front of the eyes, large

and rough, and other antennae underneath, small and smooth. The eyes of all

these creatures are hard and beady, and can move either to the inner or to the

outer side. The eyes of most crabs have a similar facility of movement, or

rather, in the crab this facility is developed in a higher degree. (See diagram.)

The lobster is all over grey-coloured, with a mottling of black. Its under or

hinder feet, up to the big feet or claws, are eight in number; then come the big

feet, far larger and flatter at the tips than the same organs in the crawfish; and

these big feet or claws are exceptional in their structure, for the right claw has

the  extreme  flat  surface  long  and  thin,  while  the  left  claw  has  the

corresponding surface thick and round. Each of the two claws, divided at the

end like a pair of jaws, has both below and above a set of teeth: only that in

the right claw they are all small and saw-shaped, while in the left claw those

at the apex are saw-shaped and those within are molar-shaped, these latter

being, in the under part of the cleft claw, four teeth close together, and in the

upper part three teeth, not close together. Both right and left claws have the

upper part mobile, and bring it to bear against the lower one, and both are

curved  like  bandy-legs,  being  thereby  adapted  for  apprehension  and

constriction. Above the two large claws come two others, covered with hair, a

little underneath the mouth; and underneath these the gill-like formations in

the region of the mouth, hairy and numerous. These organs the animal keeps

in perpetual motion; and the two hairy feet it bends and draws in towards its

mouth. The feet near the mouth are furnished also with delicate outgrowing

appendages. Like the crawfish, the lobster has two teeth, or mandibles, and

above these teeth are its antennae, long, but shorter and finer by far thanthose  of  the  crawfish,  and  then  four  other  antennae  similar  in  shape,  but

shorter and finer than the others. Over these antennae come the eyes, small

and short, not large like the eyes of the crawfish. Over the eyes is a peaky

rough projection like a forehead, larger than the same part in the crawfish; in

fact, the frontal part is more pointed and the thorax is much broader in the

lobster than in the crawfish, and the body in general is smoother and more

full of flesh. Of the eight feet, four are bifurcate at the extremities, and four

are undivided. The region of the so-called neck is outwardly divided into five

divisions, and sixthly comes the flattened portion at the end, and this portion

has five flaps, or tail-fins; and the inner or under parts, into which the female

drops her spawn, are four in number and hairy, and on each of the aforesaid

parts is a spine turned outwards, short and straight. The body in general and

the region of the thorax in particular are smooth, not rough as in the crawfish;

but  on  the  large  claws  the  outer  portion  has  larger  spines.  There  is  no

apparent difference between the male and female, for they both have one

claw, whichever it may be, larger than the other, and neither male nor female

is ever found with both claws of the same size.

All crustaceans take in water close by the mouth. The crab discharges it,

closing  up,  as  it  does  so,  a  small  portion  of  the  same,  and  the  crawfish

discharges it by way of the gills; and, by the way, the gill-shaped organs in

the crawfish are very numerous.

The following properties are common to all crustaceans: they have in all

cases two teeth, or mandibles (for the front teeth in the crawfish are two in

number), and in all cases there is in the mouth a small fleshy structure serving

for a tongue; and the stomach is close to the mouth, only that the crawfish has

a little oesophagus in front of the stomach, and there is a straight gut attached

to it. This gut, in the crawfish and its congeners, and in the carids, extends in

a straight line to the tail, and terminates where the animal discharges the

residuum, and where the female deposits her spawn; in the crab it terminates

where the flap is situated, and in the centre of the flap. (And by the way, in

all these animals the spawn is deposited outside.) Further, the female has the

place for the spawn running along the gut. And, again, all these animals have,

more or less, an organ termed the ‘mytis’, or ‘poppyjuice’.

We must now proceed to review their several differentiae.

The crawfish then, as has been said, has two teeth, large and hollow, in

which is contained a juice resembling the mytis, and in between the teeth is a

fleshy  substance,  shaped  like  a  tongue.  After  the  mouth  comes  a  shortoesophagus, and then a membranous stomach attached to the oesophagus,

and at the orifice Of the stomach are three teeth, two facing one another and a

third standing by itself underneath. Coming off at a bend from the stomach is

a gut, simple and of equal thickness throughout the entire length of the body

until it reaches the anal vent.

  These are all common properties of the crawfish, the carid, and the crab;

for the crab, be it remembered, has two teeth.

  Again, the crawfish has a duct attached all the way from the chest to the

anal vent; and this duct is connected with the ovary in the female, and with

the seminal ducts in the male. This passage is attached to the concave surface

of the flesh in such a way that the flesh is in betwixt the duct and the gut; for

the gut is related to the convexity and this duct to the concavity, pretty much

as is observed in quadrupeds. And the duct is identical in both the sexes; that

is to say, the duct in both is thin and white, and charged with a sallow-

coloured moisture, and is attached to the chest.

  (The following are the properties of the egg and of the convolutes in the

carid.)

The male, by the way, differs from the female in regard to its flesh, in

having  in  connexion  with  the  chest  two  separate  and  distinct  white

substances, resembling in colour and conformation the tentacles of the cuttle-

fish, and they are convoluted like the ‘poppy’ or quasi-liver of the trumpet-

shell.  These  organs  have  their  starting-point  in  ‘cotyledons’  or  papillae,

which are situated under the hindmost feet; and hereabouts the flesh is red

and blood-coloured, but is slippery to the touch and in so far unlike flesh. Off

from the convolute organ at the chest branches off another coil about as thick

as ordinary twine; and underneath there are two granular seminal bodies in

juxta-position with the gut. These are the organs of the male. The female has

red-coloured eggs, which are adjacent to the stomach and to each side of the

gut all along to the fleshy parts, being enveloped in a thin membrane.

  Such are the parts, internal and external, of the carid.

<

div id="section59" class="section" title="3">


3


The  inner  organs  of  sanguineous  animals  happen  to  have  specific

designations; for these animals have in all cases the inner viscera, but this isnot the case with the bloodless animals, but what they have in common with

red-blooded animals is the stomach, the oesophagus, and the gut.

  With regard to the crab, it has already been stated that it has claws and feet,

and their position has been set forth; furthermore, for the most part they have

the right claw bigger and stronger than the left. It has also been stated’ that in

general the eyes of the crab look sideways. Further, the trunk of the crab’s

body is single and undivided, including its head and any other part it may

possess.  Some  crabs  have  eyes  placed  sideways  on  the  upper  part,

immediately under the back, and standing a long way apart, and some have

their eyes in the centre and close together, like the crabs of Heracleotis and

the so-called ‘grannies’. The mouth lies underneath the eyes, and inside it

there are two teeth, as is the case with the crawfish, only that in the crab the

teeth are not rounded but long; and over the teeth are two lids, and in betwixt

them are structures such as the crawfish has besides its teeth. The crab takes

in water near by the mouth, using the lids as a check to the inflow, and

discharges the water by two passages above the mouth, closing by means of

the  lids  the  way  by  which  it  entered;  and  the  two  passage-ways  are

underneath the eyes. When it has taken in water it closes its mouth by means

of both lids, and ejects the water in the way above described. Next after the

teeth comes the oesophagus, very short, so short in fact that the stomach

seems to come straightway after the mouth. Next after the oesophagus comes

the stomach, two-horned, to the centre of which is attached a simple and

delicate gut; and the gut terminates outwards, at the operculum, as has been

previously  stated.  (The  crab  has  the  parts  in  between  the  lids  in  the

neighbourhood of the teeth similar to the same parts in the crawfish.) Inside

the trunk is a sallow juice and some few little bodies, long and white, and

others spotted red. The male differs from the female in size and breadth, and

in respect of the ventral flap; for this is larger in the female than in the male,

and stands out further from the trunk, and is more hairy (as is the case also

with the female in the crawfish).

So much, then, for the organs of the malacostraca or crustacea.

<

div id="section60" class="section" title="4">


4


  With the ostracoderma, or testaceans, such as the land-snails and the sea-snails, and all the ‘oysters’ so-called, and also with the sea-urchin genus, the

fleshy part, in such as have flesh, is similarly situated to the fleshy part in the

crustaceans; in other words, it is inside the animal, and the shell is outside,

and there is no hard substance in the interior. As compared with one another

the testaceans present many diversities both in regard to their shells and to the

flesh within. Some of them have no flesh at all, as the sea-urchin; others have

flesh, but it is inside and wholly hidden, except the head, as in the land-snails,

and the so-called cocalia, and, among pelagic animals, in the purple murex,

the ceryx or trumpet-shell, the sea-snail, and the spiral-shaped testaceans in

general. Of the rest, some are bivalved and some univalved; and by ‘bivalves’

I mean such as are enclosed within two shells, and by ‘univalved’ such as are

enclosed within a single shell, and in these last the fleshy part is exposed, as

in the case of the limpet. Of the bivalves, some can open out, like the scallop

and the mussel; for all such shells are grown together on one side and are

separate on the other, so as to open and shut. Other bivalves are closed on

both sides alike, like the solen or razor-fish. Some testaceans there are, that

are entirely enveloped in shell and expose no portion of their flesh outside, as

the tethya or ascidians.

  Again, in regard to the shells themselves, the testaceans present differences

when compared with one another. Some are smooth-shelled, like the solen,

the mussel, and some clams, viz. those that are nicknamed ‘milkshells’, while

others are rough-shelled, such as the pool-oyster or edible oyster, the pinna,

and certain species of cockles, and the trumpet shells; and of these some are

ribbed, such as the scallop and a certain kind of clam or cockle, and some are

devoid of ribs, as the pinna and another species of clam. Testaceans also

differ from one another in regard to the thickness or thinness of their shell,

both as regards the shell in its entirety and as regards specific parts of the

shell, for instance, the lips; for some have thin-lipped shells, like the mussel,

and others have thick-lipped shells, like the oyster. A property common to the

above mentioned, and, in fact, to all testaceans, is the smoothness of their

shells inside. Some also are capable of motion, like the scallop, and indeed

some aver that scallops can actually fly, owing to the circumstance that they

often jump right out of the apparatus by means of which they are caught;

others are incapable of motion and are attached fast to some external object,

as is the case with the pinna. All the spiral-shaped testaceans can move and

creep, and even the limpet relaxes its hold to go in quest of food. In the case

of the univalves and the bivalves, the fleshy substance adheres to the shell sotenaciously  that  it  can  only  be  removed  by  an  effort;  in  the  case  of  the

stromboids,  it  is  more  loosely  attached.  And  a  peculiarity  of  all  the

stromboids is the spiral twist of the shell in the part farthest away from the

head; they are also furnished from birth with an operculum. And, further, all

stromboid testaceans have their shells on the right hand side, and move not in

the  direction  of  the  spire,  but  the  opposite  way.  Such  are  the  diversities

observed in the external parts of these animals.

The internal structure is almost the same in all these creatures, and in the

stromboids especially; for it is in size that these latter differ from one another,

and in accidents of the nature of excess or defect. And there is not much

difference between most of the univalves and bivalves; but, while those that

open and shut differ from one another but slightly, they differ considerably

from  such  as  are  incapable  of  motion.  And  this  will  be  illustrated  more

satisfactorily hereafter.

The spiral-shaped testaceans are all similarly constructed, but differ from

one another, as has been said, in the way of excess or defect (for the larger

species  have  larger  and  more  conspicuous  organs,  and  the  smaller  have

smaller  and  less  conspicuous),  and,  furthermore,  in  relative  hardness  or

softness, and in other such accidents or properties. All the stromboids, for

instance, have the flesh that extrudes from the mouth of the shell, hard and

stiff; some more, and some less. From the middle of this protrudes the head

and two horns, and these horns are large in the large species, but exceedingly

minute in the smaller ones. The head protrudes from them all in the same

way; and, if the animal be alarmed, the head draws in again. Some of these

creatures have a mouth and teeth, as the snail; teeth sharp, and small, and

delicate. They have also a proboscis just like that of the fly; and the proboscis

is tongue-shaped. The ceryx and the purple murex have this organ firm and

solid; and just as the myops, or horse-fly, and the oestrus, or gadfly, can

pierce the skin of a quadruped, so is that proboscis proportionately stronger in

these testaceans; for they bore right through the shells of other shell-fish on

which they prey. The stomach follows close upon the mouth, and, by the

way, this organ in the snail resembles a bird’s crop. Underneath come two

white firm formations, mastoid or papillary in form; and similar formations

are found in the cuttle-fish also, only that they are of a firmer consistency in

the cuttle-fish. After the stomach comes an oesophagus, simple and long,

extending to the poppy or quasi-liver, which is in the innermost recess of the

shell. All these statements may be verified in the case of the purple murexand the ceryx by observation within the whorl of the shell. What comes next

to  the  oesophagus  is  the  gut;  in  fact,  the  gut  is  continuous  with  the

oesophagus,  and  runs  its  whole  length  uncomplicated  to  the  outlet  of  the

residuum. The gut has its point of origin in the region of the coil of the

mecon,  or  so-called  ‘poppy’,  and  is  wider  hereabouts  (for  remember,  the

mecon is for the most part a sort of excretion in all testaceans); it then takes a

bend and runs up again towards the fleshy part, and terminates by the side of

the head, where the animal discharges its residuum; and this holds good in

the case of all stromboid testaceans, whether terrestrial or marine. From the

stomach there is drawn in a parallel direction with the oesophagus, in the

larger  snails,  a  long  white  duct  enveloped  in  a  membrane,  resembling  in

colour the mastoid formations higher up; and in it are nicks or interruptions,

as in the egg-mass of the crawfish, only, by the way, the duct of which we are

treating is white and the egg-mass of the crawfish is red. This formation has

no outlet nor duct, but is enveloped in a thin membrane with a narrow cavity

in  its  interior.  And  from  the  gut  downward  extend  black  and  rough

formations, in close connexion, something like the formations in the tortoise,

only not so black. Marine snails, also, have these formations, and the white

ones, only that the formations are smaller in the smaller species.

The  non-spiral  univalves  and  bivalves  are  in  some  respect  similar  in

construction, and in some respects dissimilar, to the spiral testaceans. They

all have a head and horns, and a mouth, and the organ resembling a tongue;

but  these  organs,  in  the  smaller  species,  are  indiscernible  owing  to  the

minuteness of these animals, and some are indiscernible even in the larger

species when dead, or when at rest and motionless. They all have the mecon,

or poppy, but not all in the same place, nor of equal size, nor similarly open

to observation; thus, the limpets have this organ deep down in the bottom of

the shell, and the bivalves at the hinge connecting the two valves. They also

have in all cases the hairy growths or beards, in a circular form, as in the

scallops. And, with regard to the so-called ‘egg’, in those that have it, when

they have it, it is situated in one of the semi-circles of the periphery, as is the

case with the white formation in the snail; for this white formation in the snail

corresponds to the so-called egg of which we are speaking. But all these

organs, as has been stated, are distinctly traceable in the larger species, while

in the small ones they are in some cases almost, and in others altogether,

indiscernible. Hence they are most plainly visible in the large scallops; and

these are the bivalves that have one valve flat-shaped, like the lid of a pot.The outlet of the excretion is in all these animals (save for the exception to be

afterwards related) on one side; for there is a passage whereby the excretion

passes out. (And, remember, the mecon or poppy, as has been stated, is an

excretion in all these animals-an excretion enveloped in a membrane.) The

so-called  egg  has  no  outlet  in  any  of  these  creatures,  but  is  merely  an

excrescence in the fleshy mass; and it is not situated in the same region with

the gut, but the ‘egg’ is situated on the right-hand side and the gut on the left.

Such are the relations of the anal vent in most of these animals; but in the

case of the wild limpet (called by some the ‘sea-ear’), the residuum issues

beneath the shell, for the shell is perforated to give an outlet. In this particular

limpet  the  stomach  is  seen  coming  after  the  mouth,  and  the  egg-shaped

formations are discernible. But for the relative positions of these parts you are

referred to my Treatise on Anatomy.

The so-called carcinium or hermit crab is in a way intermediate between

the crustaceans and the testaceans. In its nature it resembles the crawfish

kind, and it is born simple of itself, but by its habit of introducing itself into a

shell and living there it resembles the testaceans, and so appears to partake of

the  characters  of  both  kinds.  In  shape,  to  give  a  simple  illustration,  it

resembles a spider, only that the part below the head and thorax is larger in

this creature than in the spider. It has two thin red horns, and underneath

these horns two long eyes, not retreating inwards, nor turning sideways like

the eyes of the crab, but protruding straight out; and underneath these eyes

the mouth, and round about the mouth several hair-like growths, and next

after these two bifurcate legs or claws, whereby it draws in objects towards

itself, and two other legs on either side, and a third small one. All below the

thorax is soft, and when opened in dissection is found to be sallow-coloured

within. From the mouth there runs a single passage right on to the stomach,

but the passage for the excretions is not discernible. The legs and the thorax

are hard, but not so hard as the legs and the thorax of the crab. It does not

adhere to its shell like the purple murex and the ceryx, but can easily slip out

of it. It is longer when found in the shell of the stromboids than when found

in the shell of the neritae.

  And, by the way, the animal found in the shell of the neritae is a separate

species, like to the other in most respects; but of its bifurcate feet or claws,

the right-hand one is small and the left-hand one is large, and it progresses

chiefly by the aid of this latter and larger one. (In the shells of these animals,

and in certain others, there is found a parasite whose mode of attachment issimilar.  The  particular  one  which  we  have  just  described  is  named  the

cyllarus.)

The nerites has a smooth large round shell, and resembles the ceryx in

shape, only the poppy-juice is, in its case, not black but red. It clings with

great force near the middle. In calm weather, then, they go free afield, but

when the wind blows the carcinia take shelter against the rocks: the neritae

themselves  cling  fast  like  limpets;  and  the  same  is  the  case  with  the

haemorrhoid or aporrhaid and all others of the like kind. And, by the way,

they  cling  to  the  rock,  when  they  turn  back  their  operculum,  for  this

operculum seems like a lid; in fact this structure represents the one part, in

the stromboids, of that which in the bivalves is a duplicate shell. The interior

of the animal is fleshy, and the mouth is inside. And it is the same with the

haemorrhoid, the purple murex, and all suchlike animals.

  Such of the little crabs as have the left foot or claw the bigger of the two

are  found  in  the  neritae,  but  not  in  the  stromboids.  are  some  snail-shells

which have inside them creatures resembling those little crayfish that are also

found  in  fresh  water.  These  creatures,  however,  differ  in  having  the  part

inside the shells But as to the characters, you are referred to my Treatise on

Anatomy.

<

div id="section61" class="section" title="5">


5


The urchins are devoid of flesh, and this is a character peculiar to them;

and while they are in all cases empty and devoid of any flesh within, they are

in all cases furnished with the black formations. There are several species of

the urchin, and one of these is that which is made use of for food; this is the

kind in which are found the so-called eggs, large and edible, in the larger and

smaller specimens alike; for even when as yet very small they are provided

with  them.  There  are  two  other  species,  the  spatangus,  and  the  so-called

bryssus,  these  animals  are  pelagic  and  scarce.  Further,  there  are  the

echinometrae, or ‘mother-urchins’, the largest in size of all the species. In

addition to these there is another species, small in size, but furnished with

large hard spines; it lives in the sea at a depth of several fathoms; and is used

by some people as a specific for cases of strangury. In the neighbourhood of

Torone there are sea-urchins of a white colour, shells, spines, eggs and all,and that are longer than the ordinary sea-urchin. The spine in this species is

not large nor strong, but rather limp; and the black formations in connexion

with the mouth are more than usually numerous, and communicate with the

external duct, but not with one another; in point of fact, the animal is in a

manner divided up by them. The edible urchin moves with greatest freedom

and  most  often;  and  this  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  these  urchins  have

always something or other on their spines.

All urchins are supplied with eggs, but in some of the species the eggs are

exceedingly small and unfit for food. Singularly enough, the urchin has what

we may call its head and mouth down below, and a place for the issue of the

residuum up above; (and this same property is common to all stromboids and

to  limpets).  For  the  food  on  which  the  creature  lives  lies  down  below;

consequently the mouth has a position well adapted for getting at the food,

and the excretion is above, near to the back of the shell. The urchin has, also,

five hollow teeth inside, and in the middle of these teeth a fleshy substance

serving the office of a tongue. Next to this comes the oesophagus, and then

the stomach, divided into five parts, and filled with excretion, all the five

parts uniting at the anal vent, where the shell is perforated for an outlet.

Underneath  the  stomach,  in  another  membrane,  are  the  so-called  eggs,

identical in number in all cases, and that number is always an odd number, to

wit five. Up above, the black formations are attached to the starting-point of

the teeth, and they are bitter to the taste, and unfit for food. A similar or at

least an analogous formation is found in many animals; as, for instance, in the

tortoise, the toad, the frog, the stromboids, and, generally, in the molluscs;

but the formation varies here and there in colour, and in all cases is altogether

uneatable, or more or less unpalatable. In reality the mouth-apparatus of the

urchin is continuous from one end to the other, but to outward appearance it

is not so, but looks like a horn lantern with the panes of horn left out. The

urchin uses its spines as feet; for it rests its weight on these, and then moving

shifts from place to place.

<

div id="section62" class="section" title="6">


6


The  so-called  tethyum  or  ascidian  has  of  all  these  animals  the  most

remarkable  characteristics.  It  is  the  only  mollusc  that  has  its  entire  bodyconcealed within its shell, and the shell is a substance intermediate between

hide and shell, so that it cuts like a piece of hard leather. It is attached to

rocks by its shell, and is provided with two passages placed at a distance from

one another, very minute and hard to see, whereby it admits and discharges

the sea-water; for it has no visible excretion (whereas of shell fish in general

some resemble the urchin in this matter of excretion, and others are provided

with  the  so-called  mecon,  or  poppy-juice).  If  the  animal  be  opened,  it  is

found to have, in the first place, a tendinous membrane running round inside

the shell-like substance, and within this membrane is the flesh-like substance

of the ascidian, not resembling that in other molluscs; but this flesh, to which

I now allude, is the same in all ascidia. And this substance is attached in two

places  to  the  membrane  and  the  skin,  obliquely;  and  at  the  point  of

attachment  the  space  is  narrowed  from  side  to  side,  where  the  fleshy

substance stretches towards the passages that lead outwards through the shell;

and here it discharges and admits food and liquid matter, just as it would if

one of the passages were a mouth and the other an anal vent; and one of the

passages is somewhat wider than the other Inside it has a pair of cavities, one

on either side, a small partition separating them; and one of these two cavities

contains  the  liquid.  The  creature  has  no  other  organ  whether  motor  or

sensory, nor, as was said in the case of the others, is it furnished with any

organ connected with excretion, as other shell-fish are. The colour of the

ascidian is in some cases sallow, and in other cases red.

  There is, furthermore, the genus of the sea-nettles, peculiar in its way. The

sea-nettle, or sea-anemone, clings to rocks like certain of the testaceans, but

at times relaxes its hold. It has no shell, but its entire body is fleshy. It is

sensitive to touch, and, if you put your hand to it, it will seize and cling to it,

as the cuttlefish would do with its feelers, and in such a way as to make the

flesh of your hand swell up. Its mouth is in the centre of its body, and it lives

adhering to the rock as an oyster to its shell. If any little fish come up against

it it it clings to it; in fact, just as I described it above as doing to your hand, so

it does to anything edible that comes in its way; and it feeds upon sea-urchins

and scallops. Another species of the sea-nettle roams freely abroad. The sea-

nettle  appears  to  be  devoid  altogether  of  excretion,  and  in  this  respect  it

resembles a plant.

Of sea-nettles there are two species, the lesser and more edible, and the

large hard ones, such as are found in the neighbourhood of Chalcis. In winter

time their flesh is firm, and accordingly they are sought after as articles offood, but in summer weather they are worthless, for they become thin and

watery, and if you catch at them they break at once into bits, and cannot be

taken off the rocks entire; and being oppressed by the heat they tend to slip

back into the crevices of the rocks.

So much for the external and the internal organs of molluscs, crustaceans,

and testaceans.

<

div id="section63" class="section" title="7">


7


We now proceed to treat of insects in like manner. This genus comprises

many species, and, though several kinds are clearly related to one another,

these are not classified under one common designation, as in the case of the

bee, the drone, the wasp, and all such insects, and again as in the case of

those that have their wings in a sheath or shard, like the cockchafer, the

carabus or stag-beetle, the cantharis or blister-beetle, and the like.

  Insects have three parts common to them all; the head, the trunk containing

the stomach, and a third part in betwixt these two, corresponding to what in

other  creatures  embraces  chest  and  back.  In  the  majority  of  insects  this

intermediate  part  is  single;  but  in  the  long  and  multipedal  insects  it  has

practically the same number of segments as of nicks.

All  insects  when  cut  in  two  continue  to  live,  excepting  such  as  are

naturally  cold  by  nature,  or  such  as  from  their  minute  size  chill  rapidly;

though, by the way, wasps notwithstanding their small size continue living

after severance. In conjunction with the middle portion either the head or the

stomach can live, but the head cannot live by itself. Insects that are long in

shape and many-footed can live for a long while after being cut in twain, and

the severed portions can move in either direction, backwards or forwards;

thus, the hinder portion, if cut off, can crawl either in the direction of the

section or in the direction of the tail, as is observed in the scolopendra.

All insects have eyes, but no other organ of sense discernible, except that

some  insects  have  a  kind  of  a  tongue  corresponding  to  a  similar  organ

common to all testaceans; and by this organ such insects taste and imbibe

their food. In some insects this organ is soft; in other insects it is firm; as it is,

by the way, in the purple-fish, among testaceans. In the horsefly and the

gadfly this organ is hard, and indeed it is hard in most insects. In point offact, such insects as have no sting in the rear use this organ as a weapon,

(and, by the way, such insects as are provided with this organ are unprovided

with teeth, with the exception of a few insects); the fly by a touch can draw

blood with this organ, and the gnat can prick or sting with it.

  Certain insects are furnished with prickers or stings. Some insects have the

sting inside, as the bee and the wasp, others outside, as the scorpion; and, by

the way, this is the only insect furnished with a long tail. And, further, the

scorpion is furnished with claws, as is also the creature resembling a scorpion

found within the pages of books.

In addition to their other organs, flying insects are furnished with wings.

Some  insects  are  dipterous  or  double-winged,  as  the  fly;  others  are

tetrapterous or furnished with four wings, as the bee; and, by the way, no

insect  with  only  two  wings  has  a  sting  in  the  rear.  Again,  some  winged

insects have a sheath or shard for their wings, as the cockchafer; whereas in

others the wings are unsheathed, as in the bee. But in the case of all alike,

flight is in no way modified by tail-steerage, and the wing is devoid of quill-

structure or division of any kind.

  Again, some insects have antennae in front of their eyes, as the butterfly

and the horned beetle. Such of them as have the power of jumping have the

hinder legs the longer; and these long hind-legs whereby they jump bend

backwards  like  the  hind-legs  of  quadrupeds.  All  insects  have  the  belly

different from the back; as, in fact, is the case with all animals. The flesh of

an insect’s body is neither shell-like nor is it like the internal substance of

shell-covered animals, nor is it like flesh in the ordinary sense of the term;

but it is a something intermediate in quality. Wherefore they have nor spine,

nor bone, nor sepia-bone, nor enveloping shell; but their body by its hardness

is its own protection and requires no extraneous support. However, insects

have a skin; but the skin is exceedingly thin. These and such-like are the

external organs of insects.

  Internally,  next  after  the  mouth,  comes  a  gut,  in  the  majority  of  cases

straight and simple down to the outlet of the residuum: but in a few cases the

gut is coiled. No insect is provided with any viscera, or is supplied with fat;

and  these  statements  apply  to  all  animals  devoid  of  blood.  Some  have  a

stomach  also,  and  attached  to  this  the  rest  of  the  gut,  either  simple  or

convoluted as in the case of the acris or grasshopper.

The  tettix  or  cicada,  alone  of  such  creatures  (and,  in  fact,  alone  of  all

creatures), is unprovided with a mouth, but it is provided with the tongue-likeformation  found  in  insects  furnished  with  frontward  stings;  and  this

formation in the cicada is long, continuous, and devoid of any split; and by

the aid of this the creature feeds on dew, and on dew only, and in its stomach

no excretion is ever found. Of the cicada there are several kinds, and they

differ from one another in relative magnitude, and in this respect that the

achetes or chirper is provided with a cleft or aperture under the hypozoma

and  has  in  it  a  membrane  quite  discernible,  whilst  the  membrane  is

indiscernible in the tettigonia.

  Furthermore, there are some strange creatures to be found in the sea, which

from their rarity we are unable to classify. Experienced fishermen affirm,

some  that  they  have  at  times  seen  in  the  sea  animals  like  sticks,  black,

rounded, and of the same thickness throughout; others that they have seen

creatures resembling shields, red in colour, and furnished with fins packed

close together; and others that they have seen creatures resembling the male

organ in shape and size, with a pair of fins in the place of the testicles, and

they aver that on one occasion a creature of this description was brought up

on the end of a nightline.

So much then for the parts, external and internal, exceptional and common,

of all animals.

<

div id="section64" class="section" title="8">


8


We now proceed to treat of the senses; for there are diversities in animals

with regard to the senses, seeing that some animals have the use of all the

senses, and others the use of a limited number of them. The total number of

the senses (for we have no experience of any special sense not here included),

is five: sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch.

Man, then, and all vivipara that have feet, and, further, all red-blooded

ovipara, appear to have the use of all the five senses, except where some

isolated species has been subjected to mutilation, as in the case of the mole.

For this animal is deprived of sight; it has no eyes visible, but if the skin-a

thick one, by the way-be stripped off the head, about the place in the exterior

where  eyes  usually  are,  the  eyes  are  found  inside  in  a  stunted  condition,

furnished with all the parts found in ordinary eyes; that is to say, we find

there the black rim, and the fatty part surrounding it; but all these parts aresmaller than the same parts in ordinary visible eyes. There is no external sign

of the existence of these organs in the mole, owing to the thickness of the

skin  drawn  over  them,  so  that  it  would  seem  that  the  natural  course  of

development were congenitally arrested; (for extending from the brain at its

junction  with  the  marrow  are  two  strong  sinewy  ducts  running  past  the

sockets of the eyes, and terminating at the upper eye-teeth). All the other

animals of the kinds above mentioned have a perception of colour and of

sound, and the senses of smell and taste; the fifth sense, that, namely, of

touch, is common to all animals whatsoever.

In some animals the organs of sense are plainly discernible; and this is

especially the case with the eyes. For animals have a special locality for the

eyes, and also a special locality for hearing: that is to say, some animals have

ears, while others have the passage for sound discernible. It is the same with

the sense of smell; that is to say, some animals have nostrils, and others have

only the passages for smell, such as birds. It is the same also with the organ

of taste, the tongue. Of aquatic red-blooded animals, fishes possess the organ

of taste, namely the tongue, but it is in an imperfect and amorphous form, in

other words it is osseous and undetached. In some fish the palate is fleshy, as

in the fresh-water carp, so that by an inattentive observer it might be mistaken

for a tongue.

  There is no doubt but that fishes have the sense of taste, for a great number

of them delight in special flavours; and fishes freely take the hook if it be

baited with a piece of flesh from a tunny or from any fat fish, obviously

enjoying the taste and the eating of food of this kind. Fishes have no visible

organs for hearing or for smell; for what might appear to indicate an organ

for smell in the region of the nostril has no communication with the brain.

These indications, in fact, in some cases lead nowhere, like blind alleys, and

in other cases lead only to the gills; but for all this fishes undoubtedly hear

and smell. For they are observed to run away from any loud noise, such as

would be made by the rowing of a galley, so as to become easy of capture in

their holes; for, by the way, though a sound be very slight in the open air, it

has a loud and alarming resonance to creatures that hear under water. And

this  is  shown  in  the  capture  of  the  dolphin;  for  when  the  hunters  have

enclosed a shoal of these fishes with a ring of their canoes, they set up from

inside the canoes a loud splashing in the water, and by so doing induce the

creatures to run in a shoal high and dry up on the beach, and so capture them

while stupefied with the noise. And yet, for all this, the dolphin has no organof hearing discernible. Furthermore, when engaged in their craft, fishermen

are particularly careful to make no noise with oar or net; and after they have

spied a shoal, they let down their nets at a spot so far off that they count upon

no noise being likely to reach the shoal, occasioned either by oar or by the

surging of their boats through the water; and the crews are strictly enjoined to

preserve silence until the shoal has been surrounded. And, at times, when

they want the fish to crowd together, they adopt the stratagem of the dolphin-

hunter; in other words they clatter stones together, that the fish may, in their

fright, gather close into one spot, and so they envelop them within their nets.

(Before surrounding them, then, they preserve silence, as was said; but, after

hemming the shoal in, they call on every man to shout out aloud and make

any kind of noise; for on hearing the noise and hubbub the fish are sure to

tumble into the nets from sheer fright.) Further, when fishermen see a shoal

of fish feeding at a distance, disporting themselves in calm bright weather on

the surface of the water, if they are anxious to descry the size of the fish and

to learn what kind of a fish it is, they may succeed in coming upon the shoal

whilst yet basking at the surface if they sail up without the slightest noise, but

if any man make a noise previously, the shoal will be seen to scurry away in

alarm. Again, there is a small river-fish called the cottus or bullhead; this

creature burrows under a rock, and fishers catch it by clattering stones against

the rock, and the fish, bewildered at the noise, darts out of its hiding-place.

From these facts it is quite obvious that fishes can hear; and indeed some

people, from living near the sea and frequently witnessing such phenomena,

affirm that of all living creatures the fish is the quickest of hearing. And, by

the way, of all fishes the quickest of hearing are the cestreus or mullet, the

chremps, the labrax or basse, the salpe or saupe, the chromis or sciaena, and

such like. Other fishes are less quick of hearing, and, as might be expected,

are more apt to be found living at the bottom of the sea.

The case is similar in regard to the sense of smell. Thus, as a rule, fishes

will not touch a bait that is not fresh, neither are they all caught by one and

the same bait, but they are severally caught by baits suited to their several

likings, and these baits they distinguish by their sense of smell; and, by the

way, some fishes are attracted by malodorous baits, as the saupe, for instance,

is  attracted  by  excrement.  Again,  a  number  of  fishes  live  in  caves;  and

accordingly fishermen, when they want to entice them out, smear the mouth

of a cave with strong-smelling pickles, and the fish are Soon attracted to the

smell. And the eel is caught in a similar way; for the fisherman lays down anearthen pot that has held pickles, after inserting a ‘weel’ in the neck thereof.

As a general rule, fishes are especially attracted by savoury smells. For this

reason, fishermen roast the fleshy parts of the cuttle-fish and use it as bait on

account of its smell, for fish are peculiarly attracted by it; they also bake the

octopus and bait their fish-baskets or weels with it, entirely, as they say, on

account of its smell. Furthermore, gregarious fishes, if fish washings or bilge-

water  be  thrown  overboard,  are  observed  to  scud  off  to  a  distance,  from

apparent dislike of the smell. And it is asserted that they can at once detect by

smell the presence of their own blood; and this faculty is manifested by their

hurrying off to a great distance whenever fish-blood is spilt in the sea. And,

as a general rule, if you bait your weel with a stinking bait, the fish refuse to

enter the weel or even to draw near; but if you bait the weel with a fresh and

savoury bait, they come at once from long distances and swim into it. And all

this is particularly manifest in the dolphin; for, as was stated, it has no visible

organ of hearing, and yet it is captured when stupefied with noise; and so,

while it has no visible organ for smell, it has the sense of smell remarkably

keen. It is manifest, then, that the animals above mentioned are in possession

of all the five senses.

All other animals may, with very few exceptions, be comprehended within

four genera: to wit, molluscs, crustaceans, testaceans, and insects. Of these

four genera, the mollusc, the crustacean, and the insect have all the senses: at

all events, they have sight, smell, and taste. As for insects, both winged and

wingless,  they  can  detect  the  presence  of  scented  objects  afar  off,  as  for

instance bees and snipes detect the presence of honey at a distance; and do so

recognizing it by smell. Many insects are killed by the smell of brimstone;

ants, if the apertures to their dwellings be smeared with powdered origanum

and brimstone, quit their nests; and most insects may be banished with burnt

hart’s horn, or better still by the burning of the gum styrax. The cuttle-fish,

the octopus, and the crawfish may be caught by bait. The octopus, in fact,

clings so tightly to the rocks that it cannot be pulled off, but remains attached

even when the knife is employed to sever it; and yet, if you apply fleabane to

the creature, it drops off at the very smell of it. The facts are similar in regard

to taste. For the food that insects go in quest of is of diverse kinds, and they

do not all delight in the same flavours: for instance, the bee never settles on a

withered or wilted flower, but on fresh and sweet ones; and the conops or

gnat settles only on acrid substances and not on sweet. The sense of touch, by

the way, as has been remarked, is common to all animals. Testaceans havethe senses of smell and taste. With regard to their possession of the sense of

smell, that is proved by the use of baits, e.g. in the case of the purple-fish; for

this creature is enticed by baits of rancid meat, which it perceives and is

attracted to from a great distance. The proof that it possesses a sense of taste

hangs by the proof of its sense of smell; for whenever an animal is attracted

to a thing by perceiving its smell, it is sure to like the taste of it. Further, all

animals furnished with a mouth derive pleasure or pain from the touch of

sapid juices.

  With  regard  to  sight  and  hearing,  we  cannot  make  statements  with

thorough confidence or on irrefutable evidence. However, the solen or razor-

fish, if you make a noise, appears to burrow in the sand, and to hide himself

deeper when he hears the approach of the iron rod (for the animal, be it

observed,  juts  a  little  out  of  its  hole,  while  the  greater  part  of  the  body

remains  within),-and  scallops,  if  you  present  your  finger  near  their  open

valves, close them tight again as though they could see what you were doing.

Furthermore, when fishermen are laying bait for neritae, they always get to

leeward of them, and never speak a word while so engaged, under the firm

impression that the animal can smell and hear; and they assure us that, if any

one  speaks  aloud,  the  creature  makes  efforts  to  escape.  With  regard  to

testaceans, of the walking or creeping species the urchin appears to have the

least developed sense of smell; and, of the stationary species, the ascidian and

the barnacle.

So much for the organs of sense in the general run of animals. We now

proceed to treat of voice.

<

div id="section65" class="section" title="9">


9


  Voice and sound are different from one another; and language differs from

voice and sound. The fact is that no animal can give utterance to voice except

by the action of the pharynx, and consequently such animals as are devoid of

lung have no voice; and language is the articulation of vocal sounds by the

instrumentality of the tongue. Thus, the voice and larynx can emit vocal or

vowel sounds; non-vocal or consonantal sounds are made by the tongue and

the lips; and out of these vocal and non-vocal sounds language is composed.

Consequently, animals that have no tongue at all or that have a tongue notfreely detached, have neither voice nor language; although, by the way, they

may be enabled to make noises or sounds by other organs than the tongue.

  Insects, for instance, have no voice and no language, but they can emit

sound by internal air or wind, though not by the emission of air or wind; for

no insects are capable of respiration. But some of them make a humming

noise, like the bee and the other winged insects; and others are said to sing, as

the cicada. And all these latter insects make their special noises by means of

the membrane that is underneath the ‘hypozoma’-those insects, that is to say,

whose body is thus divided; as for instance, one species of cicada, which

makes the sound by means of the friction of the air. Flies and bees, and the

like, produce their special noise by opening and shutting their wings in the

act of flying; for the noise made is by the friction of air between the wings

when in motion. The noise made by grasshoppers is produced by rubbing or

reverberating with their long hind-legs.

No mollusc or crustacean can produce any natural voice or sound. Fishes

can produce no voice, for they have no lungs, nor windpipe and pharynx; but

they emit certain inarticulate sounds and squeaks, which is what is called

their ‘voice’, as the lyra or gurnard, and the sciaena (for these fishes make a

grunting kind of noise) and the caprus or boar-fish in the river Achelous, and

the chalcis and the cuckoo-fish; for the chalcis makes a sort piping sound,

and the cuckoo-fish makes a sound greatly like the cry of the cuckoo, and is

nicknamed from the circumstance. The apparent voice in all these fishes is a

sound caused in some cases by a rubbing motion of their gills, which by the

way are prickly, or in other cases by internal parts about their bellies; for they

all have air or wind inside them, by rubbing and moving which they produce

the sounds. Some cartilaginous fish seem to squeak.

But  in  these  cases  the  term  ‘voice’  is  inappropriate;  the  more  correct

expression would be ‘sound’. For the scallop, when it goes along supporting

itself on the water, which is technically called ‘flying’, makes a whizzing

sound; and so does the sea-swallow or flying-fish: for this fish flies in the air,

clean out of the water, being furnished with fins broad and long. Just then as

in the flight of birds the sound made by their wings is obviously not voice, so

is it in the case of all these other creatures.

The dolphin, when taken out of the water, gives a squeak and moans in the

air, but these noises do not resemble those above mentioned. For this creature

has a voice (and can therefore utter vocal or vowel sounds), for it is furnished

with a lung and a windpipe; but its tongue is not loose, nor has it lips, so as togive utterance to an articulate sound (or a sound of vowel and consonant in

combination.)

Of  animals  which  are  furnished  with  tongue  and  lung,  the  oviparous

quadrupeds produce a voice, but a feeble one; in some cases, a shrill piping

sound, like the serpent; in others, a thin faint cry; in others, a low hiss, like

the tortoise. The formation of the tongue in the frog is exceptional. The front

part of the tongue, which in other animals is detached, is tightly fixed in the

frog as it is in all fishes; but the part towards the pharynx is freely detached,

and may, so to speak, be spat outwards, and it is with this that it makes its

peculiar croak. The croaking that goes on in the marsh is the call of the males

to the females at rutting time; and, by the way, all animals have a special cry

for the like end at the like season, as is observed in the case of goats, swine,

and sheep. (The bull-frog makes its croaking noise by putting its under jaw

on a level with the surface of the water and extending its upper jaw to its

utmost  capacity.  The  tension  is  so  great  that  the  upper  jaw  becomes

transparent, and the animal’s eyes shine through the jaw like lamps; for, by

the way, the commerce of the sexes takes place usually in the night time.)

Birds can utter vocal sounds; and such of them can articulate best as have the

tongue moderately flat, and also such as have thin delicate tongues. In some

cases, the male and the female utter the same note; in other cases, different

notes. The smaller birds are more vocal and given to chirping than the larger

ones; but in the pairing season every species of bird becomes particularly

vocal. Some of them call when fighting, as the quail, others cry or crow when

challenging to combat, as the partridge, or when victorious, as the barn-door

cock. In some cases cock-birds and hens sing alike, as is observed in the

nightingale, only that the hen stops singing when brooding or rearing her

young; in other birds, the cocks sing more than the hens; in fact, with barn-

door fowls and quails, the cock sings and the hen does not.

  Viviparous quadrupeds utter vocal sounds of different kinds, but they have

no power of converse. In fact, this power, or language, is peculiar to man. For

while the capability of talking implies the capability of uttering vocal sounds,

the converse does not hold good. Men that are born deaf are in all cases also

dumb; that is, they can make vocal sounds, but they cannot speak. Children,

just as they have no control over other parts, so have no control, at first, over

the tongue; but it is so far imperfect, and only frees and detaches itself by

degrees, so that in the interval children for the most part lisp and stutter.

  Vocal sounds and modes of language differ according to locality. Vocalsounds are characterized chiefly by their pitch, whether high or low, and the

kinds of sound capable of being produced are identical within the limits of

one and the same species; but articulate sound, that one might reasonably

designate ‘language’, differs both in various animals, and also in the same

species according to diversity of locality; as for instance, some partridges

cackle, and some make a shrill twittering noise. Of little birds, some sing a

different note from the parent birds, if they have been removed from the nest

and  have  heard  other  birds  singing;  and  a  mother-nightingale  has  been

observed to give lessons in singing to a young bird, from which spectacle we

might obviously infer that the song of the bird was not equally congenital

with  mere  voice,  but  was  something  capable  of  modification  and  of

improvement. Men have the same voice or vocal sounds, but they differ from

one another in speech or language.

The elephant makes a vocal sound of a windlike sort by the mouth alone,

unaided by the trunk, just like the sound of a man panting or sighing; but, if it

employ the trunk as well, the sound produced is like that of a hoarse trumpet.

<

div id="section66" class="section" title="10">


10


  With regard to the sleeping and waking of animals, all creatures that are

red-blooded and provided with legs give sensible proof that they go to sleep

and that they waken up from sleep; for, as a matter of fact, all animals that are

furnished with eyelids shut them up when they go to sleep. Furthermore, it

would appear that not only do men dream, but horses also, and dogs, and

oxen; aye, and sheep, and goats, and all viviparous quadrupeds; and dogs

show  their  dreaming  by  barking  in  their  sleep.  With  regard  to  oviparous

animals we cannot be sure that they dream, but most undoubtedly they sleep.

And  the  same  may  be  said  of  water  animals,  such  as  fishes,  molluscs,

crustaceans, to wit crawfish and the like. These animals sleep without doubt,

although their sleep is of very short duration. The proof of their sleeping

cannot be got from the condition of their eyes-for none of these creatures are

furnished with eyelids-but can be obtained only from their motionless repose.

  Apart from the irritation caused by lice and what are nicknamed fleas, fish

are met with in a state so motionless that one might easily catch them by

hand; and, as a matter of fact, these little creatures, if the fish remain long inone  position,  will  attack  them  in  myriads  and  devour  them.  For  these

parasites are found in the depths of the sea, and are so numerous that they

devour any bait made of fish’s flesh if it be left long on the ground at the

bottom; and fishermen often draw up a cluster of them, all clinging on to the

bait.

But it is from the following facts that we may more reasonably infer that

fishes sleep. Very often it is possible to take a fish off its guard so far as to

catch hold of it or to give it a blow unawares; and all the while that you are

preparing to catch or strike it, the fish is quite still but for a slight motion of

the  tail.  And  it  is  quite  obvious  that  the  animal  is  sleeping,  from  its

movements if any disturbance be made during its repose; for it moves just as

you would expect in a creature suddenly awakened. Further, owing to their

being asleep, fish may be captured by torchlight. The watchmen in the tunny-

fishery often take advantage of the fish being asleep to envelop them in a

circle of nets; and it is quite obvious that they were thus sleeping by their

lying still and allowing the glistening under-parts of their bodies to become

visible, while the capture is taking Place. They sleep in the night-time more

than during the day; and so soundly at night that you may cast the net without

making them stir. Fish, as a general rule, sleep close to the ground, or to the

sand or to a stone at the bottom, or after concealing themselves under a rock

or the ground. Flat fish go to sleep in the sand; and they can be distinguished

by the outlines of their shapes in the sand, and are caught in this position by

being speared with pronged instruments. The basse, the chrysophrys or gilt-

head, the mullet, and fish of the like sort are often caught in the daytime by

the  prong  owing  to  their  having  been  surprised  when  sleeping;  for  it  is

scarcely probable that fish could be pronged while awake. Cartilaginous fish

sleep at times so soundly that they may be caught by hand. The dolphin and

the whale, and all such as are furnished with a blow-hole, sleep with the

blow-hole over the surface of the water, and breathe through the blow-hole

while  they  keep  up  a  quiet  flapping  of  their  fins;  indeed,  some  mariners

assure us that they have actually heard the dolphin snoring.

  Molluscs sleep like fishes, and crustaceans also. It is plain also that insects

sleep; for there can be no mistaking their condition of motionless repose. In

the bee the fact of its being asleep is very obvious; for at night-time bees are

at rest and cease to hum. But the fact that insects sleep may be very well seen

in the case of common every-day creatures; for not only do they rest at night-

time from dimness of vision (and, by the way, all hard-eyed creatures see butindistinctly), but even if a lighted candle be presented they continue sleeping

quite as soundly.

Of all animals man is most given to dreaming. Children and infants do not

dream, but in most cases dreaming comes on at the age of four or five years.

Instances have been known of full-grown men and women that have never

dreamed at all; in exceptional cases of this kind, it has been observed that

when  a  dream  occurs  in  advanced  life  it  prognosticates  either  actual

dissolution or a general break-up of the system.

So much then for sensation and for the phenomena of sleeping and of

awakening.

<

div id="section67" class="section" title="11">


11


  With regard to sex, some animals are divided into male and female, but

others are not so divided but can only be said in a comparative way to bring

forth young and to be pregnant. In animals that live confined to one spot there

is no duality of sex; nor is there such, in fact, in any testaceans. In molluscs

and  in  crustaceans  we  find  male  and  female:  and,  indeed,  in  all  animals

furnished with feet, biped or quadruped; in short, in all such as by copulation

engender  either  live  young  or  egg  or  grub.  In  the  several  genera,  with

however certain exceptions, there either absolutely is or absolutely is not a

duality of sex. Thus, in quadrupeds the duality is universal, while the absence

of  such  duality  is  universal  in  testaceans,  and  of  these  creatures,  as  with

plants, some individuals are fruitful and some are not their lying still

But among insects and fishes, some cases are found wholly devoid of this

duality  of  sex.  For  instance,  the  eel  is  neither  male  nor  female,  and  can

engender nothing. In fact, those who assert that eels are at times found with

hair-like or worm-like progeny attached, make only random assertions from

not having carefully noticed the locality of such attachments. For no eel nor

animal of this kind is ever viviparous unless previously oviparous; and no eel

was ever yet seen with an egg. And animals that are viviparous have their

young in the womb and closely attached, and not in the belly; for, if the

embryo  were  kept  in  the  belly,  it  would  be  subjected  to  the  process  of

digestion like ordinary food. When people rest duality of sex in the eel on the

assertion that the head of the male is bigger and longer, and the head of thefemale smaller and more snubbed, they are taking diversity of species for

diversity of sex.

  There are certain fish that are nicknamed the epitragiae, or capon-fish, and,

by the way, fish of this description are found in fresh water, as the carp and

the balagrus. This sort of fish never has either roe or milt; but they are hard

and  fat  all  over,  and  are  furnished  with  a  small  gut;  and  these  fish  are

regarded as of super-excellent quality.

  Again, just as in testaceans and in plants there is what bears and engenders,

but  not  what  impregnates,  so  is  it,  among  fishes,  with  the  psetta,  the

erythrinus, and the channe; for these fish are in all cases found furnished with

eggs.

As  a  general  rule,  in  red-blooded  animals  furnished  with  feet  and  not

oviparous, the male is larger and longer-lived than the female (except with

the mule, where the female is longer-lived and bigger than the male); whereas

in oviparous and vermiparous creatures, as in fishes and in insects, the female

is larger than the male; as, for instance, with the serpent, the phalangium or

venom-spider, the gecko, and the frog. The same difference in size of the

sexes is found in fishes, as, for instance, in the smaller cartilaginous fishes, in

the greater part of the gregarious species, and in all that live in and about

rocks. The fact that the female is longer-lived than the male is inferred from

the fact that female fishes are caught older than males. Furthermore, in all

animals the upper and front parts are better, stronger, and more thoroughly

equipped in the male than in the female, whereas in the female those parts are

the better that may be termed hinder-parts or underparts. And this statement

is applicable to man and to all vivipara that have feet. Again, the female is

less muscular and less compactly jointed, and more thin and delicate in the

hair-that is, where hair is found; and, where there is no hair, less strongly

furnished in some analogous substance. And the female is more flaccid in

texture of flesh, and more knock-kneed, and the shin-bones are thinner; and

the feet are more arched and hollow in such animals as are furnished with

feet. And with regard to voice, the female in all animals that are vocal has a

thinner and sharper voice than the male; except, by the way, with kine, for the

lowing and bellowing of the cow has a deeper note than that of the bull. With

regard to organs of defence and offence, such as teeth, tusks, horns, spurs,

and the like, these in some species the male possesses and the female does

not; as, for instance, the hind has no horns, and where the cock-bird has a

spur the hen is entirely destitute of the organ; and in like manner the sow isdevoid of tusks. In other species such organs are found in both sexes, but are

more perfectly developed in the male; as, for instance, the horn of the bull is

more powerful than the horn of the cow.                      The History of Animals, Book V


translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson


<

div id="book5" class="chapter" title="Book V">


1


As to the parts internal and external that all animals are furnished withal,

and further as to the senses, to voice, and sleep, and the duality sex, all these

topics have now been touched upon. It now remains for us to discuss, duly

and in order, their several modes of propagation.

  These modes are many and diverse, and in some respects are like, and in

other  respects  are  unlike  to  one  another.  As  we  carried  on  our  previous

discussion genus by genus, so we must attempt to follow the same divisions

in our present argument; only that whereas in the former case we started with

a consideration of the parts of man, in the present case it behoves us to treat

of man last of all because he involves most discussion. We shall commence,

then, with testaceans, and then proceed to crustaceans, and then to the other

genera  in  due  order;  and  these  other  genera  are,  severally,  molluscs,  and

insects,  then  fishes  viviparous  and  fishes  oviparous,  and  next  birds;  and

afterwards  we  shall  treat  of  animals  provided  with  feet,  both  such  as  are

oviparous  and  such  as  are  viviparous,  and  we  may  observe  that  some

quadrupeds are viviparous, but that the only viviparous biped is man.

Now there is one property that animals are found to have in common with

plants. For some plants are generated from the seed of plants, whilst other

plants are self-generated through the formation of some elemental principle

similar to a seed; and of these latter plants some derive their nutriment from

the ground, whilst others grow inside other plants, as is mentioned, by the

way, in my treatise on Botany. So with animals, some spring from parent

animals according to their kind, whilst others grow spontaneously and not

from kindred stock; and of these instances of spontaneous generation some

come from putrefying earth or vegetable matter, as is the case with a number

of insects, while others are spontaneously generated in the inside of animalsout of the secretions of their several organs.

In animals where generation goes by heredity, wherever there is duality of

sex generation is due to copulation. In the group of fishes, however, there are

some that are neither male nor female, and these, while they are identical

generically with other fish, differ from them specifically; but there are others

that stand altogether isolated and apart by themselves. Other fishes there are

that are always female and never male, and from them are conceived what

correspond to the wind-eggs in birds. Such eggs, by the way, in birds are all

unfruitful; but it is their nature to be independently capable of generation up

to  the  egg-stage,  unless  indeed  there  be  some  other  mode  than  the  one

familiar to us of intercourse with the male; but concerning these topics we

shall treat more precisely later on. In the case of certain fishes, however, after

they  have  spontaneously  generated  eggs,  these  eggs  develop  into  living

animals; only that in certain of these cases development is spontaneous, and

in others is not independent of the male; and the method of proceeding in

regard to these matters will set forth by and by, for the method is somewhat

like to the method followed in the case of birds. But whensoever creatures are

spontaneously generated, either in other animals, in the soil, or on plants, or

in the parts of these, and when such are generated male and female, then from

the copulation of such spontaneously generated males and females there is

generated a something-a something never identical in shape with the parents,

but a something imperfect. For instance, the issue of copulation in lice is nits;

in flies, grubs; in fleas, grubs egg-like in shape; and from these issues the

parent-species is never reproduced, nor is any animal produced at all, but the

like nondescripts only.

First, then, we must proceed to treat of ‘covering’ in regard to such animals

as cover and are covered; and then after this to treat in due order of other

matters, both the exceptional and those of general occurrence.

<

div id="section69" class="section" title="2">


2


  Those animals, then, cover and are covered in which there is a duality of

sex, and the modes of covering in such animals are not in all cases similar nor

analogous.  For  the  red-blooded  animals  that  are  viviparous  and  furnished

with feet have in all cases organs adapted for procreation, but the sexes donot in all cases come together in like manner. Thus, opisthuretic animals

copulate with a rearward presentment, as is the case with the lion, the hare,

and the lynx; though, by the way, in the case of the hare, the female is often

observed to cover the male.

The case is similar in most other such animals; that is to say, the majority

of quadrupeds copulate as best they can, the male mounting the female; and

this  is  the  only  method  of  copulating  adopted  by  birds,  though  there  are

certain diversities of method observed even in birds. For in some cases the

female squats on the ground and the male mounts on top of her, as is the case

with the cock and hen bustard, and the barn-door cock and hen; in other

cases, the male mounts without the female squatting, as with the male and

female crane; for, with these birds, the male mounts on to the back of the

female and covers her, and like the cock-sparrow consumes but very little

time in the operation. Of quadrupeds, bears perform the operation lying prone

on one another, in the same way as other quadrupeds do while standing up;

that is to say, with the belly of the male pressed to the back of the female.

Hedgehogs copulate erect, belly to belly.

  With regard to large-sized vivipara, the hind only very rarely sustains the

mounting of the stag to the full conclusion of the operation, and the same is

the case with the cow as regards the bull, owing to the rigidity of the penis of

the bull. In point of fact, the females of these animals elicit the sperm of the

male in the act of withdrawing from underneath him; and, by the way, this

phenomenon  has  been  observed  in  the  case  of  the  stag  and  hind,

domesticated, of course. Covering with the wolf is the same as with the dog.

Cats do not copulate with a rearward presentment on the part of the female,

but the male stands erect and the female puts herself underneath him; and, by

the way, the female cat is peculiarly lecherous, and wheedles the male on to

sexual commerce, and caterwauls during the operation. Camels copulate with

the female in a sitting posture, and the male straddles over and covers her, not

with  the  hinder  presentment  on  the  female’s  part  but  like  the  other

quadrupeds  mentioned  above,  and  they  pass  the  whole  day  long  in  the

operation; when thus engaged they retire to lonely spots, and none but their

keeper dare approach them. And, be it observed, the penis of the camel is so

sinewy that bow-strings are manufactured out of it. Elephants, also, copulate

in  lonely  places,  and  especially  by  river-sides  in  their  usual  haunts;  the

female squats down, and straddles with her legs, and the male mounts and

covers her. The seal covers like all opisthuretic animals, and in this speciesthe copulation extends over a lengthened time, as is the case with the dog and

bitch; and the penis in the male seal is exceptionally large.

<

div id="section70" class="section" title="3">


3


  Oviparous quadrupeds cover one another in the same way. That is to say,

in  some  cases  the  male  mounts  the  female  precisely  as  in  the  viviparous

animals, as is observed in both the land and the sea tortoise… .And these

creatures have an organ in which the ducts converge, and with which they

perform the act of copulation, as is also observed in the toad, the frog, and all

other animals of the same group.

<

div id="section71" class="section" title="4">


4


  Long animals devoid of feet, like serpents and muraenae, intertwine in

coition, belly to belly. And, in fact, serpents coil round one another so tightly

as to present the appearance of a single serpent with a pair of heads. The

same mode is followed by the saurians; that is to say, they coil round one

another in the act of coition.

<

div id="section72" class="section" title="5">


5


All fishes, with the exception of the flat selachians, lie down side by side,

and copulate belly to belly. Fishes, however, that are flat and furnished with

tails-as the ray, the trygon, and the like-copulate not only in this way, but

also, where the tail from its thinness is no impediment, by mounting of the

male upon the female, belly to back. But the rhina or angel-fish, and other

like  fishes  where  the  tail  is  large,  copulate  only  by  rubbing  against  one

another sideways, belly to belly. Some men assure us that they have seen

some of the selachia copulating hindways, dog and bitch. In the cartilaginousspecies the female is larger than the male; and the same is the case with other

fishes for the most part. And among cartilaginous fishes are included, besides

those already named, the bos, the lamia, the aetos, the narce or torpedo, the

fishing-frog, and all the galeodes or sharks and dogfish. Cartilaginous fishes,

then, of all kinds, have in many instances been observed copulating in the

way above mentioned; for, by the way, in viviparous animals the process of

copulation is of longer duration than in the ovipara.

It is the same with the dolphin and with all cetaceans; that is to say, they

come side by side, male and female, and copulate, and the act extends over a

time which is neither short nor very long.

  Again, in cartilaginous fishes the male, in some species, differs from the

female in the fact that he is furnished with two appendages hanging down

from about the exit of the residuum, and that the female is not so furnished;

and this distinction between the sexes is observed in all the species of the

sharks and dog-fish.

Now  neither  fishes  nor  any  animals  devoid  of  feet  are  furnished  with

testicles, but male serpents and male fishes have a pair of ducts which fill

with milt or sperm at the rutting season, and discharge, in all cases, a milk-

like juice. These ducts unite, as in birds; for birds, by the way, have their

testicles in their interior, and so have all ovipara that are furnished with feet.

And this union of the ducts is so far continued and of such extension as to

enter the receptive organ in the female.

In viviparous animals furnished with feet there is outwardly one and the

same duct for the sperm and the liquid residuum; but there are separate ducts

internally, as has been observed in the differentiation of the organs. And with

such animals as are not viviparous the same passage serves for the discharge

also  of  the  solid  residuum;  although,  internally,  there  are  two  passages,

separate but near to one another. And these remarks apply to both male and

female; for these animals are unprovided with a bladder except in the case of

the tortoise; and the she-tortoise, though furnished with a bladder, has only

one passage; and tortoises, by the way, belong to the ovipara.

In  the  case  of  oviparous  fishes  the  process  of  coition  is  less  open  to

observation. In point of fact, some are led by the want of actual observation

to surmise that the female becomes impregnated by swallowing the seminal

fluid of the male. And there can be no doubt that this proceeding on the part

of the female is often witnessed; for at the rutting season the females follow

the males and perform this operation, and strike the males with their mouthsunder the belly, and the males are thereby induced to part with the sperm

sooner and more plentifully. And, further, at the spawning season the males

go in pursuit of the females, and, as the female spawns, the males swallow

the eggs; and the species is continued in existence by the spawn that survives

this  process.  On  the  coast  of  Phoenicia  they  take  advantage  of  these

instinctive propensities of the two sexes to catch both one and the other: that

is to say, by using the male of the grey mullet as a decoy they collect and net

the female, and by using the female, the male.

The repeated observation of this phenomenon has led to the notion that the

process was equivalent to coition, but the fact is that a similar phenomenon is

observable in quadrupeds. For at the rutting seasons both the males and the

females take to running at their genitals, and the two sexes take to smelling

each other at those parts. (With partridges, by the way, if the female gets to

leeward of the male, she becomes thereby impregnated. And often when they

happen to be in heat she is affected in this wise by the voice of the male, or

by his breathing down on her as he flies overhead; and, by the way, both the

male and the female partridge keep the mouth wide open and protrude the

tongue in the process of coition.)

The actual process of copulation on the part of oviparous fishes is seldom

accurately observed, owing to the fact that they very soon fall aside and slip

asunder. But, for all that, the process has been observed to take place in the

manner above described.

<

div id="section73" class="section" title="6">


6


  Molluscs, such as the octopus, the sepia, and the calamary, have sexual

intercourse all in the same way; that is to say, they unite at the mouth, by an

interlacing of their tentacles. When, then, the octopus rests its so-called head

against the ground and spreads abroad its tentacles, the other sex fits into the

outspreading of these tentacles, and the two sexes then bring their suckers

into mutual connexion.

  Some assert that the male has a kind of penis in one of his tentacles, the

one in which are the largest suckers; and they further assert that the organ is

tendinous  in  character,  growing  attached  right  up  to  the  middle  of  the

tentacle, and that the latter enables it to enter the nostril or funnel of thefemale.

Now  cuttle-fish  and  calamaries  swim  about  closely  intertwined,  with

mouths  and  tentacles  facing  one  another  and  fitting  closely  together,  and

swim thus in opposite directions; and they fit their so-called nostrils into one

another, and the one sex swims backwards and the other frontwards during

the operation. And the female lays its spawn by the so-called ‘blow-hole’;

and, by the way, some declare that it is at this organ that the coition really

takes place.

<

div id="section74" class="section" title="7">


7


  Crustaceans copulate, as the crawfish, the lobster, the carid and the like,

just like the opisthuretic quadrupeds, when the one animal turns up its tail

and the other puts his tail on the other’s tail. Copulation takes place in the

early  spring,  near  to  the  shore;  and,  in  fact,  the  process  has  often  been

observed in the case of all these animals. Sometimes it takes place about the

time  when  the  figs  begin  to  ripen.  Lobsters  and  carids  copulate  in  like

manner.

  Crabs copulate at the front parts of one another, belly to belly, throwing

their overlapping opercula to meet one another: first the smaller crab mounts

the larger at the rear; after he has mounted, the larger one turns on one side.

Now,  the  female  differs  in  no  respect  from  the  male  except  in  the

circumstance that its operculum is larger, more elevated, and more hairy, and

into this operculum it spawns its eggs and in the same neighbourhood is the

outlet of the residuum. In the copulative process of these animals there is no

protrusion of a member from one animal into the other.

<

div id="section75" class="section" title="8">


8


  Insects copulate at the hinder end, and the smaller individuals mount the

larger; and the smaller individual is I I is the male. The female pushes from

underneath her sexual organ into the body of the male above, this being thereverse of the operation observed in other creatures; and this organ in the case

of some insects appears to be disproportionately large when compared to the

size of the body, and that too in very minute creatures; in some insects the

disproportion is not so striking. This phenomenon may be witnessed if any

one  will  pull  asunder  flies  that  are  copulating;  and,  by  the  way,  these

creatures  are,  under  the  circumstances,  averse  to  separation;  for  the

intercourse of the sexes in their case is of long duration, as may be observed

with common everyday insects, such as the fly and the cantharis. They all

copulate in the manner above described, the fly, the cantharis, the sphondyle,

(the  phalangium  spider)  any  others  of  the  kind  that  copulate  at  all.  The

phalangia-that  is  to  say,  such  of  the  species  as  spin  webs-perform  the

operation in the following way: the female takes hold of the suspended web

at  the  middle  and  gives  a  pull,  and  the  male  gives  a  counter  pull;  this

operation they repeat until they are drawn in together and interlaced at the

hinder  ends;  for,  by  the  way,  this  mode  of  copulation  suits  them  in

consequence of the rotundity of their stomachs.

So  much  for  the  modes  of  sexual  intercourse  in  all  animals;  but,  with

regard to the same phenomenon, there are definite laws followed as regards

the season of the year and the age of the animal.

  Animals in general seem naturally disposed to this intercourse at about the

same period of the year, and that is when winter is changing into summer.

And this is the season of spring, in which almost all things that fly or walk or

swim take to pairing. Some animals pair and breed in autumn also and in

winter, as is the case with certain aquatic animals and certain birds. Man pairs

and  breeds  at  all  seasons,  as  is  the  case  also  with  domesticated  animals,

owing to the shelter and good feeding they enjoy: that is to say, with those

whose period of gestation is also comparatively brief, as the sow and the

bitch,  and  with  those  birds  that  breed  frequently.  Many  animals  time  the

season of intercourse with a view to the right nurture subsequently of their

young. In the human species, the male is more under sexual excitement in

winter, and the female in summer.

  With birds the far greater part, as has been said, pair and breed during the

spring and early summer, with the exception of the halcyon.

The halcyon breeds at the season of the winter solstice. Accordingly, when

this season is marked with calm weather, the name of ‘halcyon days’ is given

to  the  seven  days  preceding,  and  to  as  many  following,  the  solstice;  as

Simonides the poet says:<

div class="quote">

God lulls for fourteen days the winds to sleep

In winter; and this temperate interlude

Men call the Holy Season, when the deep

Cradles the mother Halcyon and her brood.

And these days are calm, when southerly winds prevail at the solstice,

northerly ones having been the accompaniment of the Pleiads. The halcyon is

said to take seven days for building her nest, and the other seven for laying

and  hatching  her  eggs.  In  our  country  there  are  not  always  halcyon  days

about the time of the winter solstice, but in the Sicilian seas this season of

calm is almost periodical. The bird lays about five eggs.

<

div id="section76" class="section" title="9">


9


  (The  aithyia,  or  diver,  and  the  larus,  or  gull,  lay  their  eggs  on  rocks

bordering on the sea, two or three at a time; but the gull lays in the summer,

and the diver at the beginning of spring, just after the winter solstice, and it

broods over its eggs as birds do in general. And neither of these birds resorts

to a hiding-place.)

The halcyon is the most rarely seen of all birds. It is seen only about the

time of the setting of the Pleiads and the winter solstice. When ships are lying

at anchor in the roads, it will hover about a vessel and then disappear in a

moment, and Stesichorus in one of his poems alludes to this peculiarity. The

nightingale also breeds at the beginning of summer, and lays five or six eggs;

from autumn until spring it retires to a hiding-place.

  Insects copulate and breed in winter also, that is when the weather is fine

and south winds prevail; such, I mean, as do not hibernate, as the fly and the

ant. The greater part of wild animals bring forth once and once only in the

year,  except  in  the  case  of  animals  like  the  hare,  where  the  female  can

become superfoetally impregnated.

In like manner the great majority of fishes breed only once a year, like the

shoal-fishes (or, in other words, such as are caught in nets), the tunny, the

pelamys, the grey mullet, the chalcis, the mackerel, the sciaena, the psetta and

the like, with the exception of the labrax or basse; for this fish (alone amongstthose mentioned) breeds twice a year, and the second brood is the weaker of

the two. The trichias and the rock-fishes breed twice a year; the red mullet

breeds thrice a year, and is exceptional in this respect. This conclusion in

regard to the red mullet is inferred from the spawn; for the spawn of the fish

may  be  seen  in  certain  places  at  three  different  times  of  the  year.  The

scorpaena breeds twice a year. The sargue breeds twice, in the spring and in

the autumn. The saupe breeds once a year only, in the autumn. The female

tunny breeds only once a year, but owing to the fact that the fish in some

cases spawn early and in others late, it looks as though the fish bred twice

over. The first spawning takes place in December before the solstice, and the

latter spawning in the spring. The male tunny differs from the female in being

unprovided with the fin beneath the belly which is called aphareus.

<

div id="section77" class="section" title="10">


10


Of cartilaginous fishes, the rhina or angelfish is the only one that breeds

twice; for it breeds at the beginning of autumn, and at the setting of the

Pleiads: and, of the two seasons, it is in better condition in the autumn. It

engenders  at  a  birth  seven  or  eight  young.  Certain  of  the  dog-fishes,  for

example the spotted dog, seem to breed twice a month, and this results from

the circumstance that the eggs do not all reach maturity at the same time.

  Some fishes breed at all seasons, as the muraena. This animal lays a great

number of eggs at a time; and the young when hatched are very small but

grow with great rapidity, like the young of the hippurus, for these fishes from

being  diminutive  at  the  outset  grow  with  exceptional  rapidity  to  an

exceptional size. (Be it observed that the muraena breeds at all seasons, but

the hippurus only in the spring. The smyrus differs from the smyraena; for

the muraena is mottled and weakly, whereas the smyrus is strong and of one

uniform colour, and the colour resembles that of the pine-tree, and the animal

has teeth inside and out. They say that in this case, as in other similar ones,

the one is the male, and the other the female, of a single species. They come

out on to the land, and are frequently caught.) Fishes, then, as a general rule,

attain their full growth with great rapidity, but this is especially the case,

among small fishes, with the coracine or crow-fish: it spawns, by the way,

near the shore, in weedy and tangled spots. The orphus also, or sea-perch, issmall at first, and rapidly attains a great size. The pelamys and the tunny

breed  in  the  Euxine,  and  nowhere  else.  The  cestreus  or  mullet,  the

chrysophrys or gilt-head, and the labrax or basse, breed best where rivers run

into the sea. The orcys or large-sized tunny, the scorpis, and many other

species spawn in the open sea.

<

div id="section78" class="section" title="11">


11


Fish for the most part breed some time or other during the three months

between the middle of March and the middle of June. Some few breed in

autumn: as, for instance, the saupe and the sargus, and such others of this sort

as breed shortly before the autumn equinox; likewise the electric ray and the

angel-fish.  Other  fishes  breed  both  in  winter  and  in  summer,  as  was

previously  observed:  as,  for  instance,  in  winter-time  the  basse,  the  grey

mullet, and the belone or pipe-fish; and in summer-time, from the middle of

June to the middle of July, the female tunny, about the time of the summer

solstice; and the tunny lays a sac-like enclosure in which are contained a

number of small eggs. The ryades or shoal-fishes breed in summer.

Of the grey mullets, the chelon begins to be in roe between the middle of

November and the middle of December; as also the sargue, and the smyxon

or myxon, and the cephalus; and their period of gestation is thirty days. And,

by  the  way,  some  of  the  grey  mullet  species  are  not  produced  from

copulation, but grow spontaneously from mud and sand.

As a general rule, then, fishes are in roe in the spring-time; while some, as

has been said, are so in summer, in autumn, or in winter. But whereas the

impregnation in the spring-time follows a general law, impregnation in the

other seasons does not follow the same rule either throughout or within the

limits of one genus; and, further, conception in these variant seasons is not so

prolific. And, indeed, we must bear this in mind, that just as with plants and

quadrupeds  diversity  of  locality  has  much  to  do  not  only  with  general

physical health but also with the comparative frequency of sexual intercourse

and generation, so also with regard to fishes locality of itself has much to do

not only in regard to the size and vigour of the creature, but also in regard to

its parturition and its copulations, causing the same species to breed oftener

in one place and seldomer in another.<

div id="section79" class="section" title="12">


12


The molluscs also breed in spring. Of the marine molluscs one of the first

to  breed  is  the  sepia.  It  spawns  at  all  times  of  the  day  and  its  period  of

gestation is fifteen days. After the female has laid her eggs, the male comes

and discharges the milt over the eggs, and the eggs thereupon harden. And

the two sexes of this animal go about in pairs, side by side; and the male is

more mottled and more black on the back than the female.

The octopus pairs in winter and breeds in spring, lying hidden for about

two months. Its spawn is shaped like a vine-tendril, and resembles the fruit of

the white poplar; the creature is extraordinarily prolific, for the number of

individuals that come from the spawn is something incalculable. The male

differs from the female in the fact that its head is longer, and that the organ

called by the fishermen its penis, in the tentacle, is white. The female, after

laying her eggs, broods over them, and in consequence gets out of condition,

by reason of not going in quest of food during the hatching period.

The purple murex breeds about springtime, and the ceryx at the close of

the winter. And, as a general rule, the testaceans are found to be furnished

with their so-called eggs in spring-time and in autumn, with the exception of

the edible urchin; for this animal has the so-called eggs in most abundance in

these seasons, but at no season is unfurnished with them; and it is furnished

with them in especial abundance in warm weather or when a full moon is in

the sky. Only, by the way, these remarks do not apply to the sea-urchin found

in the Pyrrhaean Straits, for this urchin is at its best for table purposes in the

winter; and these urchins are small but full of eggs.

  Snails are found by observations to become in all cases impregnated about

the same season.

<

div id="section80" class="section" title="13">


13


(Of birds the wild species, as has been stated, as a general rule pair andbreed  only  once  a  year.  The  swallow,  however,  and  the  blackbird  breed

twice.  With  regard  to  the  blackbird,  however,  its  first  brood  is  killed  by

inclemency of weather (for it is the earliest of all birds to breed), but the

second brood it usually succeeds in rearing.

  Birds  that  are  domesticated  or  that  are  capable  of  domestication  breed

frequently, just as the common pigeon breeds all through the summer, and as

is seen in the barn-door hen; for the barn-door cock and hen have intercourse,

and the hen breeds, at all seasons alike: excepting by the way, during the days

about the winter solstice.

Of  the  pigeon  family  there  are  many  diversities;  for  the  peristera  or

common  pigeon  is  not  identical  with  the  peleias  or  rock-pigeon.  In  other

words, the rock-pigeon is smaller than the common pigeon, and is less easily

domesticated; it is also black, and small, red-footed and rough-footed; and in

consequence of these peculiarities it is neglected by the pigeon-fancier. The

largest of all the pigeon species is the phatta or ring-dove; and the next in size

is  the  oenas  or  stock-dove;  and  the  stock-dove  is  a  little  larger  than  the

common pigeon. The smallest of all the species is the turtle-dove. Pigeons

breed and hatch at all seasons, if they are furnished with a sunny place and all

requisites; unless they are so furnished, they breed only in the summer. The

spring brood is the best, or the autumn brood. At all events, without doubt,

the produce of the hot season, the summer brood, is the poorest of the three.)

<

div id="section81" class="section" title="14">


14


  Further, animals differ from one another in regard to the time of life that is

best adapted for sexual intercourse.

To begin with, in most animals the secretion of the seminal fluid and its

generative  capacity  are  not  phenomena  simultaneously  manifested,  but

manifested successively. Thus, in all animals, the earliest secretion of sperm

is unfruitful, or if it be fruitful the issue is comparatively poor and small. And

this phenomenon is especially observable in man, in viviparous quadrupeds,

and  in  birds;  for  in  the  case  of  man  and  the  quadruped  the  offspring  is

smaller, and in the case of the bird, the egg.

For animals that copulate, of one and the same species, the age for maturity

is in most species tolerably uniform, unless it occurs prematurely by reasonof abnormality, or is postponed by physical injury.

In man, then, maturity is indicated by a change of the tone of voice, by an

increase in size and an alteration in appearance of the sexual organs, as also

in an increase of size and alteration in appearance of the breasts; and above

all, in the hair-growth at the pubes. Man begins to possess seminal fluid about

the age of fourteen, and becomes generatively capable at about the age of

twenty-one years.

In other animals there is no hair-growth at the pubes (for some animals

have no hair at all, and others have none on the belly, or less on the belly than

on the back), but still, in some animals the change of voice is quite obvious;

and  in  some  animals  other  organs  give  indication  of  the  commencing

secretion of the sperm and the onset of generative capacity. As a general rule

the female is sharper-toned in voice than the male, and the young animal than

the elder; for, by the way, the stag has a much deeper-toned bay than the

hind. Moreover, the male cries chiefly at rutting time, and the female under

terror and alarm; and the cry of the female is short, and that of the male

prolonged. With dogs also, as they grow old, the tone of the bark gets deeper.

  There is a difference observable also in the neighings of horses. That is to

say, the female foal has a thin small neigh, and the male foal a small neigh,

yet bigger and deeper-toned than that of the female, and a louder one as time

goes on. And when the young male and female are two years old and take to

breeding, the neighing of the stallion becomes loud and deep, and that of the

mare louder and shriller than heretofore; and this change goes on until they

reach the age of about twenty years; and after this time the neighing in both

sexes becomes weaker and weaker.

As a rule, then, as was stated, the voice of the male differs from the voice

of  the  female,  in  animals  where  the  voice  admits  of  a  continuous  and

prolonged sound, in the fact that the note in the male voice is more deep and

bass; not, however, in all animals, for the contrary holds good in the case of

some, as for instance in kine: for here the cow has a deeper note than the bull,

and the calves a deeper note than the cattle. And we can thus understand the

change  of  voice  in  animals  that  undergo  gelding;  for  male  animals  that

undergo this process assume the characters of the female.

The following are the ages at which various animals become capacitated

for sexual commerce. The ewe and the she-goat are sexually mature when

one year old, and this statement is made more confidently in respect to the

she-goat than to the ewe; the ram and the he-goat are sexually mature at thesame  age.  The  progeny  of  very  young  individuals  among  these  animals

differs from that of other males: for the males improve in the course of the

second  year,  when  they  become  fully  mature.  The  boar  and  the  sow  are

capable of intercourse when eight months old, and the female brings forth

when one year old, the difference corresponding to her period of gestation.

The boar is capable of generation when eight months old, but, with a sire

under a year in age, the litter is apt to be a poor one. The ages, however, are

not invariable; now and then the boar and the sow are capable of intercourse

when four months old, and are capable of producing a litter which can be

reared when six months old; but at times the boar begins to be capable of

intercourse when ten months. He continues sexually mature until he is three

years old. The dog and the bitch are, as a rule, sexually capable and sexually

receptive when a year old, and sometimes when eight months old; but the

priority in date is more common with the dog than with the bitch. The period

of gestation with the bitch is sixty days, or sixty-one, or sixty-two, or sixty-

three at the utmost; the period is never under sixty days, or, if it is, the litter

comes to no good. The bitch, after delivering a litter, submits to the male in

six  months,  but  not  before.  The  horse  and  the  mare  are,  at  the  earliest,

sexually capable and sexually mature when two years old; the issue, however,

of parents of this age is small and poor. As a general rule these animals are

sexually capable when three years old, and they grow better for breeding

purposes until they reach twenty years. The stallion is sexually capable up to

the age of thirty-three years, and the mare up to forty, so that, in point of fact,

the animals are sexually capable all their lives long; for the stallion, as a rule,

lives for about thirty-five years, and the mare for a little over forty; although,

by the way, a horse has known to live to the age of seventy-five. The ass and

the she-ass are sexually capable when thirty months old; but, as a rule, they

are not generatively mature until they are three years old, or three years and a

half. An instance has been known of a she-ass bearing and bringing forth a

foal when only a year old. A cow has been known to calve when only a year

old, and the calf grew as big as might be expected, but no more. So much for

the dates in time at which these animals attain to generative capacity.

In the human species, the male is generative, at the longest, up to seventy

years, and the female up to fifty; but such extended periods are rare. As a

rule, the male is generative up to the age of sixty-five, and to the age of forty-

five the female is capable of conception.

The ewe bears up to eight years, and, if she be carefully tended, up toeleven years; in fact, the ram and the ewe are sexually capable pretty well all

their lives long. He-goats, if they be fat, are more or less unserviceable for

breeding; and this, by the way, is the reason why country folk say of a vine

when it stops bearing that it is ‘running the goat’. However, if an over-fat he-

goat be thinned down, he becomes sexually capable and generative.

  Rams single out the oldest ewes for copulation, and show no regard for the

young ones. And, as has been stated, the issue of the younger ewes is poorer

than that of the older ones.

The boar is good for breeding purposes until he is three years of age; but

after that age his issue deteriorates, for after that age his vigour is on the

decline. The boar is most capable after a good feed, and with the first sow it

mounts; if poorly fed or put to many females, the copulation is abbreviated,

and the litter is comparatively poor. The first litter of the sow is the fewest in

number; at the second litter she is at her prime. The animal, as it grows old,

continues  to  breed,  but  the  sexual  desire  abates.  When  they  reach  fifteen

years, they become unproductive, and are getting old. If a sow be highly fed,

it is all the more eager for sexual commerce, whether old or young; but, if it

be over-fattened in pregnancy, it gives the less milk after parturition. With

regard to the age of the parents, the litter is the best when they are in their

prime; but with regard to the seasons of the year, the litter is the best that

comes  at  the  beginning  of  winter;  and  the  summer  litter  the  poorest,

consisting as it usually does of animals small and thin and flaccid. The boar,

if it be well fed, is sexually capable at all hours, night and day; but otherwise

is  peculiarly  salacious  early  in  the  morning.  As  it  grows  old  the  sexual

passion dies away, as we have already remarked. Very often a boar, when

more  or  less  impotent  from  age  or  debility,  finding  itself  unable  to

accomplish the sexual commerce with due speed, and growing fatigued with

the standing posture, will roll the sow over on the ground, and the pair will

conclude  the  operation  side  by  side  of  one  another.  The  sow  is  sure  of

conception if it drops its lugs in rutting time; if the ears do not thus drop, it

may have to rut a second time before impregnation takes place.

  Bitches do not submit to the male throughout their lives, but only until they

reach  a  certain  maturity  of  years.  As  a  general  rule,  they  are  sexually

receptive and conceptive until they are twelve years old; although, by the

way, cases have been known where dogs and bitches have been respectively

procreative and conceptive to the ages of eighteen and even of twenty years.

But, as a rule, age diminishes the capability of generation and of conceptionwith these animals as with all others.

The female of the camel is opisthuretic, and submits to the male in the way

above described; and the season for copulation in Arabia is about the month

of October. Its period of gestation is twelve months; and it is never delivered

of more than one foal at a time. The female becomes sexually receptive and

the  male  sexually  capable  at  the  age  of  three  years.  After  parturition,  an

interval of a year elapses before the female is again receptive to the male.

The female elephant becomes sexually receptive when ten years old at the

youngest, and when fifteen at the oldest; and the male is sexually capable

when five years old, or six. The season for intercourse is spring. The male

allows an interval of three years to elapse after commerce with a female: and,

after it has once impregnated a female, it has no intercourse with her again.

The period of gestation with the female is two years; and only one young

animal is produced at a time, in other words it is uniparous. And the embryo

is the size of a calf two or three months old.

<

div id="section82" class="section" title="15">


15


So much for the copulations of such animals as copulate.

We now proceed to treat of generation both with respect to copulating and

non-copulating animals, and we shall commence with discussing the subject

of generation in the case of the testaceans.

The testacean is almost the only genus that throughout all its species is

non-copulative.

The porphyrae, or purple murices, gather together to some one place in the

spring-time,  and  deposit  the  so-called  ‘honeycomb’.  This  substance

resembles the comb, only that it is not so neat and delicate; and looks as

though a number of husks of white chick-peas were all stuck together. But

none of these structures has any open passage, and the porphyra does not

grow out of them, but these and all other testaceans grow out of mud and

decaying matter. The substance, is, in fact, an excretion of the porphyra and

the  ceryx;  for  it  is  deposited  by  the  ceryx  as  well.  Such,  then,  of  the

testaceans  as  deposit  the  honeycomb  are  generated  spontaneously  like  all

other  testaceans,  but  they  certainly  come  in  greater  abundance  in  places

where their congeners have been living previously. At the commencement ofthe process of depositing the honeycomb, they throw off a slippery mucus,

and of this the husklike formations are composed. These formations, then, all

melt and deposit their contents on the ground, and at this spot there are found

on the ground a number of minute porphyrae, and porphyrae are caught at

times with these animalculae upon them, some of which are too small to be

differentiated  in  form.  If  the  porphyrae  are  caught  before  producing  this

honey-comb, they sometimes go through the process in fishing-creels, not

here and there in the baskets, but gathering to some one spot all together, just

as they do in the sea; and owing to the narrowness of their new quarters they

cluster together like a bunch of grapes.

  There are many species of the purple murex; and some are large, as those

found  off  Sigeum  and  Lectum;  others  are  small,  as  those  found  in  the

Euripus, and on the coast of Caria. And those that are found in bays are large

and rough; in most of them the peculiar bloom from which their name is

derived is dark to blackness, in others it is reddish and small in size; some of

the large ones weigh upwards of a mina apiece. But the specimens that are

found along the coast and on the rocks are small-sized, and the bloom in their

case is of a reddish hue. Further, as a general rule, in northern waters the

bloom is blackish, and in southern waters of a reddish hue. The murex is

caught  in  the  spring-time  when  engaged  in  the  construction  of  the

honeycomb; but it is not caught at any time about the rising of the dog-star,

for at that period it does not feed, but conceals itself and burrows. The bloom

of the animal is situated between the mecon (or quasi-liver) and the neck, and

the co-attachment of these is an intimate one. In colour it looks like a white

membrane, and this is what people extract; and if it be removed and squeezed

it stains your hand with the colour of the bloom. There is a kind of vein that

runs through it, and this quasi-vein would appear to be in itself the bloom.

And the qualities, by the way, of this organ are astringent. It is after the

murex has constructed the honeycomb that the bloom is at its worst. Small

specimens they break in pieces, shells and all, for it is no easy matter to

extract the organ; but in dealing with the larger ones they first strip off the

shell and then abstract the bloom. For this purpose the neck and mecon are

separated, for the bloom lies in between them, above the so-called stomach;

hence the necessity of separating them in abstracting the bloom. Fishermen

are anxious always to break the animal in pieces while it is yet alive, for, if it

die before the process is completed, it vomits out the bloom; and for this

reason the fishermen keep the animals in creels, until they have collected asufficient number and can attend to them at their leisure. Fishermen in past

times used not to lower creels or attach them to the bait, so that very often the

animal got dropped off in the pulling up; at present, however, they always

attach a basket, so that if the animal fall off it is not lost. The animal is more

inclined to slip off the bait if it be full inside; if it be empty it is difficult to

shake it off. Such are the phenomena connected with the porphyra or murex.

The same phenomena are manifested by the ceryx or trumpet-shell; and the

seasons are the same in which the phenomena are observable. Both animals,

also, the murex and the ceryx, have their opercula similarly situated-and, in

fact, all the stromboids, and this is congenital with them all; and they feed by

protruding the so-called tongue underneath the operculum. The tongue of the

murex is bigger than one’s finger, and by means of it, it feeds, and perforates

conchylia and the shells of its own kind. Both the murex and the ceryx are

long lived. The murex lives for about six years; and the yearly increase is

indicated by a distinct interval in the spiral convolution of the shell.

The mussel also constructs a honeycomb.

  With regard to the limnostreae, or lagoon oysters, wherever you have slimy

mud there you are sure to find them beginning to grow. Cockles and clams

and razor-fishes and scallops row spontaneously in sandy places. The pinna

grows straight up from its tuft of anchoring fibres in sandy and slimy places;

these creatures have inside them a parasite nicknamed the pinna-guard, in

some cases a small carid and in other cases a little crab; if the pinna be

deprived of this pinna-guard it soon dies.

As a general rule, then, all testaceans grow by spontaneous generation in

mud, differing from one another according to the differences of the material;

oysters  growing  in  slime,  and  cockles  and  the  other  testaceans  above

mentioned on sandy bottoms; and in the hollows of the rocks the ascidian and

the barnacle, and common sorts, such as the limpet and the nerites. All these

animals grow with great rapidity, especially the murex and the scallop; for

the murex and the scallop attain their full growth in a year. In some of the

testaceans  white  crabs  are  found,  very  diminutive  in  size;  they  are  most

numerous in the trough shaped mussel. In the pinna also is found the so-

called pinna-guard. They are found also in the scallop and in the oyster; these

parasites never appear to grow in size. Fishermen declare that the parasite is

congenital with the larger animal. (Scallops burrow for a time in the sand,

like the murex.)

  (Shell-fish, then, grow in the way above mentioned; and some of themgrow in shallow water, some on the sea-shore, some in rocky places, some on

hard and stony ground, and some in sandy places.) Some shift about from

place to place, others remain permanent on one spot. Of those that keep to

one spot the pinnae are rooted to the ground; the razor-fish and the clam keep

to the same locality, but are not so rooted; but still, if forcibly removed they

die.

  (The star-fish is naturally so warm that whatever it lays hold of is found,

when suddenly taken away from the animal, to have undergone a process like

boiling. Fishermen say that the star-fish is a great pest in the Strait of Pyrrha.

In shape it resembles a star as seen in an ordinary drawing. The so-called

‘lungs’ are generated spontaneously. The shells that painters use are a good

deal thicker, and the bloom is outside the shell on the surface. These creatures

are mostly found on the coast of Caria.)

The hermit-crab grows spontaneously out of soil and slime, and finds its

way  into  untenanted  shells.  As  it  grows  it  shifts  to  a  larger  shell,  as  for

instance into the shell of the nerites, or of the strombus or the like, and very

often into the shell of the small ceryx. After entering new shell, it carries it

about, and begins again to feed, and, by and by, as it grows, it shifts again

into another larger one.

<

div id="section83" class="section" title="16">


16


  Moreover,  the  animals  that  are  unfurnished  with  shells  grow

spontaneously, like the testaceans, as, for instance, the sea-nettles and the

sponges in rocky caves.

Of the sea-nettle, or sea-anemone, there are two species; and of these one

species lives in hollows and never loosens its hold upon the rocks, and the

other lives on smooth flat reefs, free and detached, and shifts its position from

time to time. (Limpets also detach themselves, and shift from place to place.)

In the chambered cavities of sponges pinna-guards or parasites are found.

And over the chambers there is a kind of spider’s web, by the opening and

closing of which they catch mute fishes; that is to say, they open the web to

let the fish get in, and close it again to entrap them.

Of sponges there are three species; the first is of loose porous texture, the

second  is  close  textured,  the  third,  which  is  nicknamed  ‘the  sponge  ofAchilles’, is exceptionally fine and close-textured and strong. This sponge is

used as a lining to helmets and greaves, for the purpose of deadening the

sound of the blow; and this is a very scarce species. Of the close textured

sponges such as are particularly hard and rough are nicknamed ‘goats’.

  Sponges grow spontaneously either attached to a rock or on sea-beaches,

and they get their nutriment in slime: a proof of this statement is the fact that

when  they  are  first  secured  they  are  found  to  be  full  of  slime.  This  is

characteristic of all living creatures that get their nutriment by close local

attachment. And, by the way, the close-textured sponges are weaker than the

more openly porous ones because their attachment extends over a smaller

area.

It is said that the sponge is sensitive; and as a proof of this statement they

say that if the sponge is made aware of an attempt being made to pluck it

from its place of attachment it draws itself together, and it becomes a difficult

task  to  detach  it.  It  makes  a  similar  contractile  movement  in  windy  and

boisterous weather, obviously with the object of tightening its hold. Some

persons express doubts as to the truth of this assertion; as, for instance, the

people of Torone.

The sponge breeds parasites, worms, and other creatures, on which, if they

be detached, the rock-fishes prey, as they prey also on the remaining stumps

of  the  sponge;  but,  if  the  sponge  be  broken  off,  it  grows  again  from  the

remaining stump and the place is soon as well covered as before.

The  largest  of  all  sponges  are  the  loose-textured  ones,  and  these  are

peculiarly abundant on the coast of Lycia. The softest are the close-textured

sponges; for, by the way, the so-called sponges of Achilles are harder than

these. As a general rule, sponges that are found in deep calm waters are the

softest; for usually windy and stormy weather has a tendency to harden them

(as it has to harden all similar growing things), and to arrest their growth.

And this accounts for the fact that the sponges found in the Hellespont are

rough and close-textured; and, as a general rule, sponges found beyond or

inside  Cape  Malea  are,  respectively,  comparatively  soft  or  comparatively

hard. But, by the way, the habitat of the sponge should not be too sheltered

and  warm,  for  it  has  a  tendency  to  decay,  like  all  similar  vegetable-like

growths. And this accounts for the fact that the sponge is at its best when

found in deep water close to shore; for owing to the depth of the water they

enjoy shelter alike from stormy winds and from excessive heat.

  Whilst they are still alive and before they are washed and cleaned, they areblackish in colour. Their attachment is not made at one particular spot, nor is

it made all over their bodies; for vacant pore-spaces intervene. There is a kind

of membrane stretched over the under parts; and in the under parts the points

of  attachment  are  the  more  numerous.  On  the  top  most  of  the  pores  are

closed, but four or five are open and visible; and we are told by some that it is

through these pores that the animal takes its food.

  There  is  a  particular  species  that  is  named  the  ‘aplysia’  or  the

‘unwashable’, from the circumstance that it cannot be cleaned. This species

has the large open and visible pores, but all the rest of the body is close-

textured; and, if it be dissected, it is found to be closer and more glutinous

than the ordinary sponge, and, in a word, something lung like in consistency.

And, on all hands, it is allowed that this species is sensitive and long-lived.

They  are  distinguished  in  the  sea  from  ordinary  sponges  from  the

circumstance that the ordinary sponges are white while the slime is in them,

but that these sponges are under any circumstances black.

And so much with regard to sponges and to generation in the testaceans.

<

div id="section84" class="section" title="17">


17


Of crustaceans, the female crawfish after copulation conceives and retains

its eggs for about three months, from about the middle of May to about the

middle of August; they then lay the eggs into the folds underneath the belly,

and  their  eggs  grow  like  grubs.  This  same  phenomenon  is  observable  in

molluscs also, and in such fishes as are oviparous; for in all these cases the

egg continues to grow.

The spawn of the crawfish is of a loose or granular consistency, and is

divided into eight parts; for corresponding to each of the flaps on the side

there is a gristly formation to which the spawn is attached, and the entire

structure resembles a cluster of grapes; for each gristly formation is split into

several parts. This is obvious enough if you draw the parts asunder; but at

first sight the whole appears to be one and indivisible. And the largest are not

those nearest to the outlet but those in the middle, and the farthest off are the

smallest. The size of the small eggs is that of a small seed in a fig; and they

are not quite close to the outlet, but placed middleways; for at both ends,

tailwards and trunkwards, there are two intervals devoid of eggs; for it is thusthat the flaps also grow. The side flaps, then, cannot close, but by placing the

end flap on them the animal can close up all, and this end-flap serves them

for a lid. And in the act of laying its eggs it seems to bring them towards the

gristly formations by curving the flap of its tail, and then, squeezing the eggs

towards  the  said  gristly  formations  and  maintaining  a  bent  posture,  it

performs the act of laying. The gristly formations at these seasons increase in

size and become receptive of the eggs; for the animal lays its eggs into these

formations, just as the sepia lays its eggs among twigs and driftwood.

It lays its eggs, then, in this manner, and after hatching them for about

twenty days it rids itself of them all in one solid lump, as is quite plain from

outside. And out of these eggs crawfish form in about fifteen days, and these

crawfish are caught at times less then a finger’s breadth, or seven-tenths of an

inch,  in  length.  The  animal,  then,  lays  its  eggs  before  the  middle  of

September, and after the middle of that month throws off its eggs in a lump.

With the humped carids or prawns the time for gestation is four months or

thereabouts.

  Crawfish are found in rough and rocky places, lobsters in smooth places,

and neither crawfish nor lobsters are found in muddy ones; and this accounts

for the fact that lobsters are found in the Hellespont and on the coast of

Thasos, and crawfish in the neighbourhood of Sigeum and Mount Athos.

Fishermen, accordingly, when they want to catch these various creatures out

at sea, take bearings on the beach and elsewhere that tell them where the

ground at the bottom is stony and where soft with slime. In winter and spring

these animals keep in near to land, in summer they keep in deep water; thus

at various times seeking respectively for warmth or coolness.

The so-called arctus or bear-crab lays its eggs at about the same time as the

crawfish; and consequently in winter and in the spring-time, before laying

their eggs, they are at their best, and after laying at their worst.

  They cast their shell in the spring-time (just as serpents shed their so-called

‘old-age’ or slough), both directly after birth and in later life; this is true both

of crabs and crawfish. And, by the way, all crawfish are long lived.

<

div id="section85" class="section" title="18">


18


  Molluscs, after pairing and copulation, lay a white spawn; and this spawn,as in the case of the testacean, gets granular in time. The octopus discharges

into  its  hole,  or  into  a  potsherd  or  into  any  similar  cavity,  a  structure

resembling the tendrils of a young vine or the fruit of the white poplar, as has

been  previously  observed.  The  eggs,  when  the  female  has  laid  them,  are

clustered round the sides of the hole. They are so numerous that, if they be

removed they suffice to fill a vessel much larger than the animal’s body in

which they were contained. Some fifty days later, the eggs burst and the little

polypuses creep out, like little spiders, in great numbers; the characteristic

form  of  their  limbs  is  not  yet  to  be  discerned  in  detail,  but  their  general

outline is clear enough. And, by the way, they are so small and helpless that

the greater number perish; it is a fact that they have been seen so extremely

minute  as  to  be  absolutely  without  organization,  but  nevertheless  when

touched they moved. The eggs of the sepia look like big black myrtle-berries,

and they are linked all together like a bunch of grapes, clustered round a

centre, and are not easily sundered from one another: for the male exudes

over them some moist glairy stuff, which constitutes the sticky gum. These

eggs increase in size; and they are white at the outset, but black and larger

after the sprinkling of the male seminal fluid.

  When it has come into being the young sepia is first distinctly formed

inside out of the white substance, and when the egg bursts it comes out. The

inner part is formed as soon as the female lays the egg, something like a hail-

stone; and out of this substance the young sepia grows by a head-attachment,

just as young birds grow by a belly-attachment. What is the exact nature of

the navel-attachment has not yet been observed, except that as the young

sepia grows the white substance grows less and less in size, and at length, as

happens with the yolk in the case of birds, the white substance in the case of

the young sepia disappears. In the case of the young sepia, as in the case of

the young of most animals, the eyes at first seem very large. To illustrate this

by way of a figure, let A represent the ovum, B and C the eyes, and D the

sepidium, or body of the little sepia. (See diagram.)

The female sepia goes pregnant in the spring-time, and lays its eggs after

fifteen days of gestation; after the eggs are laid there comes in another fifteen

days something like a bunch of grapes, and at the bursting of these the young

sepiae issue forth. But if, when the young ones are fully formed, you sever

the outer covering a moment too soon, the young creatures eject excrement,

and their colour changes from white to red in their alarm.

  Crustaceans, then, hatch their eggs by brooding over them as they carrythem about beneath their bodies; but the octopus, the sepia, and the like hatch

their eggs without stirring from the spot where they may have laid them, and

this statement is particularly applicable to the sepia; in fact, the nest of the

female sepia is often seen exposed to view close in to shore. The female

octopus at times sits brooding over her eggs, and at other times squats in front

of her hole, stretching out her tentacles on guard.

The sepia lays her spawn near to land in the neighbourhood of sea-weed or

reeds  or  any  off-sweepings  such  as  brushwood,  twigs,  or  stones;  and

fishermen place heaps of faggots here and there on purpose, and on to such

heaps the female deposits a long continuous roe in shape like a vine tendril. It

lays or spirts out the spawn with an effort, as though there were difficulty in

the process. The female calamary spawns at sea; and it emits the spawn, as

does the sepia, in the mass.

The calamary and the cuttle-fish are short-lived, as, with few exceptions,

they  never  see  the  year  out;  and  the  same  statement  is  applicable  to  the

octopus.

  From one single egg comes one single sepia; and this is likewise true of the

young calamary.

The male calamary differs from the female; for if its gill-region be dilated

and examined there are found two red formations resembling breasts, with

which the male is unprovided. In the sepia, apart from this distinction in the

sexes, the male, as has been stated, is more mottled than the female.

<

div id="section86" class="section" title="19">


19


  With regard to insects, that the male is less than the female and that he

mounts upon her back, and how he performs the act of copulation and the

circumstance that he gives over reluctantly, all this has already been set forth,

most  cases  of  insect  copulation  this  process  is  speedily  followed  up  by

parturition.

All insects engender grubs, with the exception of a species of butterfly; and

the female of this species lays a hard egg, resembling the seed of the cnecus,

with a juice inside it. But from the grub, the young animal does not grow out

of a mere portion of it, as a young animal grows from a portion only of an

egg, but the grub entire grows and the animal becomes differentiated out of it.And of insects some are derived from insect congeners, as the venom-

spider  and  the  common-spider  from  the  venom-spider  and  the  common-

spider, and so with the attelabus or locust, the acris or grasshopper, and the

tettix or cicada. Other insects are not derived from living parentage, but are

generated spontaneously: some out of dew falling on leaves, ordinarily in

spring-time, but not seldom in winter when there has been a stretch of fair

weather and southerly winds; others grow in decaying mud or dung; others in

timber,  green  or  dry;  some  in  the  hair  of  animals;  some  in  the  flesh  of

animals; some in excrements: and some from excrement after it has been

voided,  and  some  from  excrement  yet  within  the  living  animal,  like  the

helminthes or intestinal worms. And of these intestinal worms there are three

species: one named the flat-worm, another the round worm, and the third the

ascarid. These intestinal worms do not in any case propagate their kind. The

flat-worm, however, in an exceptional way, clings fast to the gut, and lays a

thing  like  a  melon-seed,  by  observing  which  indication  the  physician

concludes that his patient is troubled with the worm.

The so-called psyche or butterfly is generated from caterpillars which grow

on green leaves, chiefly leaves of the raphanus, which some call crambe or

cabbage. At first it is less than a grain of millet; it then grows into a small

grub; and in three days it is a tiny caterpillar. After this it grows on and on,

and becomes quiescent and changes its shape, and is now called a chrysalis.

The outer shell is hard, and the chrysalis moves if you touch it. It attaches

itself by cobweb-like filaments, and is unfurnished with mouth or any other

apparent organ. After a little while the outer covering bursts asunder, and out

flies the winged creature that we call the psyche or butterfly. At first, when it

is  a  caterpillar,  it  feeds  and  ejects  excrement;  but  when  it  turns  into  the

chrysalis it neither feeds nor ejects excrement.

The same remarks are applicable to all such insects as are developed out of

the grub, both such grubs as are derived from the copulation of living animals

and such as are generated without copulation on the part of parents. For the

grub of the bee, the anthrena, and the wasp, whilst it is young, takes food and

voids excrement; but when it has passed from the grub shape to its defined

form and become what is termed a ‘nympha’, it ceases to take food and to

void excrement, and remains tightly wrapped up and motionless until it has

reached  its  full  size,  when  it  breaks  the  formation  with  which  the  cell  is

closed, and issues forth. The insects named the hypera and the penia are

derived  from  similar  caterpillars,  which  move  in  an  undulatory  way,progressing with one part and then pulling up the hinder parts by a bend of

the body. The developed insect in each case takes its peculiar colour from the

parent caterpillar.

  From one particular large grub, which has as it were horns, and in other

respects differs from grubs in general, there comes, by a metamorphosis of

the  grub,  first  a  caterpillar,  then  the  cocoon,  then  the  necydalus;  and  the

creature passes through all these transformations within six months. A class

of women unwind and reel off the cocoons of these creatures, and afterwards

weave a fabric with the threads thus unwound; a Coan woman of the name of

Pamphila, daughter of Plateus, being credited with the first invention of the

fabric. After the same fashion the carabus or stag-beetle comes from grubs

that live in dry wood: at first the grub is motionless, but after a while the shell

bursts and the stag-beetle issues forth.

  From the cabbage is engendered the cabbageworm, and from the leek the

prasocuris or leekbane; this creature is also winged. From the flat animalcule

that skims over the surface of rivers comes the oestrus or gadfly; and this

accounts  for  the  fact  that  gadflies  most  abound  in  the  neighbourhood  of

waters  on  whose  surface  these  animalcules  are  observed.  From  a  certain

small, black and hairy caterpillar comes first a wingless glow-worm; and this

creature again suffers a metamorphosis, and transforms into a winged insect

named the bostrychus (or hair-curl).

  Gnats grow from ascarids; and ascarids are engendered in the slime of

wells, or in places where there is a deposit left by the draining off of water.

This slime decays, and first turns white, then black, and finally blood-red;

and at this stage there originate in it, as it were, little tiny bits of red weed,

which at first wriggle about all clinging together, and finally break loose and

swim in the water, and are hereupon known as ascarids. After a few days they

stand straight up on the water motionless and hard, and by and by the husk

breaks off and the gnats are seen sitting upon it, until the sun’s heat or a puff

of wind sets them in motion, when they fly away.

  With  all  grubs  and  all  animals  that  break  out  from  the  grub  state,

generation is due primarily to the heat of the sun or to wind.

  Ascarids are more likely to be found, and grow with unusual rapidity, in

places where there is a deposit of a mixed and heterogeneous kind, as in

kitchens and in ploughed fields, for the contents of such places are disposed

to rapid putrefaction. In autumn, also, owing to the drying up of moisture,

they grow in unusual numbers.The tick is generated from couch-grass. The cockchafer comes from a grub

that is generated in the dung of the cow or the ass. The cantharus or scarabeus

rolls a piece of dung into a ball, lies hidden within it during the winter, and

gives  birth  therein  to  small  grubs,  from  which  grubs  come  new  canthari.

Certain winged insects also come from the grubs that are found in pulse, in

the same fashion as in the cases described.

Flies  grow  from  grubs  in  the  dung  that  farmers  have  gathered  up  into

heaps: for those who are engaged in this work assiduously gather up the

compost, and this they technically term ‘working-up’ the manure. The grub is

exceedingly minute to begin with; first even at this stage-it assumes a reddish

colour, and then from a quiescent state it takes on the power of motion, as

though born to it; it then becomes a small motionless grub; it then moves

again, and again relapses into immobility; it then comes out a perfect fly, and

moves away under the influence of the sun’s heat or of a puff of air. The

myops or horse-fly is engendered in timber. The orsodacna or budbane is a

transformed  grub;  and  this  grub  is  engendered  in  cabbage-stalks.  The

cantharis comes from the caterpillars that are found on fig-trees or pear-trees

or fir-trees—for on all these grubs are engendered-and also from caterpillars

found  on  the  dog-rose;  and  the  cantharis  takes  eagerly  to  ill-scented

substances, from the fact of its having been engendered in ill-scented woods.

The conops comes from a grub that is engendered in the slime of vinegar.

  And, by the way, living animals are found in substances that are usually

supposed to be incapable of putrefaction; for instance, worms are found in

long-lying snow; and snow of this description gets reddish in colour, and the

grub that is engendered in it is red, as might have been expected, and it is also

hairy. The grubs found in the snows of Media are large and white; and all

such grubs are little disposed to motion. In Cyprus, in places where copper-

ore is smelted, with heaps of the ore piled on day after day, an animal is

engendered in the fire, somewhat larger than a blue bottle fly, furnished with

wings, which can hop or crawl through the fire. And the grubs and these

latter animals perish when you keep the one away from the fire and the other

from the snow. Now the salamander is a clear case in point, to show us that

animals do actually exist that fire cannot destroy; for this creature, so the

story goes, not only walks through the fire but puts it out in doing so.

On the river Hypanis in the Cimmerian Bosphorus, about the time of the

summer solstice, there are brought down towards the sea by the stream what

look like little sacks rather bigger than grapes, out of which at their burstingissues a winged quadruped. The insect lives and flies about until the evening,

but as the sun goes down it pines away, and dies at sunset having lived just

one day, from which circumstance it is called the ephemeron.

As a rule, insects that come from caterpillars and grubs are held at first by

filaments resembling the threads of a spider’s web.

  Such is the mode of generation of the insects above enumerated. but if the

latter impregnation takes placeduring the change of the yellow

<

div id="section87" class="section" title="20">


20


The wasps that are nicknamed ‘the ichneumons’ (or hunters), less in size,

by the way, than the ordinary wasp, kill spiders and carry off the dead bodies

to a wall or some such place with a hole in it; this hole they smear over with

mud and lay their grubs inside it, and from the grubs come the hunter-wasps.

Some of the coleoptera and of the small and nameless insects make small

holes or cells of mud on a wall or on a grave-stone, and there deposit their

grubs.

  With  insects,  as  a  general  rule,  the  time  of  generation  from  its

commencement to its completion comprises three or four weeks. With grubs

and grub-like creatures the time is usually three weeks, and in the oviparous

insects as a rule four. But, in the case of oviparous insects, the egg-formation

comes at the close of seven days from copulation, and during the remaining

three weeks the parent broods over and hatches its young; i.e. where this is

the result of copulation, as in the case of the spider and its congeners. As a

rule,  the  transformations  take  place  in  intervals  of  three  or  four  days,

corresponding  to  the  lengths  of  interval  at  which  the  crises  recur  in

intermittent fevers.

So much for the generation of insects. Their death is due to the shrivelling

of their organs, just as the larger animals die of old age.

  Winged  insects  die  in  autumn  from  the  shrinking  of  their  wings.  The

myops dies from dropsy in the eyes.

<

div id="section88" class="section" title="21">


21  With regard to the generation of bees different hypotheses are in vogue.

Some affirm that bees neither copulate nor give birth to young, but that they

fetch their young. And some say that they fetch their young from the flower

of the callyntrum; others assert that they bring them from the flower of the

reed, others, from the flower of the olive. And in respect to the olive theory, it

is stated as a proof that, when the olive harvest is most abundant, the swarms

are most numerous. Others declare that they fetch the brood of the drones

from  such  things  as  above  mentioned,  but  that  the  working  bees  are

engendered by the rulers of the hive.

Now of these rulers there are two kinds: the better kind is red in colour, the

inferior  kind  is  black  and  variegated;  the  ruler  is  double  the  size  of  the

working bee. These rulers have the abdomen or part below the waist half as

large again, and they are called by some the ‘mothers’, from an idea that they

bear or generate the bees; and, as a proof of this theory of their motherhood,

they declare that the brood of the drones appears even when there is no ruler-

bee in the hive, but that the bees do not appear in his absence. Others, again,

assert that these insects copulate, and that the drones are male and the bees

female.

The ordinary bee is generated in the cells of the comb, but the ruler-bees in

cells down below attached to the comb, suspended from it, apart from the

rest, six or seven in number, and growing in a way quite different from the

mode of growth of the ordinary brood.

Bees are provided with a sting, but the drones are not so provided. The

rulers  are  provided  with  stings,  but  they  never  use  them;  and  this  latter

circumstance will account for the belief of some people that they have no

stings at all.

<

div id="section89" class="section" title="22">


22


Of bees there are various species. The best kind is a little round mottled

insect; another is long, and resembles the anthrena; a third is a black and flat-

bellied, and is nick-named the ‘robber’; a fourth kind is the drone, the largest

of all, but stingless and inactive. And this proportionate size of the drone

explains why some bee-masters place a net-work in front of the hives; for the

network is put to keep the big drones out while it lets the little bees go in.Of the king bees there are, as has been stated, two kinds. In every hive

there are more kings than one; and a hive goes to ruin if there be too few

kings, not because of anarchy thereby ensuing, but, as we are told, because

these creatures contribute in some way to the generation of the common bees.

A hive will go also to ruin if there be too large a number of kings in it; for the

members of the hives are thereby subdivided into too many separate factions.

  Whenever the spring-time is late a-coming, and when there is drought and

mildew,  then  the  progeny  of  the  hive  is  small  in  number.  But  when  the

weather is dry they attend to the honey, and in rainy weather their attention is

concentrated on the brood; and this will account for the coincidence of rich

olive-harvests and abundant swarms.

The bees first work at the honeycomb, and then put the pupae in it: by the

mouth, say those who hold the theory of their bringing them from elsewhere.

After putting in the pupae they put in the honey for subsistence, and this they

do in the summer and autumn; and, by the way, the autumn honey is the

better of the two.

The honeycomb is made from flowers, and the materials for the wax they

gather from the resinous gum of trees, while honey is distilled from dew, and

is deposited chiefly at the risings of the constellations or when a rainbow is in

the  sky:  and  as  a  general  rule  there  is  no  honey  before  the  rising  of  the

Pleiads. (The bee, then, makes the wax from flowers. The honey, however, it

does not make, but merely gathers what is deposited out of the atmosphere;

and as a proof of this statement we have the known fact that occasionally

bee-keepers find the hives filled with honey within the space of two or three

days.  Furthermore,  in  autumn  flowers  are  found,  but  honey,  if  it  be

withdrawn, is not replaced; now, after the withdrawal of the original honey,

when no food or very little is in the hives, there would be a fresh stock of

honey, if the bees made it from flowers.) Honey, if allowed to ripen and

mature, gathers consistency; for at first it is like water and remains liquid for

several days. If it be drawn off during these days it has no consistency; but it

attains  consistency  in  about  twenty  days.  The  taste  of  thyme-honey  is

discernible at once, from its peculiar sweetness and consistency.

The bee gathers from every flower that is furnished with a calyx or cup,

and from all other flowers that are sweet-tasted, without doing injury to any

fruit; and the juices of the flowers it takes up with the organ that resembles a

tongue and carries off to the hive.

  Swarms are robbed of their honey on the appearance of the wild fig. Theyproduce the best larvae at the time the honey is a-making. The bee carries

wax and bees’ bread round its legs, but vomits the honey into the cell. After

depositing its young, it broods over it like a bird. The grub when it is small

lies slantwise in the comb, but by and by rises up straight by an effort of its

own and takes food, and holds on so tightly to the honeycomb as actually to

cling to it.

The young of bees and of drones is white, and from the young come the

grubs; and the grubs grow into bees and drones. The egg of the king bee is

reddish in colour, and its substance is about as consistent as thick honey; and

from the first it is about as big as the bee that is produced from it. From the

young of the king bee there is no intermediate stage, it is said, of the grub, but

the bee comes at once.

  Whenever the bee lays an egg in the comb there is always a drop of honey

set against it. The larva of the bee gets feet and wings as soon as the cell has

been stopped up with wax, and when it arrives at its completed form it breaks

its membrane and flies away. It ejects excrement in the grub state, but not

afterwards; that is, not until it has got out of the encasing membrane, as we

have already described. If you remove the heads from off the larvae before

the coming of the wings, the bees will eat them up; and if you nip off the

wings from a drone and let it go, the bees will spontaneously bite off the

wings from off all the remaining drones.

The bee lives for six years as a rule, as an exception for seven years. If a

swarm  lasts  for  nine  years,  or  ten,  great  credit  is  considered  due  to  its

management.

In  Pontus  are  found  bees  exceedingly  white  in  colour,  and  these  bees

produce their honey twice a month. (The bees in Themiscyra, on the banks of

the river Thermodon, build honeycombs in the ground and in hives, and these

honeycombs  are  furnished  with  very  little  wax  but  with  honey  of  great

consistency; and the honeycomb, by the way, is smooth and level.) But this is

not always the case with these bees, but only in the winter season; for in

Pontus the ivy is abundant, and it flowers at this time of the year, and it is

from the ivy-flower that they derive their honey. A white and very consistent

honey is brought down from the upper country to Amisus, which is deposited

by bees on trees without the employment of honeycombs: and this kind of

honey is produced in other districts in Pontus.

  There are bees also that construct triple honeycombs in the ground; and

these  honeycombs  supply  honey  but  never  contain  grubs.  But  thehoneycombs  in  these  places  are  not  all  of  this  sort,  nor  do  all  the  bees

construct them.

<

div id="section90" class="section" title="23">


23


  Anthrenae and wasps construct combs for their young. When they have no

king, but are wandering about in search of one, the anthrene constructs its

comb on some high place, and the wasp inside a hole. When the anthrene and

the wasp have a king, they construct their combs underground. Their combs

are in all cases hexagonal like the comb of the bee. They are composed,

however, not of wax, but of a bark-like filamented fibre, and the comb of the

anthrene is much neater than the comb of the wasp. Like the bee, they put

their young just like a drop of liquid on to the side of the cell, and the egg

clings to the wall of the cell. But the eggs are not deposited in the cells

simultaneously; on the contrary, in some cells are creatures big enough to fly,

in others are nymphae, and in others are mere grubs. As in the case of bees,

excrement is observed only in the cells where the grubs are found. As long as

the creatures are in the nymph condition they are motionless, and the cell is

cemented over. In the comb of the anthrene there is found in the cell of the

young a drop of honey in front of it. The larvae of the anthrene and the wasp

make their appearance not in the spring but in the autumn; and their growth is

especially discernible in times of full moon. And, by the way, the eggs and

the grubs never rest at the bottom of the cells, but always cling on to the side

wall.

<

div id="section91" class="section" title="24">


24


  There  is  a  kind  of  humble-bee  that  builds  a  cone-shaped  nest  of  clay

against  a  stone  or  in  some  similar  situation,  besmearing  the  clay  with

something like spittle. And this nest or hive is exceedingly thick and hard; in

point of fact, one can hardly break it open with a spike. Here the insects lay

their  eggs,  and  white  grubs  are  produced  wrapped  in  a  black  membrane.Apart from the membrane there is found some wax in the honeycomb; and

this a wax is much sallower in hue than the wax in the honeycomb of the bee.

<

div id="section92" class="section" title="25">


25


  Ants copulate and engender grubs; and these grubs attach themselves to

nothing in particular, but grow on and on from small and rounded shapes

until they become elongated and defined in shape: and they are engendered in

spring-time.

<

div id="section93" class="section" title="26">


26


The land-scorpion also lays a number of egg shaped grubs, and broods

over them. When the hatching is completed, the parent animal, as happens

with the parent spider, is ejected and put to death by the young ones; for very

often the young ones are about eleven in number.

<

div id="section94" class="section" title="27">


27


  Spiders in all cases copulate in the way above mentioned, and generate at

first small grubs. And these grubs metamorphose in their entirety, and not

partially, into spiders; for, by the way, the grubs are round-shaped at the

outset. And the spider, when it lays its eggs, broods over them, and in three

days the eggs or grubs take definite shape.

All spiders lay their eggs in a web; but some spiders lay in a small and fine

web, and others in a thick one; and some, as a rule, lay in a round-shaped

case or capsule, and some are only partially enveloped in the web. The young

grubs are not all developed at one and the same time into young spiders; but

the moment the development takes place, the young spider makes a leap and

begins to spin his web. The juice of the grub, if you squeeze it, is the same asthe juice found in the spider when young; that is to say, it is thick and white.

The meadow spider lays its eggs into a web, one half of which is attached

to itself and the other half is free; and on this the parent broods until the eggs

are hatched. The phalangia lay their eggs in a sort of strong basket which they

have woven, and brood over it until the eggs are hatched. The smooth spider

is much less prolific than the phalangium or hairy spider. These phalangia,

when they grow to full size, very often envelop the mother phalangium and

eject and kill her; and not seldom they kill the father-phalangium as well, if

they catch him: for, by the way, he has the habit of co-operating with the

mother in the hatching. The brood of a single phalangium is sometimes three

hundred in number. The spider attains its full growth in about four weeks.

<

div id="section95" class="section" title="28">


28


  Grasshoppers (or locusts) copulate in the same way as other insects; that is

to say, with the lesser covering the larger, for the male is smaller than the

female. The females first insert the hollow tube, which they have at their tails,

in  the  ground,  and  then  lay  their  eggs:  and  the  male,  by  the  way,  is  not

furnished with this tube. The females lay their eggs all in a lump together,

and in one spot, so that the entire lump of eggs resembles a honeycomb. After

they have laid their eggs, the eggs assume the shape of oval grubs that are

enveloped by a sort of thin clay, like a membrane; in this membrane-like

formation they grow on to maturity. The larva is so soft that it collapses at a

touch.  The  larva  is  not  placed  on  the  surface  of  the  ground,  but  a  little

beneath the surface; and, when it reaches maturity, it comes out of its clayey

investiture in the shape of a little black grasshopper; by and by, the skin

integument strips off, and it grows larger and larger.

The grasshopper lays its eggs at the close of summer, and dies after laying

them. The fact is that, at the time of laying the eggs, grubs are engendered in

the region of the mother grasshopper’s neck; and the male grasshoppers die

about the same time. In spring-time they come out of the ground; and, by the

way, no grasshoppers are found in mountainous land or in poor land, but only

in flat and loamy land, for the fact is they lay their eggs in cracks of the soil.

During the winter their eggs remain in the ground; and with the coming of

summer the last year’s larva develops into the perfect grasshopper.<

div id="section96" class="section" title="29">


29


The attelabi or locusts lay their eggs and die in like manner after laying

them. Their eggs are subject to destruction by the autumn rains, when the

rains  are  unusually  heavy;  but  in  seasons  of  drought  the  locusts  are

exceedingly numerous, from the absence of any destructive cause, since their

destruction seems then to be a matter of accident and to depend on luck.

<

div id="section97" class="section" title="30">


30


Of the cicada there are two kinds; one, small in size, the first to come and

the last to disappear; the other, large, the singing one that comes last and first

disappears. Both in the small and the large species some are divided at the

waist, to wit, the singing ones, and some are undivided; and these latter have

no song. The large and singing cicada is by some designated the ‘chirper’,

and the small cicada the ‘tettigonium’ or cicadelle. And, by the way, such of

the tettigonia as are divided at the waist can sing just a little.

The cicada is not found where there are no trees; and this accounts for the

fact that in the district surrounding the city of Cyrene it is not found at all in

the plain country, but is found in great numbers in the neighbourhood of the

city, and especially where olive-trees are growing: for an olive grove is not

thickly shaded. And the cicada is not found in cold places, and consequently

is not found in any grove that keeps out the sunlight.

The large and the small cicada copulate alike, belly to belly. The male

discharges sperm into the female, as is the case with insects in general, and

the female cicada has a cleft generative organ; and it is the female into which

the male discharges the sperm.

  They lay their eggs in fallow lands, boring a hole with the pointed organ

they carry in the rear, as do the locusts likewise; for the locust lays its eggs in

untilled lands, and this fact may account for their numbers in the territory

adjacent to the city of Cyrene. The cicadae also lay their eggs in the canes onwhich husbandmen prop vines, perforating the canes; and also in the stalks of

the squill. This brood runs into the ground. And they are most numerous in

rainy  weather.  The  grub,  on  attaining  full  size  in  the  ground,  becomes  a

tettigometra (or nymph), and the creature is sweetest to the taste at this stage

before the husk is broken. When the summer solstice comes, the creature

issues from the husk at night-time, and in a moment, as the husk breaks, the

larva becomes the perfect cicada. creature, also, at once turns black in colour

and harder and larger, and takes to singing. In both species, the larger and the

smaller, it is the male that sings, and the female that is unvocal. At first, the

males are the sweeter eating; but, after copulation, the females, as they are

full then of white eggs.

If  you  make  a  sudden  noise  as  they  are  flying  overhead  they  let  drop

something like water. Country people, in regard to this, say that they are

voiding urine, ie. that they have an excrement, and that they feed upon dew.

If you present your finger to a cicada and bend back the tip of it and then

extend it again, it will endure the presentation more quietly than if you were

to keep your finger outstretched altogether; and it will set to climbing your

finger: for the creature is so weak-sighted that it will take to climbing your

finger as though that were a moving leaf.

<

div id="section98" class="section" title="31">


31


Of insects that are not carnivorous but that live on the juices of living flesh,

such as lice and fleas and bugs, all, without exception, generate what are

called ‘nits’, and these nits generate nothing.

Of  these  insects  the  flea  is  generated  out  of  the  slightest  amount  of

putrefying matter; for wherever there is any dry excrement, a flea is sure to

be found. Bugs are generated from the moisture of living animals, as it dries

up outside their bodies. Lice are generated out of the flesh of animals.

  When  lice  are  coming  there  is  a  kind  of  small  eruption  visible,

unaccompanied by any discharge of purulent matter; and, if you prick an

animal when in this condition at the spot of eruption, the lice jump out. In

some men the appearance of lice is a disease, in cases where the body is

surcharged with moisture; and, indeed, men have been known to succumb to

this louse-disease, as Alcman the poet and the Syrian Pherecydes are said tohave done. Moreover, in certain diseases lice appear in great abundance.

  There is also a species of louse called the ‘wild louse’, and this is harder

than the ordinary louse, and there is exceptional difficulty in getting the skin

rid  of  it.  Boys’  heads  are  apt  to  be  lousy,  but  men’s  in  less  degree;  and

women are more subject to lice than men. But, whenever people are troubled

with lousy heads, they are less than ordinarily troubled with headache. And

lice  are  generated  in  other  animals  than  man.  For  birds  are  infested  with

them; and pheasants, unless they clean themselves in the dust, are actually

destroyed by them. All other winged animals that are furnished with feathers

are  similarly  infested,  and  all  hair-coated  creatures  also,  with  the  single

exception of the ass, which is infested neither with lice nor with ticks.

  Cattle suffer both from lice and from ticks. Sheep and goats breed ticks,

but do not breed lice. Pigs breed lice large and hard. In dogs are found the

flea peculiar to the animal, the Cynoroestes. In all animals that are subject to

lice, the latter originate from the animals themselves. Moreover, in animals

that bathe at all, lice are more than usually abundant when they change the

water in which they bathe.

In the sea, lice are found on fishes, but they are generated not out of the

fish but out of slime; and they resemble multipedal wood-lice, only that their

tail is flat. Sea-lice are uniform in shape and universal in locality, and are

particularly numerous on the body of the red mullet. And all these insects are

multipedal and devoid of blood.

The parasite that feeds on the tunny is found in the region of the fins; it

resembles a scorpion, and is about the size of a spider. In the seas between

Cyrene and Egypt there is a fish that attends on the dolphin, which is called

the  ‘dolphin’s  louse’.  This  fish  gets  exceedingly  fat  from  enjoying  an

abundance of food while the dolphin is out in pursuit of its prey.

<

div id="section99" class="section" title="32">


32


  Other  animalcules  besides  these  are  generated,  as  we  have  already

remarked, some in wool or in articles made of wool, as the ses or clothes-

moth.  And  these  animalcules  come  in  greater  numbers  if  the  woollen

substances are dusty; and they come in especially large numbers if a spider be

shut up in the cloth or wool, for the creature drinks up any moisture that maybe there, and dries up the woollen substance. This grub is found also in men’s

clothes.

A creature is also found in wax long laid by, just as in wood, and it is the

smallest of animalcules and is white in colour, and is designated the acari or

mite. In books also other animalcules are found, some resembling the grubs

found in garments, and some resembling tailless scorpions, but very small.

As a general rule we may state that such animalcules are found in practically

anything, both in dry things that are becoming moist and in moist things that

are drying, provided they contain the conditions of life.

  There  is  a  grub  entitled  the  ‘faggot-bearer’,  as  strange  a  creature  as  is

known. Its head projects outside its shell, mottled in colour, and its feet are

near the end or apex, as is the case with grubs in general; but the rest of its

body is cased in a tunic as it were of spider’s web, and there are little dry

twigs about it, that look as though they had stuck by accident to the creature

as  it  went  walking  about.  But  these  twig-like  formations  are  naturally

connected with the tunic, for just as the shell is with the body of the snail so

is the whole superstructure with our grub; and they do not drop off, but can

only be torn off, as though they were all of a piece with him, and the removal

of the tunic is as fatal to this grub as the removal of the shell would be to the

snail. In course of time this grub becomes a chrysalis, as is the case with the

silkworm, and lives in a motionless condition. But as yet it is not known into

what winged condition it is transformed.

The fruit of the wild fig contains the psen, or fig-wasp. This creature is a

grub at first; but in due time the husk peels off and the psen leaves the husk

behind it and flies away, and enters into the fruit of the fig-tree through its

orifice,  and  causes  the  fruit  not  to  drop  off;  and  with  a  view  to  this

phenomenon, country folk are in the habit of tying wild figs on to fig-trees,

and of planting wild fig-trees near domesticated ones.

<

div id="section100" class="section" title="33">


33


In the case of animals that are quadrupeds and red-blooded and oviparous,

generation takes place in the spring, but copulation does not take place in an

uniform  season.  In  some  cases  it  takes  place  in  the  spring,  in  others  in

summer  time,  and  in  others  in  the  autumn,  according  as  the  subsequentseason may be favourable for the young.

The tortoise lays eggs with a hard shell and of two colours within, like

birds’ eggs, and after laying them buries them in the ground and treads the

ground hard over them; it then broods over the eggs on the surface of the

ground,  and  hatches  the  eggs  the  next  year.  The  hemys,  or  fresh-water

tortoise, leaves the water and lays its eggs. It digs a hole of a casklike shape,

and deposits therein the eggs; after rather less than thirty days it digs the eggs

up again and hatches them with great rapidity, and leads its young at once off

to the water. The sea-turtle lays on the ground eggs just like the eggs of

domesticated birds, buries the eggs in the ground, and broods over them in

the night-time. It lays a very great number of eggs, amounting at times to one

hundred.

  Lizards and crocodiles, terrestrial and fluvial, lay eggs on land. The eggs of

lizards hatch spontaneously on land, for the lizard does not live on into the

next year; in fact, the life of the animal is said not to exceed six months. The

river-crocodile lays a number of eggs, sixty at the most, white in colour, and

broods over them for sixty days: for, by the way, the creature is very long-

lived. And the disproportion is more marked in this animal than in any other

between the smallness of the original egg and the huge size of the full-grown

animal.  For  the  egg  is  not  larger  than  that  of  the  goose,  and  the  young

crocodile is small, answering to the egg in size, but the full-grown animal

attains  the  length  of  twenty-six  feet;  in  fact,  it  is  actually  stated  that  the

animal goes on growing to the end of its days.

<

div id="section101" class="section" title="34">


34


  With  regard  to  serpents  or  snakes,  the  viper  is  externally  viviparous,

having been previously oviparous internally. The egg, as with the egg of

fishes, is uniform in colour and soft-skinned. The young serpent grows on the

surface  of  the  egg,  and,  like  the  young  of  fishes,  has  no  shell-like

envelopment. The young of the viper is born inside a membrane that bursts

from off the young creature in three days; and at times the young viper eats

its way out from the inside of the egg. The mother viper brings forth all its

young in one day, twenty in number, and one at a time. The other serpents are

externally oviparous, and their eggs are strung on to one another like a lady’snecklace; after the dam has laid her eggs in the ground she broods over them,

and hatches the eggs in the following year.                    The History of Animals, Book VI


translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson


<

div id="book6" class="chapter" title="Book VI">


1


So much for the generative processes in snakes and insects, and also in

oviparous  quadrupeds.  Birds  without  exception  lay  eggs,  but  the  pairing

season and the times of parturition are not alike for all. Some birds couple

and lay at almost any time in the year, as for instance the barn-door hen and

the pigeon: the former of these coupling and laying during the entire year,

with  the  exception  of  the  month  before  and  the  month  after  the  winter

solstice. Some hens, even in the high breeds, lay a large quantity of eggs

before brooding, amounting to as many as sixty; and, by the way, the higher

breeds are less prolific than the inferior ones. The Adrian hens are small-

sized, but they lay every day; they are cross-tempered, and often kill their

chickens; they are of all colours. Some domesticated hens lay twice a day;

indeed,  instances  have  been  known  where  hens,  after  exhibiting  extreme

fecundity, have died suddenly. Hens, then, lay eggs, as has been stated, at all

times  indiscriminately;  the  pigeon,  the  ring-dove,  the  turtle-dove,  and  the

stock-dove lay twice a year, and the pigeon actually lays ten times a year. The

great majority of birds lay during the spring-time. Some birds are prolific,

and prolific in either of two ways-either by laying often, as the pigeon, or by

laying many eggs at a sitting, as the barn-door hen. All birds of prey, or birds

with crooked talons, are unprolific, except the kestrel: this bird is the most

prolific of birds of prey; as many as four eggs have been observed in the nest,

and occasionally it lays even more.

  Birds in general lay their eggs in nests, but such as are disqualified for

flight, as the partridge and the quail, do not lay them in nests but on the

ground, and cover them over with loose material. The same is the case with

the lark and the tetrix. These birds hatch in sheltered places; but the bird

called merops in Boeotia, alone of all birds, burrows into holes in the groundand hatches there.

  Thrushes, like swallows, build nests of clay, on high trees, and build them

in  rows  all  close  together,  so  that  from  their  continuity  the  structure

resembles  a  necklace  of  nests.  Of  all  birds  that  hatch  for  themselves  the

hoopoe is the only one that builds no nest whatever; it gets into the hollow of

the trunk of a tree, and lays its eggs there without making any sort of nest.

The circus builds either under a dwelling-roof or on cliffs. The tetrix, called

ourax in Athens, builds neither on the ground nor on trees, but on low-lying

shrubs.

<

div id="section103" class="section" title="2">


2


The egg in the case of all birds alike is hard-shelled, if it be the produce of

copulation and be laid by a healthy hen-for some hens lay soft eggs. The

interior of the egg is of two colours, and the white part is outside and the

yellow part within.

The eggs of birds that frequent rivers and marshes differ from those of

birds  that  live  on  dry  land;  that  is  to  say,  the  eggs  of  waterbirds  have

comparatively more of the yellow or yolk and less of the white. Eggs vary in

colour according to their kind. Some eggs are white, as those of the pigeon

and of the partridge; others are yellowish, as the eggs of marsh birds; in some

cases the eggs are mottled, as the eggs of the guinea-fowl and the pheasant;

while the eggs of the kestrel are red, like vermilion.

  Eggs are not symmetrically shaped at both ends: in other words, one end is

comparatively sharp, and the other end is comparatively blunt; and it is the

latter end that protrudes first at the time of laying. Long and pointed eggs are

female; those that are round, or more rounded at the narrow end, are male.

Eggs are hatched by the incubation of the mother-bird. In some cases, as in

Egypt, they are hatched spontaneously in the ground, by being buried in dung

heaps. A story is told of a toper in Syracuse, how he used to put eggs into the

ground under his rush-mat and to keep on drinking until he hatched them.

Instances have occurred of eggs being deposited in warm vessels and getting

hatched spontaneously.

The sperm of birds, as of animals in general, is white. After the female has

submitted to the male, she draws up the sperm to underneath her midriff. Atfirst it is little in size and white in colour; by and by it is red, the colour of

blood; as it grows, it becomes pale and yellow all over. When at length it is

getting ripe for hatching, it is subject to differentiation of substance, and the

yolk gathers together within and the white settles round it on the outside.

When the full time is come, the egg detaches itself and protrudes, changing

from soft to hard with such temporal exactitude that, whereas it is not hard

during the process of protrusion, it hardens immediately after the process is

completed:  that  is  if  there  be  no  concomitant  pathological  circumstances.

Cases have occurred where substances resembling the egg at a critical point

of its growth-that is, when it is yellow all over, as the yolk is subsequently-

have  been  found  in  the  cock  when  cut  open,  underneath  his  midriff,  just

where the hen has her eggs; and these are entirely yellow in appearance and

of the same size as ordinary eggs. Such phenomena are regarded as unnatural

and portentous.

  Such as affirm that wind-eggs are the residua of eggs previously begotten

from  copulation  are  mistaken  in  this  assertion,  for  we  have  cases  well

authenticated where chickens of the common hen and goose have laid wind-

eggs  without  ever  having  been  subjected  to  copulation.  Wind-eggs  are

smaller, less palatable, and more liquid than true eggs, and are produced in

greater numbers. When they are put under the mother bird, the liquid contents

never  coagulate,  but  both  the  yellow  and  the  white  remain  as  they  were.

Wind-eggs are laid by a number of birds: as for instance by the common hen,

the hen partridge, the hen pigeon, the peahen, the goose, and the vulpanser.

Eggs  are  hatched  under  brooding  hens  more  rapidly  in  summer  than  in

winter; that is to say, hens hatch in eighteen days in summer, but occasionally

in winter take as many as twenty-five. And by the way for brooding purposes

some birds make better mothers than others. If it thunders while a hen-bird is

brooding, the eggs get addled. Wind-eggs that are called by some cynosura

and  uria  are  produced  chiefly  in  summer.  Wind-eggs  are  called  by  some

zephyr-eggs,  because  at  spring-time  hen-birds  are  observed  to  inhale  the

breezes; they do the same if they be stroked in a peculiar way by hand. Wind-

eggs  can  turn  into  fertile  eggs,  and  eggs  due  to  previous  copulation  can

change breed, if before the change of the yellow to the white the hen that

contains wind-eggs, or eggs begotten of copulation be trodden by another

cock-bird. Under these circumstances the wind-eggs turn into fertile eggs,

and the previously impregnated eggs follow the breed of the impregnator; but

if the latter impregnation takes place during the change of the yellow to thewhite, then no change in the egg takes place: the wind-egg does not become a

true egg, and the true egg does not take on the breed of the latter impregnator.

If when the egg-substance is small copulation be intermitted, the previously

existing egg-substance exhibits no increase; but if the hen be again submitted

to the male the increase in size proceeds with rapidity.

The yolk and the white are diverse not only in colour but also in properties.

Thus,  the  yolk  congeals  under  the  influence  of  cold,  whereas  the  white

instead of congealing is inclined rather to liquefy. Again, the white stiffens

under the influence of fire, whereas the yolk does not stiffen; but, unless it be

burnt through and through, it remains soft, and in point of fact is inclined to

set or to harden more from the boiling than from the roasting of the egg. The

yolk and the white are separated by a membrane from one another. The so-

called ‘hail-stones’, or treadles, that are found at the extremity of the yellow

in no way contribute towards generation, as some erroneously suppose: they

are two in number, one below and the other above. If you take out of the

shells a number of yolks and a number of whites and pour them into a sauce

pan and boil them slowly over a low fire, the yolks will gather into the centre

and the whites will set all around them.

Young hens are the first to lay, and they do so at the beginning of spring

and lay more eggs than the older hens, but the eggs of the younger hens are

comparatively small. As a general rule, if hens get no brooding they pine and

sicken. After copulation hens shiver and shake themselves, and often kick

rubbish about all round them-and this, by the way, they do sometimes after

laying-whereas pigeons trail their rumps on the ground, and geese dive under

the water. Conception of the true egg and conformation of the wind-egg take

place rapidly with most birds; as for instance with the hen-partridge when in

heat. The fact is that, when she stands to windward and within scent of the

male, she conceives, and becomes useless for decoy purposes: for, by the

way, the partridge appears to have a very acute sense of smell.

The generation of the egg after copulation and the generation of the chick

from the subsequent hatching of the egg are not brought about within equal

periods for all birds, but differ as to time according to the size of the parent-

birds. The egg of the common hen after copulation sets and matures in ten

days  a  general  rule;  the  egg  of  the  pigeon  in  a  somewhat  lesser  period.

Pigeons have the faculty of holding back the egg at the very moment of

parturition; if a hen pigeon be put about by any one, for instance if it be

disturbed  on  its  nest,  or  have  a  feather  plucked  out,  or  sustain  any  other