has the same colour, as a bull is white as a whole or dark as a whole); others

are vari-coloured. This last term is used in both ways; sometimes the whole

kind is vari-coloured, as leopards and peacocks, and some fish, e.g. the so-

called ‘thrattai’; sometimes the kind as a whole is not so, but such individuals

are found in it, as with cattle and goats and, among birds, pigeons; the same

applies also to other kinds of birds. The whole-coloured change much more

than the uniformly coloured, both into the simple colour of another individual

of the same kind (as dark changing into white and vice versa) and into both

colours mingled. This is because it is a natural characteristic of the kind as a

whole  not  to  have  one  colour  only,  the  kind  being  easily  moved  in  both

directions so that the colours both change more into one another and are more

varied. The opposite holds with the uniformly coloured; they do not change

except by an affection of the colour, and that rarely; but still they do so

change,  for  before  now  white  individuals  have  been  observed  among

partridges, ravens, sparrows, and bears. This happens when the course of

development is perverted, for what is small is easily spoilt and easily moved,

and what is developing is small, the beginning of all such things being on a

small scale.

  Change  is  especially  found  in  those  animals  of  which  by  nature  the

individual is whole-coloured but the kind many-coloured. This is owing to

the water which they drink, for hot waters make the hair white, cold makes it

dark, an effect found also in plants. The reason is that the hot have more air

than water in them, and the air shining through causes whiteness, as also in

froth. As, then, skins which are white by reason of some affection differ from

those white by nature, so also in the hair the whiteness due to disease or age

differs from that due to nature in that the cause is different; the latter are

whitened by the natural heat, the former by the external heat. Whiteness is

caused in all things by the vaporous air imprisoned in them. Hence also in all

animals not uniformly coloured all the part under the belly is whiter. For

practically all white animals are both hotter and better flavoured for the same

reason; the concoction of their nutriment makes them well-flavoured, and

heat causes the concoction. The same cause holds for those animals which are

uniformly-coloured, but either dark or white; heat and cold are the causes of

the nature of the skin and hair, each of the parts having its own special heat.

The tongue also varies in colour in the simply coloured as compared with

the vari-coloured animals, and again in the simply coloured which differ from

one another, as white and dark. The reason is that assigned before, that theskins of the vari-coloured are vari-coloured, and the skins of the white-haired

and dark-haired are white and dark in each case. Now we must conceive of

the tongue as one of the external parts, not taking into account the fact that it

is covered by the mouth but looking on it as we do on the hand or foot; thus

since the skin of the vari-coloured animals is not uniformly coloured, this is

the cause of the skin on the tongue being also vari-coloured.

  Some birds and some wild quadrupeds change their colour according to the

seasons of the year. The reason is that, as men change according to their age,

so the same thing happens to them according to the season; for this makes a

greater difference to them than the change of age.

The more omnivorous animals are more vari-coloured to speak generally,

and this is what might be expected; thus bees are more uniformly coloured

than hornets and wasps. For if the food is responsible for the change we

should expect varied food to increase the variety in the movements which

cause the development and so in the residual matter of the food, from which

come into being hairs and feathers and skins.

So much for colours and hairs.

<

div id="section59" class="section" title="7">


7


As to the voice, it is deep in some animals, high in others, in others again

well-pitched and in due proportion between both extremes. Again, in some it

is loud, in others small, and it differs in smoothness and roughness, flexibility

and  inflexibility.  We  must  inquire  then  into  the  causes  of  each  of  these

distinctions.

We must suppose then that the same cause is responsible for high and deep

voices as for the change which they undergo in passing from youth to age.

The voice is higher in all other animals when younger, but in cattle that of

calves is deeper. We find the same thing also in the male and female sexes; in

the other kinds of animals the voice of the female is higher than that of the

male (this being especially plain in man, for Nature has given this faculty to

him in the highest degree because he alone of animals makes use of speech

and the voice is the material of speech), but in cattle the opposite obtains, for

the voice of cows is deeper than that of bulls.

Now the purpose for which animals have a voice, and what is meant by‘voice’ and by ‘sound’ generally, has been stated partly in the treatise on

sensation, partly in that on the soul. But since lowness of voice depends on

the movement of the air being slow and its highness on its being quick, there

is a difficulty in knowing whether it is that which moves or that which is

moved that is the cause of the slowness or quickness. For some say that what

is much is moved slowly, what is little quickly, and that the quantity of the air

is the cause of some animals having a deep and others a high voice. Up to a

certain point this is well said (for it seems to be rightly said in a general way

that the depth depends on a certain amount of the air put in motion), but not

altogether, for if this were true it would not be easy to speak both soft and

deep at once, nor again both loud and high. Again, the depth seems to belong

to the nobler nature, and in songs the deep note is better than the high-pitched

ones,  the  better  lying  in  superiority,  and  depth  of  tone  being  a  sort  of

superiority. But then depth and height in the voice are different from loudness

and  softness,  and  some  high-voiced  animals  are  loud-voiced,  and  in  like

manner some soft-voiced ones are deep-voiced, and the same applies to the

tones lying between these extremes. And by what else can we define these (I

mean loudness and softness of voice) except by the large and small amount of

the  air  put  in  motion?  If  then  height  and  depth  are  to  be  decided  in

accordance with the distinction postulated, the result will be that the same

animals will be deep-and loud-voiced, and the same will be high-and not

loud-voiced; but this is false.

The reason of the difficulty is that the words ‘great’ and ‘small’, ‘much’

and  ‘little’  are  used  sometimes  absolutely,  sometimes  relatively  to  one

another. Whether an animal has a great (or loud) voice depends on the air

which is moved being much absolutely, whether it has a small voice depends

on its being little absolutely; but whether they have a deep or high voice

depends on their being thus differentiated in relation to one another. For if

that which is moved surpass the strength of that which moves it, the air that is

sent  forth  must  go  slowly;  if  the  opposite,  quickly.  The  strong,  then,  on

account of their strength, sometimes move much air and make the movement

slow, sometimes, having complete command over it, make the movement

swift. On the same principle the weak either move too much air for their

strength and so make the movement slow, or if they make it swift move but

little because of their weakness.

These, then, are the reasons of these contrarieties, that neither are all young

animals high-voiced nor all deep-voiced, nor are all the older, nor yet are thetwo sexes thus opposed, and again that not only the sick speak in a high voice

but also those in good bodily condition, and, further, that as men verge on old

age they become higher-voiced, though this age is opposite to that of youth.

  Most young animals, then, and most females set but little air in motion

because of their want of power, and are consequently high-voiced, for a little

air is carried along quickly, and in the voice what is quick is high. But in

calves and cows, in the one case because of their age, in the other because of

their female nature, the part by which they set the air in motion is not strong;

at the same time they set a great quantity in motion and so are deep-voiced;

for that which is borne along slowly is heavy, and much air is borne along

slowly. And these animals set much in movement whereas the others set but

little, because the vessel through which the breath is first borne has in them a

large opening and necessarily sets much air in motion, whereas in the rest the

air is better dispensed. As their age advances this part which moves the air

gains more strength in each animal, so that they change into the opposite

condition, the high-voiced becoming deeper-voiced than they were, and the

deep-voiced  higher-voiced,  which  is  why  bulls  have  a  higher  voice  than

calves and cows. Now the strength of all animals is in their sinews, and so

those in the prime of life are stronger, the young being weaker in the joints

and sinews; moreover, in the young they are not yet tense, and in those now

growing old the tension relaxes, wherefore both these ages are weak and

powerless for movement. And bulls are particularly sinewy, even their hearts,

and therefore that part by which they set the air in motion is in a tense state,

like a sinewy string stretched tight. (That the heart of bulls is of such a nature

is shown by the fact that a bone is actually found in some of them, and bones

are naturally connected with sinew.)

All animals when castrated change to the female character, and utter a

voice like that of the females because the sinewy strength in the principle of

the voice is relaxed. This relaxation is just as if one should stretch a string

and make it taut by hanging some weight on to it, as women do who weave at

the loom, for they stretch the warp by attaching to it what are called ‘laiai’.

For in this way are the testes attached to the seminal passages, and these

again to the blood-vessel which takes its origin in the heart near the organ

which  sets  the  voice  in  motion.  Hence  as  the  seminal  passages  change

towards the age at which they are now able to secrete the semen, this part also

changes along with them. As this changes, the voice again changes, more

indeed  in  males,  but  the  same  thing  happens  in  females  too,  only  not  soplainly, the result being what some call ‘bleating’ when the voice is uneven.

After this it settles into the deep or high voice of the succeeding time of life.

If the testes are removed the tension of the passages relaxes, as when the

weight is taken off the string or the warp; as this relaxes, the organ which

moves the voice is loosened in the same proportion. This, then, is the reason

why the voice and the form generally changes to the female character in

castrated animals; it is because the principle is relaxed upon which depends

the tension of the body; not that, as some suppose, the testes are themselves a

ganglion of many principles, but small changes are the causes of great ones,

not per se but when it happens that a principle changes with them. For the

principles, though small in size, are great in potency; this, indeed, is what is

meant  by  a  principle,  that  it  is  itself  the  cause  of  many  things  without

anything else being higher than it for it to depend upon.

The heat or cold also of their habitat contributes to make some animals of

such a character as to be deep-voiced, and others high-voiced. For hot breath

being thick causes depth, cold breath being thin the opposite. This is clear

also in pipe-playing, for if the breath of the performer is hotter, that is to say

if it is expelled as by a groan, the note is deeper.

The cause of roughness and smoothness in the voice, and of all similar

inequality, is that the part or organ through which the voice is conveyed is

rough or smooth or generally even or uneven. This is plain when there is any

moisture about the trachea or when it is roughened by any affection, for then

the voice also becomes uneven.

  Flexibility depends on the softness or hardness of the organ, for what is

soft can be regulated and assume any form, while what is hard cannot; thus

the soft organ can utter a loud or a small note, and accordingly a high or a

deep one, since it easily regulates the breath, becoming itself easily great or

small. But hardness cannot be regulated.

Let this be enough on all those points concerning the voice which have not

been previously discussed in the treatise on sensation and in that on the soul.

<

div id="section60" class="section" title="8">


8


  With regard to the teeth it has been stated previously that they do not exist

for a single purpose nor for the same purpose in all animals, but in some fornutrition only, in others also for fighting and for vocal speech. We must,

however,  consider  it  not  alien  to  the  discussion  of  generation  and

development to inquire into the reason why the front teeth are formed first

and the grinders later, and why the latter are not shed but the former are shed

and grow again.

  Democritus has spoken of these questions but not well, for he assigns the

cause too generally without investigating the facts in all cases. He says that

the early teeth are shed because they are formed in animals too early, for it is

when  animals  are  practically  in  their  prime  that  they  grow  according  to

Nature, and suckling is the cause he assigns for their being found too early.

Yet  the  pig  also  suckles  but  does  not  shed  its  teeth,  and,  further,  all  the

animals with carnivorous dentition suckle, but some of them do not shed any

teeth  except  the  canines,  e.g.  lions.  This  mistake,  then,  was  due  to  his

speaking generally without examining what happens in all cases; but this is

what we to do, for any one who makes any general statement must speak of

all the particular cases.

Now we assume, basing our assumption upon what we see, that Nature

never fails nor does anything in vain so far as is possible in each case. And it

is necessary, if an animal is to obtain food after the time of taking milk is

over, that it should have instruments for the treatment of the food. If, then, as

Democritus says, this happened about the time of reaching maturity, Nature

would fail in something possible for her to do. And, besides, the operation of

Nature would be contrary to Nature, for what is done by violence is contrary

to Nature, and it is by violence that he says the formation of the first teeth is

brought about. That this view then is not true is plain from these and other

similar considerations.

Now  these  teeth  are  developed  before  the  flat  teeth,  in  the  first  place

because their function is earlier (for dividing comes before crushing, and the

flat  teeth  are  for  crushing,  the  others  for  dividing),  in  the  second  place

because the smaller is naturally developed quicker than the larger, even if

both  start  together,  and  these  teeth  are  smaller  in  size  than  the  grinders,

because the bone of the jaw is flat in that part but narrow towards the mouth.

From the greater part, therefore, must flow more nutriment to form the teeth,

and from the narrower part less.

The act of sucking in itself contributes nothing to the formation of the

teeth, but the heat of the milk makes them appear more quickly. A proof of

this is that even in suckling animals those young which enjoy hotter milkgrow their teeth quicker, heat being conducive to growth.

  They are shed, after they have been formed, partly because it is better so

(for what is sharp is soon blunted, so that a fresh relay is needed for the work,

whereas the flat teeth cannot be blunted but are only smoothed in time by

wearing down), partly from necessity because, while the roots of the grinders

are fixed where the jaw is flat and the bone strong, those of the front teeth are

in a thin part, so that they are weak and easily moved. They grow again

because they are shed while the bone is still growing and the animal is still

young enough to grow teeth. A proof of this is that even the flat teeth grow

for a long time, the last of them cutting the gum at about twenty years of age;

indeed in some cases the last teeth have been grown in quite old age. This is

because there is much nutriment in the broad part of the bones, whereas the

front part being thin soon reaches perfection and no residual matter is found

in it, the nutriment being consumed in its own growth.

  Democritus, however, neglecting the final cause, reduces to necessity all

the operations of Nature. Now they are necessary, it is true, but yet they are

for a final cause and for the sake of what is best in each case. Thus nothing

prevents the teeth from being formed and being shed in this way; but it is not

on account of these causes but on account of the end (or final cause); these

are causes only in the sense of being the moving and efficient instruments

and the material. So it is reasonable that Nature should perform most of her

operations using breath as an instrument, for as some instruments serve many

uses in the arts, e.g. the hammer and anvil in the smith’s art, so does breath in

the living things formed by Nature. But to say that necessity is the only cause

is much as if we should think that the water has been drawn off from a

dropsical patient on account of the lancet, not on account of health, for the

sake of which the lancet made the incision.

We have thus spoken of the teeth, saying why some are shed and grow

again, and others not, and generally for what cause they are formed. And we

have spoken of the other affections of the parts which are found to occur not

for any final end but of necessity and on account of the motive or efficient

cause.                                    Part 5


                              Metaphysics                                        Book I


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="book1" class="chapter" title="Book I">


1


All men by nature desire to know. An indication of this is the delight we

take in our senses; for even apart from their usefulness they are loved for

themselves; and above all others the sense of sight. For not only with a view

to action, but even when we are not going to do anything, we prefer seeing

(one might say) to everything else. The reason is that this, most of all the

senses, makes us know and brings to light many differences between things.

By  nature  animals  are  born  with  the  faculty  of  sensation,  and  from

sensation memory is produced in some of them, though not in others. And

therefore the former are more intelligent and apt at learning than those which

cannot remember; those which are incapable of hearing sounds are intelligent

though they cannot be taught, e.g. the bee, and any other race of animals that

may be like it; and those which besides memory have this sense of hearing

can be taught.

The animals other than man live by appearances and memories, and have

but little of connected experience; but the human race lives also by art and

reasonings.  Now  from  memory  experience  is  produced  in  men;  for  the

several memories of the same thing produce finally the capacity for a single

experience. And experience seems pretty much like science and art, but really

science and art come to men through experience; for ‘experience made art’,

as  Polus  says,  ‘but  inexperience  luck.’  Now  art  arises  when  from  many

notions  gained  by  experience  one  universal  judgement  about  a  class  of

objects is produced. For to have a judgement that when Callias was ill of this

disease this did him good, and similarly in the case of Socrates and in many

individual cases, is a matter of experience; but to judge that it has done good

to all persons of a certain constitution, marked off in one class, when they

were ill of this disease, e.g. to phlegmatic or bilious people when burningwith fevers-this is a matter of art.

  With a view to action experience seems in no respect inferior to art, and

men of experience succeed even better than those who have theory without

experience. (The reason is that experience is knowledge of individuals, art of

universals, and actions and productions are all concerned with the individual;

for the physician does not cure man, except in an incidental way, but Callias

or Socrates or some other called by some such individual name, who happens

to  be  a  man.  If,  then,  a  man  has  the  theory  without  the  experience,  and

recognizes the universal but does not know the individual included in this, he

will often fail to cure; for it is the individual that is to be cured.) But yet we

think  that  knowledge  and  understanding  belong  to  art  rather  than  to

experience, and we suppose artists to be wiser than men of experience (which

implies that Wisdom depends in all cases rather on knowledge); and this

because  the  former  know  the  cause,  but  the  latter  do  not.  For  men  of

experience know that the thing is so, but do not know why, while the others

know the ‘why’ and the cause. Hence we think also that the masterworkers in

each craft are more honourable and know in a truer sense and are wiser than

the manual workers, because they know the causes of the things that are done

(we think the manual workers are like certain lifeless things which act indeed,

but act without knowing what they do, as fire burns,-but while the lifeless

things perform each of their functions by a natural tendency, the labourers

perform them through habit); thus we view them as being wiser not in virtue

of being able to act, but of having the theory for themselves and knowing the

causes. And in general it is a sign of the man who knows and of the man who

does not know, that the former can teach, and therefore we think art more

truly knowledge than experience is; for artists can teach, and men of mere

experience cannot.

  Again, we do not regard any of the senses as Wisdom; yet surely these give

the most authoritative knowledge of particulars. But they do not tell us the

‘why’ of anything-e.g. why fire is hot; they only say that it is hot.

At first he who invented any art whatever that went beyond the common

perceptions of man was naturally admired by men, not only because there

was something useful in the inventions, but because he was thought wise and

superior to the rest. But as more arts were invented, and some were directed

to the necessities of life, others to recreation, the inventors of the latter were

naturally always regarded as wiser than the inventors of the former, because

their  branches  of  knowledge  did  not  aim  at  utility.  Hence  when  all  suchinventions were already established, the sciences which do not aim at giving

pleasure or at the necessities of life were discovered, and first in the places

where men first began to have leisure. This is why the mathematical arts were

founded in Egypt; for there the priestly caste was allowed to be at leisure.

We have said in the Ethics what the difference is between art and science

and the other kindred faculties; but the point of our present discussion is this,

that all men suppose what is called Wisdom to deal with the first causes and

the  principles  of  things;  so  that,  as  has  been  said  before,  the  man  of

experience is thought to be wiser than the possessors of any sense-perception

whatever, the artist wiser than the men of experience, the masterworker than

the mechanic, and the theoretical kinds of knowledge to be more of the nature

of Wisdom than the productive. Clearly then Wisdom is knowledge about

certain principles and causes.

<

div id="section16" class="section" title="2">


2


  Since we are seeking this knowledge, we must inquire of what kind are the

causes and the principles, the knowledge of which is Wisdom. If one were to

take the notions we have about the wise man, this might perhaps make the

answer more evident. We suppose first, then, that the wise man knows all

things, as far as possible, although he has not knowledge of each of them in

detail; secondly, that he who can learn things that are difficult, and not easy

for man to know, is wise (sense-perception is common to all, and therefore

easy and no mark of Wisdom); again, that he who is more exact and more

capable of teaching the causes is wiser, in every branch of knowledge; and

that of the sciences, also, that which is desirable on its own account and for

the sake of knowing it is more of the nature of Wisdom than that which is

desirable on account of its results, and the superior science is more of the

nature of Wisdom than the ancillary; for the wise man must not be ordered

but must order, and he must not obey another, but the less wise must obey

him.

  Such and so many are the notions, then, which we have about Wisdom and

the wise. Now of these characteristics that of knowing all things must belong

to him who has in the highest degree universal knowledge; for he knows in a

sense all the instances that fall under the universal. And these things, the mostuniversal, are on the whole the hardest for men to know; for they are farthest

from the senses. And the most exact of the sciences are those which deal

most with first principles; for those which involve fewer principles are more

exact  than  those  which  involve  additional  principles,  e.g.  arithmetic  than

geometry. But the science which investigates causes is also instructive, in a

higher degree, for the people who instruct us are those who tell the causes of

each thing. And understanding and knowledge pursued for their own sake are

found most in the knowledge of that which is most knowable (for he who

chooses to know for the sake of knowing will choose most readily that which

is most truly knowledge, and such is the knowledge of that which is most

knowable); and the first principles and the causes are most knowable; for by

reason of these, and from these, all other things come to be known, and not

these by means of the things subordinate to them. And the science which

knows to what end each thing must be done is the most authoritative of the

sciences, and more authoritative than any ancillary science; and this end is

the good of that thing, and in general the supreme good in the whole of

nature. Judged by all the tests we have mentioned, then, the name in question

falls to the same science; this must be a science that investigates the first

principles and causes; for the good, i.e. the end, is one of the causes.

That it is not a science of production is clear even from the history of the

earliest philosophers. For it is owing to their wonder that men both now begin

and at first began to philosophize; they wondered originally at the obvious

difficulties,  then  advanced  little  by  little  and  stated  difficulties  about  the

greater matters, e.g. about the phenomena of the moon and those of the sun

and of the stars, and about the genesis of the universe. And a man who is

puzzled and wonders thinks himself ignorant (whence even the lover of myth

is in a sense a lover of Wisdom, for the myth is composed of wonders);

therefore since they philosophized order to escape from ignorance, evidently

they were pursuing science in order to know, and not for any utilitarian end.

And this is confirmed by the facts; for it was when almost all the necessities

of life and the things that make for comfort and recreation had been secured,

that such knowledge began to be sought. Evidently then we do not seek it for

the sake of any other advantage; but as the man is free, we say, who exists for

his own sake and not for another’s, so we pursue this as the only free science,

for it alone exists for its own sake.

  Hence also the possession of it might be justly regarded as beyond human

power; for in many ways human nature is in bondage, so that according toSimonides ‘God alone can have this privilege’, and it is unfitting that man

should not be content to seek the knowledge that is suited to him. If, then,

there is something in what the poets say, and jealousy is natural to the divine

power, it would probably occur in this case above all, and all who excelled in

this knowledge would be unfortunate. But the divine power cannot be jealous

(nay, according to the proverb, ‘bards tell a lie’), nor should any other science

be thought more honourable than one of this sort. For the most divine science

is also most honourable; and this science alone must be, in two ways, most

divine. For the science which it would be most meet for God to have is a

divine science, and so is any science that deals with divine objects; and this

science alone has both these qualities; for (1) God is thought to be among the

causes of all things and to be a first principle, and (2) such a science either

God alone can have, or God above all others. All the sciences, indeed, are

more necessary than this, but none is better.

Yet the acquisition of it must in a sense end in something which is the

opposite  of  our  original  inquiries.  For  all  men  begin,  as  we  said,  by

wondering  that  things  are  as  they  are,  as  they  do  about  self-moving

marionettes, or about the solstices or the incommensurability of the diagonal

of a square with the side; for it seems wonderful to all who have not yet seen

the  reason,  that  there  is  a  thing  which  cannot  be  measured  even  by  the

smallest unit. But we must end in the contrary and, according to the proverb,

the better state, as is the case in these instances too when men learn the cause;

for  there  is  nothing  which  would  surprise  a  geometer  so  much  as  if  the

diagonal turned out to be commensurable.

We have stated, then, what is the nature of the science we are searching

for, and what is the mark which our search and our whole investigation must

reach.

<

div id="section17" class="section" title="3">


3


  Evidently we have to acquire knowledge of the original causes (for we say

we know each thing only when we think we recognize its first cause), and

causes are spoken of in four senses. In one of these we mean the substance,

i.e. the essence (for the ‘why’ is reducible finally to the definition, and the

ultimate ‘why’ is a cause and principle); in another the matter or substratum,in a third the source of the change, and in a fourth the cause opposed to this,

the purpose and the good (for this is the end of all generation and change).

We have studied these causes sufficiently in our work on nature, but yet let us

call  to  our  aid  those  who  have  attacked  the  investigation  of  being  and

philosophized about reality before us. For obviously they too speak of certain

principles and causes; to go over their views, then, will be of profit to the

present inquiry, for we shall either find another kind of cause, or be more

convinced of the correctness of those which we now maintain.

Of the first philosophers, then, most thought the principles which were of

the nature of matter were the only principles of all things. That of which all

things that are consist, the first from which they come to be, the last into

which  they  are  resolved  (the  substance  remaining,  but  changing  in  its

modifications), this they say is the element and this the principle of things,

and therefore they think nothing is either generated or destroyed, since this

sort of entity is always conserved, as we say Socrates neither comes to be

absolutely when he comes to be beautiful or musical, nor ceases to be when

loses these characteristics, because the substratum, Socrates himself remains.

just so they say nothing else comes to be or ceases to be; for there must be

some entity-either one or more than one-from which all other things come to

be, it being conserved.

Yet  they  do  not  all  agree  as  to  the  number  and  the  nature  of  these

principles. Thales, the founder of this type of philosophy, says the principle is

water (for which reason he declared that the earth rests on water), getting the

notion perhaps from seeing that the nutriment of all things is moist, and that

heat itself is generated from the moist and kept alive by it (and that from

which they come to be is a principle of all things). He got his notion from this

fact, and from the fact that the seeds of all things have a moist nature, and

that water is the origin of the nature of moist things.

  Some  think  that  even  the  ancients  who  lived  long  before  the  present

generation,  and  first  framed  accounts  of  the  gods,  had  a  similar  view  of

nature;  for  they  made  Ocean  and  Tethys  the  parents  of  creation,  and

described the oath of the gods as being by water, to which they give the name

of Styx; for what is oldest is most honourable, and the most honourable thing

is that by which one swears. It may perhaps be uncertain whether this opinion

about nature is primitive and ancient, but Thales at any rate is said to have

declared himself thus about the first cause. Hippo no one would think fit to

include among these thinkers, because of the paltriness of his thought.  Anaximenes and Diogenes make air prior to water, and the most primary

of  the  simple  bodies,  while  Hippasus  of  Metapontium  and  Heraclitus  of

Ephesus say this of fire, and Empedocles says it of the four elements (adding

a fourth-earth-to those which have been named); for these, he says, always

remain and do not come to be, except that they come to be more or fewer,

being aggregated into one and segregated out of one.

  Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, who, though older than Empedocles, was later

in his philosophical activity, says the principles are infinite in number; for he

says  almost  all  the  things  that  are  made  of  parts  like  themselves,  in  the

manner of water or fire, are generated and destroyed in this way, only by

aggregation  and  segregation,  and  are  not  in  any  other  sense  generated  or

destroyed, but remain eternally.

  From  these  facts  one  might  think  that  the  only  cause  is  the  so-called

material cause; but as men thus advanced, the very facts opened the way for

them and joined in forcing them to investigate the subject. However true it

may be that all generation and destruction proceed from some one or (for that

matter) from more elements, why does this happen and what is the cause? For

at least the substratum itself does not make itself change; e.g. neither the

wood nor the bronze causes the change of either of them, nor does the wood

manufacture a bed and the bronze a statue, but something else is the cause of

the change. And to seek this is to seek the second cause, as we should say,-

that from which comes the beginning of the movement. Now those who at the

very beginning set themselves to this kind of inquiry, and said the substratum

was one, were not at all dissatisfied with themselves; but some at least of

those who maintain it to be one-as though defeated by this search for the

second cause-say the one and nature as a whole is unchangeable not only in

respect of generation and destruction (for this is a primitive belief, and all

agreed in it), but also of all other change; and this view is peculiar to them.

Of those who said the universe was one, then none succeeded in discovering

a cause of this sort, except perhaps Parmenides, and he only inasmuch as he

supposes that there is not only one but also in some sense two causes. But for

those who make more elements it is more possible to state the second cause,

e.g. for those who make hot and cold, or fire and earth, the elements; for they

treat fire as having a nature which fits it to move things, and water and earth

and such things they treat in the contrary way.

  When these men and the principles of this kind had had their day, as the

latter were found inadequate to generate the nature of things men were againforced by the truth itself, as we said, to inquire into the next kind of cause.

For it is not likely either that fire or earth or any such element should be the

reason why things manifest goodness and, beauty both in their being and in

their coming to be, or that those thinkers should have supposed it was; nor

again could it be right to entrust so great a matter to spontaneity and chance.

When  one  man  said,  then,  that  reason  was  present-as  in  animals,  so

throughout nature-as the cause of order and of all arrangement, he seemed

like a sober man in contrast with the random talk of his predecessors. We

know  that  Anaxagoras  certainly  adopted  these  views,  but  Hermotimus  of

Clazomenae is credited with expressing them earlier. Those who thought thus

stated that there is a principle of things which is at the same time the cause of

beauty, and that sort of cause from which things acquire movement.

<

div id="section18" class="section" title="4">


4


One might suspect that Hesiod was the first to look for such a thing-or

some one else who put love or desire among existing things as a principle, as

Parmenides, too, does; for he, in constructing the genesis of the universe,

says:—


  Love first of all the Gods she planned.


And Hesiod says:—


First of all things was chaos made, and then

  Broad-breasted earth…

And love, ‘mid all the gods pre-eminent,


  which implies that among existing things there must be from the first a

cause which will move things and bring them together. How these thinkers

should be arranged with regard to priority of discovery let us be allowed to

decide later; but since the contraries of the various forms of good were also

perceived to be present in nature-not only order and the beautiful, but also

disorder  and  the  ugly,  and  bad  things  in  greater  number  than  good,  and

ignoble things than beautiful-therefore another thinker introduced friendshipand strife, each of the two the cause of one of these two sets of qualities. For

if we were to follow out the view of Empedocles, and interpret it according to

its meaning and not to its lisping expression, we should find that friendship is

the  cause  of  good  things,  and  strife  of  bad.  Therefore,  if  we  said  that

Empedocles in a sense both mentions, and is the first to mention, the bad and

the good as principles, we should perhaps be right, since the cause of all

goods is the good itself.

  These thinkers, as we say, evidently grasped, and to this extent, two of the

causes  which  we  distinguished  in  our  work  on  nature-the  matter  and  the

source  of  the  movement-vaguely,  however,  and  with  no  clearness,  but  as

untrained men behave in fights; for they go round their opponents and often

strike fine blows, but they do not fight on scientific principles, and so too

these thinkers do not seem to know what they say; for it is evident that, as a

rule,  they  make  no  use  of  their  causes  except  to  a  small  extent.  For

Anaxagoras uses reason as a deus ex machina for the making of the world,

and when he is at a loss to tell from what cause something necessarily is, then

he drags reason in, but in all other cases ascribes events to anything rather

than to reason. And Empedocles, though he uses the causes to a greater extent

than this, neither does so sufficiently nor attains consistency in their use. At

least, in many cases he makes love segregate things, and strife aggregate

them. For whenever the universe is dissolved into its elements by strife, fire

is aggregated into one, and so is each of the other elements; but whenever

again under the influence of love they come together into one, the parts must

again be segregated out of each element.

  Empedocles, then, in contrast with his precessors, was the first to introduce

the dividing of this cause, not positing one source of movement, but different

and  contrary  sources.  Again,  he  was  the  first  to  speak  of  four  material

elements; yet he does not use four, but treats them as two only; he treats fire

by itself, and its opposite-earth, air, and water-as one kind of thing. We may

learn this by study of his verses.

This philosopher then, as we say, has spoken of the principles in this way,

and made them of this number. Leucippus and his associate Democritus say

that the full and the empty are the elements, calling the one being and the

other non-being-the full and solid being being, the empty non-being (whence

they say being no more is than non-being, because the solid no more is than

the empty); and they make these the material causes of things. And as those

who  make  the  underlying  substance  one  generate  all  other  things  by  itsmodifications,  supposing  the  rare  and  the  dense  to  be  the  sources  of  the

modifications, in the same way these philosophers say the differences in the

elements are the causes of all other qualities. These differences, they say, are

three-shape and order and position. For they say the real is differentiated only

by ‘rhythm and ‘inter-contact’ and ‘turning’; and of these rhythm is shape,

inter-contact is order, and turning is position; for A differs from N in shape,

AN from NA in order, M from W in position. The question of movement-

whence or how it is to belong to things-these thinkers, like the others, lazily

neglected.

  Regarding the two causes, then, as we say, the inquiry seems to have been

pushed thus far by the early philosophers.

<

div id="section19" class="section" title="5">


5


  Contemporaneously with these philosophers and before them, the so-called

Pythagoreans, who were the first to take up mathematics, not only advanced

this study, but also having been brought up in it they thought its principles

were the principles of all things. Since of these principles numbers are by

nature the first, and in numbers they seemed to see many resemblances to the

things that exist and come into being-more than in fire and earth and water

(such and such a modification of numbers being justice, another being soul

and reason, another being opportunity-and similarly almost all other things

being numerically expressible); since, again, they saw that the modifications

and the ratios of the musical scales were expressible in numbers;-since, then,

all other things seemed in their whole nature to be modelled on numbers, and

numbers seemed to be the first things in the whole of nature, they supposed

the  elements  of  numbers  to  be  the  elements  of  all  things,  and  the  whole

heaven to be a musical scale and a number. And all the properties of numbers

and scales which they could show to agree with the attributes and parts and

the whole arrangement of the heavens, they collected and fitted into their

scheme; and if there was a gap anywhere, they readily made additions so as

to make their whole theory coherent. E.g. as the number 10 is thought to be

perfect and to comprise the whole nature of numbers, they say that the bodies

which move through the heavens are ten, but as the visible bodies are only

nine, to meet this they invent a tenth—the ‘counter-earth’. We have discussedthese matters more exactly elsewhere.

But the object of our review is that we may learn from these philosophers

also what they suppose to be the principles and how these fall under the

causes  we  have  named.  Evidently,  then,  these  thinkers  also  consider  that

number is the principle both as matter for things and as forming both their

modifications  and  their  permanent  states,  and  hold  that  the  elements  of

number are the even and the odd, and that of these the latter is limited, and

the former unlimited; and that the One proceeds from both of these (for it is

both even and odd), and number from the One; and that the whole heaven, as

has been said, is numbers.

  Other members of this same school say there are ten principles, which they

arrange in two columns of cognates-limit and unlimited, odd and even, one

and plurality, right and left, male and female, resting and moving, straight

and curved, light and darkness, good and bad, square and oblong. In this way

Alcmaeon of Croton seems also to have conceived the matter, and either he

got this view from them or they got it from him; for he expressed himself

similarly to them. For he says most human affairs go in pairs, meaning not

definite  contrarieties  such  as  the  Pythagoreans  speak  of,  but  any  chance

contrarieties, e.g. white and black, sweet and bitter, good and bad, great and

small. He threw out indefinite suggestions about the other contrarieties, but

the Pythagoreans declared both how many and which their contraricties are.

  From both these schools, then, we can learn this much, that the contraries

are the principles of things; and how many these principles are and which

they are, we can learn from one of the two schools. But how these principles

can be brought together under the causes we have named has not been clearly

and articulately stated by them; they seem, however, to range the elements

under  the  head  of  matter;  for  out  of  these  as  immanent  parts  they  say

substance is composed and moulded.

  From these facts we may sufficiently perceive the meaning of the ancients

who said the elements of nature were more than one; but there are some who

spoke of the universe as if it were one entity, though they were not all alike

either in the excellence of their statement or in its conformity to the facts of

nature.  The  discussion  of  them  is  in  no  way  appropriate  to  our  present

investigation  of  causes,  for.  they  do  not,  like  some  of  the  natural

philosophers, assume being to be one and yet generate it out of the one as out

of matter, but they speak in another way; those others add change, since they

generate the universe, but these thinkers say the universe is unchangeable.Yet this much is germane to the present inquiry: Parmenides seems to fasten

on that which is one in definition, Melissus on that which is one in matter, for

which reason the former says that it is limited, the latter that it is unlimited;

while Xenophanes, the first of these partisans of the One (for Parmenides is

said to have been his pupil), gave no clear statement, nor does he seem to

have grasped the nature of either of these causes, but with reference to the

whole material universe he says the One is God. Now these thinkers, as we

said, must be neglected for the purposes of the present inquiry-two of them

entirely,  as  being  a  little  too  naive,  viz.  Xenophanes  and  Melissus;  but

Parmenides seems in places to speak with more insight. For, claiming that,

besides the existent, nothing non-existent exists, he thinks that of necessity

one thing exists, viz. the existent and nothing else (on this we have spoken

more clearly in our work on nature), but being forced to follow the observed

facts, and supposing the existence of that which is one in definition, but more

than  one  according  to  our  sensations,  he  now  posits  two  causes  and  two

principles,  calling  them  hot  and  cold,  i.e.  fire  and  earth;  and  of  these  he

ranges the hot with the existent, and the other with the non-existent.

  From what has been said, then, and from the wise men who have now sat

in council with us, we have got thus much-on the one hand from the earliest

philosophers, who regard the first principle as corporeal (for water and fire

and such things are bodies), and of whom some suppose that there is one

corporeal principle, others that there are more than one, but both put these

under the head of matter; and on the other hand from some who posit both

this cause and besides this the source of movement, which we have got from

some as single and from others as twofold.

  Down  to  the  Italian  school,  then,  and  apart  from  it,  philosophers  have

treated these subjects rather obscurely, except that, as we said, they have in

fact used two kinds of cause, and one of these-the source of movement-some

treat as one and others as two. But the Pythagoreans have said in the same

way that there are two principles, but added this much, which is peculiar to

them, that they thought that finitude and infinity were not attributes of certain

other things, e.g. of fire or earth or anything else of this kind, but that infinity

itself  and  unity  itself  were  the  substance  of  the  things  of  which  they  are

predicated.  This  is  why  number  was  the  substance  of  all  things.  On  this

subject, then, they expressed themselves thus; and regarding the question of

essence they began to make statements and definitions, but treated the matter

too  simply.  For  they  both  defined  superficially  and  thought  that  the  firstsubject of which a given definition was predicable was the substance of the

thing  defined,  as  if  one  supposed  that  ‘double’  and  ‘2’  were  the  same,

because 2 is the first thing of which ‘double’ is predicable. But surely to be

double and to be 2 are not the same; if they are, one thing will be many-a

consequence which they actually drew. From the earlier philosophers, then,

and from their successors we can learn thus much.

<

div id="section20" class="section" title="6">


6


  After the systems we have named came the philosophy of Plato, which in

most respects followed these thinkers, but had pecullarities that distinguished

it from the philosophy of the Italians. For, having in his youth first become

familiar with Cratylus and with the Heraclitean doctrines (that all sensible

things are ever in a state of flux and there is no knowledge about them), these

views he held even in later years. Socrates, however, was busying himself

about  ethical  matters  and  neglecting  the  world  of  nature  as  a  whole  but

seeking the universal in these ethical matters, and fixed thought for the first

time on definitions; Plato accepted his teaching, but held that the problem

applied not to sensible things but to entities of another kind-for this reason,

that the common definition could not be a definition of any sensible thing, as

they were always changing. Things of this other sort, then, he called Ideas,

and sensible things, he said, were all named after these, and in virtue of a

relation to these; for the many existed by participation in the Ideas that have

the  same  name  as  they.  Only  the  name  ‘participation’  was  new;  for  the

Pythagoreans say that things exist by ‘imitation’ of numbers, and Plato says

they exist by participation, changing the name. But what the participation or

the imitation of the Forms could be they left an open question.

  Further, besides sensible things and Forms he says there are the objects of

mathematics, which occupy an intermediate position, differing from sensible

things in being eternal and unchangeable, from Forms in that there are many

alike, while the Form itself is in each case unique.

  Since  the  Forms  were  the  causes  of  all  other  things,  he  thought  their

elements were the elements of all things. As matter, the great and the small

were principles; as essential reality, the One; for from the great and the small,

by participation in the One, come the Numbers.But he agreed with the Pythagoreans in saying that the One is substance

and not a predicate of something else; and in saying that the Numbers are the

causes of the reality of other things he agreed with them; but positing a dyad

and constructing the infinite out of great and small, instead of treating the

infinite as one, is peculiar to him; and so is his view that the Numbers exist

apart  from  sensible  things,  while  they  say  that  the  things  themselves  are

Numbers, and do not place the objects of mathematics between Forms and

sensible things. His divergence from the Pythagoreans in making the One and

the Numbers separate from things, and his introduction of the Forms, were

due to his inquiries in the region of definitions (for the earlier thinkers had no

tincture of dialectic), and his making the other entity besides the One a dyad

was due to the belief that the numbers, except those which were prime, could

be neatly produced out of the dyad as out of some plastic material. Yet what

happens is the contrary; the theory is not a reasonable one. For they make

many things out of the matter, and the form generates only once, but what we

observe is that one table is made from one matter, while the man who applies

the form, though he is one, makes many tables. And the relation of the male

to the female is similar; for the latter is impregnated by one copulation, but

the male impregnates many females; yet these are analogues of those first

principles.

Plato, then, declared himself thus on the points in question; it is evident

from what has been said that he has used only two causes, that of the essence

and the material cause (for the Forms are the causes of the essence of all

other things, and the One is the cause of the essence of the Forms); and it is

evident what the underlying matter is, of which the Forms are predicated in

the case of sensible things, and the One in the case of Forms, viz. that this is a

dyad, the great and the small. Further, he has assigned the cause of good and

that of evil to the elements, one to each of the two, as we say some of his

predecessors sought to do, e.g. Empedocles and Anaxagoras.

<

div id="section21" class="section" title="7">


7


Our review of those who have spoken about first principles and reality and

of the way in which they have spoken, has been concise and summary; but

yet  we  have  learnt  this  much  from  them,  that  of  those  who  speak  about‘principle’  and  ‘cause’  no  one  has  mentioned  any  principle  except  those

which have been distinguished in our work on nature, but all evidently have

some  inkling  of  them,  though  only  vaguely.  For  some  speak  of  the  first

principle as matter, whether they suppose one or more first principles, and

whether they suppose this to be a body or to be incorporeal; e.g. Plato spoke

of the great and the small, the Italians of the infinite, Empedocles of fire,

earth, water, and air, Anaxagoras of the infinity of things composed of similar

parts. These, then, have all had a notion of this kind of cause, and so have all

who speak of air or fire or water, or something denser than fire and rarer than

air; for some have said the prime element is of this kind.

  These thinkers grasped this cause only; but certain others have mentioned

the source of movement, e.g. those who make friendship and strife, or reason,

or love, a principle.

The essence, i.e. the substantial reality, no one has expressed distinctly. It

is  hinted  at  chiefly  by  those  who  believe  in  the  Forms;  for  they  do  not

suppose either that the Forms are the matter of sensible things, and the One

the matter of the Forms, or that they are the source of movement (for they say

these are causes rather of immobility and of being at rest), but they furnish

the Forms as the essence of every other thing, and the One as the essence of

the Forms.

That for whose sake actions and changes and movements take place, they

assert to be a cause in a way, but not in this way, i.e. not in the way in which

it is its nature to be a cause. For those who speak of reason or friendship class

these causes as goods; they do not speak, however, as if anything that exists

either existed or came into being for the sake of these, but as if movements

started from these. In the same way those who say the One or the existent is

the good, say that it is the cause of substance, but not that substance either is

or comes to be for the sake of this. Therefore it turns out that in a sense they

both say and do not say the good is a cause; for they do not call it a cause qua

good but only incidentally.

All these thinkers then, as they cannot pitch on another cause, seem to

testify that we have determined rightly both how many and of what sort the

causes are. Besides this it is plain that when the causes are being looked for,

either all four must be sought thus or they must be sought in one of these four

ways. Let us next discuss the possible difficulties with regard to the way in

which each of these thinkers has spoken, and with regard to his situation

relatively to the first principles.<

div id="section22" class="section" title="8">


8


  Those, then, who say the universe is one and posit one kind of thing as

matter, and as corporeal matter which has spatial magnitude, evidently go

astray  in  many  ways.  For  they  posit  the  elements  of  bodies  only,  not  of

incorporeal things, though there are also incorporeal things. And in trying to

state  the  causes  of  generation  and  destruction,  and  in  giving  a  physical

account of all things, they do away with the cause of movement. Further, they

err in not positing the substance, i.e. the essence, as the cause of anything,

and besides this in lightly calling any of the simple bodies except earth the

first principle, without inquiring how they are produced out of one anothers-I

mean fire, water, earth, and air. For some things are produced out of each

other  by  combination,  others  by  separation,  and  this  makes  the  greatest

difference to their priority and posteriority. For (1) in a way the property of

being most elementary of all would seem to belong to the first thing from

which they are produced by combination, and this property would belong to

the most fine-grained and subtle of bodies. For this reason those who make

fire the principle would be most in agreement with this argument. But each of

the other thinkers agrees that the element of corporeal things is of this sort. At

least  none  of  those  who  named  one  element  claimed  that  earth  was  the

element, evidently because of the coarseness of its grain. (Of the other three

elements each has found some judge on its side; for some maintain that fire,

others that water, others that air is the element. Yet why, after all, do they not

name earth also, as most men do? For people say all things are earth Hesiod

says earth was produced first of corporeal things; so primitive and popular

has the opinion been.) According to this argument, then, no one would be

right who either says the first principle is any of the elements other than fire,

or supposes it to be denser than air but rarer than water. But (2) if that which

is  later  in  generation  is  prior  in  nature,  and  that  which  is  concocted  and

compounded is later in generation, the contrary of what we have been saying

must be true,-water must be prior to air, and earth to water.

So much, then, for those who posit one cause such as we mentioned; but

the same is true if one supposes more of these, as Empedocles says matter of

things  is  four  bodies.  For  he  too  is  confronted  by  consequences  some  ofwhich are the same as have been mentioned, while others are peculiar to him.

For we see these bodies produced from one another, which implies that the

same body does not always remain fire or earth (we have spoken about this in

our works on nature); and regarding the cause of movement and the question

whether we must posit one or two, he must be thought to have spoken neither

correctly  nor  altogether  plausibly.  And  in  general,  change  of  quality  is

necessarily done away with for those who speak thus, for on their view cold

will  not  come  from  hot  nor  hot  from  cold.  For  if  it  did  there  would  be

something that accepted the contraries themselves, and there would be some

one entity that became fire and water, which Empedocles denies.

As regards Anaxagoras, if one were to suppose that he said there were two

elements, the supposition would accord thoroughly with an argument which

Anaxagoras  himself  did  not  state  articulately,  but  which  he  must  have

accepted if any one had led him on to it. True, to say that in the beginning all

things were mixed is absurd both on other grounds and because it follows that

they must have existed before in an unmixed form, and because nature does

not allow any chance thing to be mixed with any chance thing, and also

because on this view modifications and accidents could be separated from

substances (for the same things which are mixed can be separated); yet if one

were to follow him up, piecing together what he means, he would perhaps be

seen to be somewhat modern in his views. For when nothing was separated

out,  evidently  nothing  could  be  truly  asserted  of  the  substance  that  then

existed. I mean, e.g. that it was neither white nor black, nor grey nor any

other colour, but of necessity colourless; for if it had been coloured, it would

have had one of these colours. And similarly, by this same argument, it was

flavourless, nor had it any similar attribute; for it could not be either of any

quality or of any size, nor could it be any definite kind of thing. For if it were,

one of the particular forms would have belonged to it, and this is impossible,

since all were mixed together; for the particular form would necessarily have

been already separated out, but he all were mixed except reason, and this

alone was unmixed and pure. From this it follows, then, that he must say the

principles are the One (for this is simple and unmixed) and the Other, which

is of such a nature as we suppose the indefinite to be before it is defined and

partakes of some form. Therefore, while expressing himself neither rightly

nor clearly, he means something like what the later thinkers say and what is

now more clearly seen to be the case.

But  these  thinkers  are,  after  all,  at  home  only  in  arguments  aboutgeneration and destruction and movement; for it is practically only of this

sort of substance that they seek the principles and the causes. But those who

extend their vision to all things that exist, and of existing things suppose

some  to  be  perceptible  and  others  not  perceptible,  evidently  study  both

classes, which is all the more reason why one should devote some time to

seeing what is good in their views and what bad from the standpoint of the

inquiry we have now before us.

The ‘Pythagoreans’ treat of principles and elements stranger than those of

the physical philosophers (the reason is that they got the principles from non-

sensible things, for the objects of mathematics, except those of astronomy,

are  of  the  class  of  things  without  movement);  yet  their  discussions  and

investigations are all about nature; for they generate the heavens, and with

regard to their parts and attributes and functions they observe the phenomena,

and use up the principles and the causes in explaining these, which implies

that they agree with the others, the physical philosophers, that the real is just

all that which is perceptible and contained by the so-called ‘heavens’. But the

causes and the principles which they mention are, as we said, sufficient to act

as steps even up to the higher realms of reality, and are more suited to these

than to theories about nature. They do not tell us at all, however, how there

can be movement if limit and unlimited and odd and even are the only things

assumed, or how without movement and change there can be generation and

destruction, or the bodies that move through the heavens can do what they do.

  Further, if one either granted them that spatial magnitude consists of these

elements,  or  this  were  proved,  still  how  would  some  bodies  be  light  and

others have weight? To judge from what they assume and maintain they are

speaking no more of mathematical bodies than of perceptible; hence they

have said nothing whatever about fire or earth or the other bodies of this sort,

I  suppose  because  they  have  nothing  to  say  which  applies  peculiarly  to

perceptible things.

  Further, how are we to combine the beliefs that the attributes of number,

and number itself, are causes of what exists and happens in the heavens both

from the beginning and now, and that there is no other number than this

number out of which the world is composed? When in one particular region

they place opinion and opportunity, and, a little above or below, injustice and

decision or mixture, and allege, as proof, that each of these is a number, and

that  there  happens  to  be  already  in  this  place  a  plurality  of  the  extended

bodies composed of numbers, because these attributes of number attach to thevarious places,-this being so, is this number, which we must suppose each of

these abstractions to be, the same number which is exhibited in the material

universe, or is it another than this? Plato says it is different; yet even he

thinks  that  both  these  bodies  and  their  causes  are  numbers,  but  that  the

intelligible numbers are causes, while the others are sensible.

<

div id="section23" class="section" title="9">


9


Let us leave the Pythagoreans for the present; for it is enough to have

touched on them as much as we have done. But as for those who posit the

Ideas as causes, firstly, in seeking to grasp the causes of the things around us,

they introduced others equal in number to these, as if a man who wanted to

count things thought he would not be able to do it while they were few, but

tried to count them when he had added to their number. For the Forms are

practically equal to-or not fewer than-the things, in trying to explain which

these thinkers proceeded from them to the Forms. For to each thing there

answers  an  entity  which  has  the  same  name  and  exists  apart  from  the

substances, and so also in the case of all other groups there is a one over

many, whether the many are in this world or are eternal.

  Further,  of  the  ways  in  which  we  prove  that  the  Forms  exist,  none  is

convincing; for from some no inference necessarily follows, and from some

arise  Forms  even  of  things  of  which  we  think  there  are  no  Forms.  For

according to the arguments from the existence of the sciences there will be

Forms of all things of which there are sciences and according to the ‘one over

many’ argument there will be Forms even of negations, and according to the

argument that there is an object for thought even when the thing has perished,

there will be Forms of perishable things; for we have an image of these.

Further, of the more accurate arguments, some lead to Ideas of relations, of

which we say there is no independent class, and others introduce the ‘third

man’.

And in general the arguments for the Forms destroy the things for whose

existence  we  are  more  zealous  than  for  the  existence  of  the  Ideas;  for  it

follows that not the dyad but number is first, i.e. that the relative is prior to

the  absolute,-besides  all  the  other  points  on  which  certain  people  by

following out the opinions held about the Ideas have come into conflict withthe principles of the theory.

  Further, according to the assumption on which our belief in the Ideas rests,

there will be Forms not only of substances but also of many other things (for

the concept is single not only in the case of substances but also in the other

cases, and there are sciences not only of substance but also of other things,

and a thousand other such difficulties confront them). But according to the

necessities of the case and the opinions held about the Forms, if Forms can be

shared in there must be Ideas of substances only. For they are not shared in

incidentally, but a thing must share in its Form as in something not predicated

of a subject (by ‘being shared in incidentally’ I mean that e.g. if a thing

shares  in  ‘double  itself’,  it  shares  also  in  ‘eternal’,  but  incidentally;  for

‘eternal’ happens to be predicable of the ‘double’). Therefore the Forms will

be substance; but the same terms indicate substance in this and in the ideal

world (or what will be the meaning of saying that there is something apart

from the particulars-the one over many?). And if the Ideas and the particulars

that share in them have the same form, there will be something common to

these; for why should ‘2’ be one and the same in the perishable 2’s or in

those which are many but eternal, and not the same in the ‘2’ itself’ as in the

particular 2? But if they have not the same form, they must have only the

name in common, and it is as if one were to call both Callias and a wooden

image a ‘man’, without observing any community between them.

  Above  all  one  might  discuss  the  question  what  on  earth  the  Forms

contribute to sensible things, either to those that are eternal or to those that

come into being and cease to be. For they cause neither movement nor any

change in them. But again they help in no wise either towards the knowledge

of the other things (for they are not even the substance of these, else they

would  have  been  in  them),  or  towards  their  being,  if  they  are  not  in  the

particulars which share in them; though if they were, they might be thought

to be causes, as white causes whiteness in a white object by entering into its

composition. But this argument, which first Anaxagoras and later Eudoxus

and certain others used, is very easily upset; for it is not difficult to collect

many insuperable objections to such a view.

But, further, all other things cannot come from the Forms in any of the

usual senses of ‘from’. And to say that they are patterns and the other things

share in them is to use empty words and poetical metaphors. For what is it

that works, looking to the Ideas? And anything can either be, or become, like

another without being copied from it, so that whether Socrates or not a manSocrates  like  might  come  to  be;  and  evidently  this  might  be  so  even  if

Socrates were eternal. And there will be several patterns of the same thing,

and therefore several Forms; e.g. ‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’ and also ‘man

himself’  will  be  Forms  of  man.  Again,  the  Forms  are  patterns  not  only

sensible things, but of Forms themselves also; i.e. the genus, as genus of

various species, will be so; therefore the same thing will be pattern and copy.

  Again, it would seem impossible that the substance and that of which it is

the substance should exist apart; how, therefore, could the Ideas, being the

substances of things, exist apart? In the Phaedo’ the case is stated in this way-

that the Forms are causes both of being and of becoming; yet when the Forms

exist, still the things that share in them do not come into being, unless there is

something to originate movement; and many other things come into being

(e.g.  a  house  or  a  ring)  of  which  we  say  there  are  no  Forms.  Clearly,

therefore, even the other things can both be and come into being owing to

such causes as produce the things just mentioned.

  Again, if the Forms are numbers, how can they be causes? Is it because

existing  things  are  other  numbers,  e.g.  one  number  is  man,  another  is

Socrates, another Callias? Why then are the one set of numbers causes of the

other set? It will not make any difference even if the former are eternal and

the  latter  are  not.  But  if  it  is  because  things  in  this  sensible  world  (e.g.

harmony) are ratios of numbers, evidently the things between which they are

ratios  are  some  one  class  of  things.  If,  then,  this—the  matter—is  some

definite  thing,  evidently  the  numbers  themselves  too  will  be  ratios  of

something to something else. E.g. if Callias is a numerical ratio between fire

and earth and water and air, his Idea also will be a number of certain other

underlying things; and man himself, whether it is a number in a sense or not,

will still be a numerical ratio of certain things and not a number proper, nor

will it be a of number merely because it is a numerical ratio.

  Again, from many numbers one number is produced, but how can one

Form come from many Forms? And if the number comes not from the many

numbers themselves but from the units in them, e.g. in 10,000, how is it with

the units? If they are specifically alike, numerous absurdities will follow, and

also if they are not alike (neither the units in one number being themselves

like one another nor those in other numbers being all like to all); for in what

will they differ, as they are without quality? This is not a plausible view, nor

is it consistent with our thought on the matter.

  Further, they must set up a second kind of number (with which arithmeticdeals), and all the objects which are called ‘intermediate’ by some thinkers;

and how do these exist or from what principles do they proceed? Or why

must they be intermediate between the things in this sensible world and the

things-themselves?

  Further, the units in must each come from a prior but this is impossible.

  Further, why is a number, when taken all together, one?

  Again, besides what has been said, if the units are diverse the Platonists

should have spoken like those who say there are four, or two, elements; for

each  of  these  thinkers  gives  the  name  of  element  not  to  that  which  is

common,  e.g.  to  body,  but  to  fire  and  earth,  whether  there  is  something

common to them, viz. body, or not. But in fact the Platonists speak as if the

One were homogeneous like fire or water; and if this is so, the numbers will

not  be  substances.  Evidently,  if  there  is  a  One  itself  and  this  is  a  first

principle, ‘one’ is being used in more than one sense; for otherwise the theory

is impossible.

  When we wish to reduce substances to their principles, we state that lines

come from the short and long (i.e. from a kind of small and great), and the

plane from the broad and narrow, and body from the deep and shallow. Yet

how then can either the plane contain a line, or the solid a line or a plane? For

the  broad  and  narrow  is  a  different  class  from  the  deep  and  shallow.

Therefore, just as number is not present in these, because the many and few

are  different  from  these,  evidently  no  other  of  the  higher  classes  will  be

present in the lower. But again the broad is not a genus which includes the

deep, for then the solid would have been a species of plane. Further, from

what principle will the presence of the points in the line be derived? Plato

even used to object to this class of things as being a geometrical fiction. He

gave  the  name  of  principle  of  the  line-and  this  he  often  posited-to  the

indivisible lines. Yet these must have a limit; therefore the argument from

which the existence of the line follows proves also the existence of the point.

In general, though philosophy seeks the cause of perceptible things, we

have given this up (for we say nothing of the cause from which change takes

its  start),  but  while  we  fancy  we  are  stating  the  substance  of  perceptible

things, we assert the existence of a second class of substances, while our

account of the way in which they are the substances of perceptible things is

empty talk; for ‘sharing’, as we said before, means nothing.

Nor have the Forms any connexion with what we see to be the cause in the

case of the arts, that for whose sake both all mind and the whole of nature areoperative,-with this cause which we assert to be one of the first principles;

but  mathematics  has  come  to  be  identical  with  philosophy  for  modern

thinkers, though they say that it should be studied for the sake of other things.

Further,  one  might  suppose  that  the  substance  which  according  to  them

underlies as matter is too mathematical, and is a predicate and differentia of

the substance, ie. of the matter, rather than matter itself; i.e. the great and the

small are like the rare and the dense which the physical philosophers speak

of, calling these the primary differentiae of the substratum; for these are a

kind of excess and defect. And regarding movement, if the great and the

small are to he movement, evidently the Forms will be moved; but if they are

not to be movement, whence did movement come? The whole study of nature

has been annihilated.

And what is thought to be easy-to show that all things are one-is not done;

for what is proved by the method of setting out instances is not that all things

are one but that there is a One itself,-if we grant all the assumptions. And not

even this follows, if we do not grant that the universal is a genus; and this in

some cases it cannot be.

Nor can it be explained either how the lines and planes and solids that

come after the numbers exist or can exist, or what significance they have; for

these can neither be Forms (for they are not numbers), nor the intermediates

(for those are the objects of mathematics), nor the perishable things. This is

evidently a distinct fourth class.

In  general,  if  we  search  for  the  elements  of  existing  things  without

distinguishing the many senses in which things are said to exist, we cannot

find them, especially if the search for the elements of which things are made

is  conducted  in  this  manner.  For  it  is  surely  impossible  to  discover  what

‘acting’ or ‘being acted on’, or ‘the straight’, is made of, but if elements can

be discovered at all, it is only the elements of substances; therefore either to

seek the elements of all existing things or to think one has them is incorrect.

And how could we learn the elements of all things? Evidently we cannot

start by knowing anything before. For as he who is learning geometry, though

he may know other things before, knows none of the things with which the

science  deals  and  about  which  he  is  to  learn,  so  is  it  in  all  other  cases.

Therefore if there is a science of all things, such as some assert to exist, he

who is learning this will know nothing before. Yet all learning is by means of

premisses which are (either all or some of them) known before,-whether the

learning  be  by  demonstration  or  by  definitions;  for  the  elements  of  thedefinition must be known before and be familiar; and learning by induction

proceeds similarly. But again, if the science were actually innate, it were

strange that we are unaware of our possession of the greatest of sciences.

  Again, how is one to come to know what all things are made of, and how is

this to be made evident? This also affords a difficulty; for there might be a

conflict of opinion, as there is about certain syllables; some say za is made

out of s and d and a, while others say it is a distinct sound and none of those

that are familiar.

  Further, how could we know the objects of sense without having the sense

in question? Yet we ought to, if the elements of which all things consist, as

complex sounds consist of the clements proper to sound, are the same.

<

div id="section24" class="section" title="10">


10


It is evident, then, even from what we have said before, that all men seem

to seek the causes named in the Physics, and that we cannot name any beyond

these; but they seek these vaguely; and though in a sense they have all been

described  before,  in  a  sense  they  have  not  been  described  at  all.  For  the

earliest philosophy is, on all subjects, like one who lisps, since it is young and

in its beginnings. For even Empedocles says bone exists by virtue of the ratio

in it. Now this is the essence and the substance of the thing. But it is similarly

necessary that flesh and each of the other tissues should be the ratio of its

elements, or that not one of them should; for it is on account of this that both

flesh  and  bone  and  everything  else  will  exist,  and  not  on  account  of  the

matter, which he names,-fire and earth and water and air. But while he would

necessarily have agreed if another had said this, he has not said it clearly.

On these questions our views have been expressed before; but let us return

to enumerate the difficulties that might be raised on these same points; for

perhaps we may get from them some help towards our later difficulties.                                        Book II


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section25" class="section" title="1">


1


The  investigation  of  the  truth  is  in  one  way  hard,  in  another  easy.  An

indication of this is found in the fact that no one is able to attain the truth

adequately, while, on the other hand, we do not collectively fail, but every

one says something true about the nature of things, and while individually we

contribute little or nothing to the truth, by the union of all a considerable

amount is amassed. Therefore, since the truth seems to be like the proverbial

door, which no one can fail to hit, in this respect it must be easy, but the fact

that we can have a whole truth and not the particular part we aim at shows the

difficulty of it.

  Perhaps,  too,  as  difficulties  are  of  two  kinds,  the  cause  of  the  present

difficulty is not in the facts but in us. For as the eyes of bats are to the blaze

of day, so is the reason in our soul to the things which are by nature most

evident of all.

It is just that we should be grateful, not only to those with whose views we

may agree, but also to those who have expressed more superficial views; for

these  also  contributed  something,  by  developing  before  us  the  powers  of

thought. It is true that if there had been no Timotheus we should have been

without much of our lyric poetry; but if there had been no Phrynis there

would have been no Timotheus. The same holds good of those who have

expressed views about the truth; for from some thinkers we have inherited

certain opinions, while the others have been responsible for the appearance of

the former.

It is right also that philosophy should be called knowledge of the truth. For

the end of theoretical knowledge is truth, while that of practical knowledge is

action (for even if they consider how things are, practical men do not study

the eternal, but what is relative and in the present). Now we do not know atruth without its cause; and a thing has a quality in a higher degree than other

things if in virtue of it the similar quality belongs to the other things as well

(e.g. fire is the hottest of things; for it is the cause of the heat of all other

things); so that that causes derivative truths to be true is most true. Hence the

principles of eternal things must be always most true (for they are not merely

sometimes true, nor is there any cause of their being, but they themselves are

the cause of the being of other things), so that as each thing is in respect of

being, so is it in respect of truth.

<

div id="section26" class="section" title="2">


2


But evidently there is a first principle, and the causes of things are neither

an infinite series nor infinitely various in kind. For neither can one thing

proceed from another, as from matter, ad infinitum (e.g. flesh from earth,

earth from air, air from fire, and so on without stopping), nor can the sources

of movement form an endless series (man for instance being acted on by air,

air by the sun, the sun by Strife, and so on without limit). Similarly the final

causes cannot go on ad infinitum,-walking being for the sake of health, this

for the sake of happiness, happiness for the sake of something else, and so

one thing always for the sake of another. And the case of the essence is

similar. For in the case of intermediates, which have a last term and a term

prior to them, the prior must be the cause of the later terms. For if we had to

say which of the three is the cause, we should say the first; surely not the last,

for the final term is the cause of none; nor even the intermediate, for it is the

cause only of one. (It makes no difference whether there is one intermediate

or more, nor whether they are infinite or finite in number.) But of series

which are infinite in this way, and of the infinite in general, all the parts down

to that now present are alike intermediates; so that if there is no first there is

no cause at all.

Nor can there be an infinite process downwards, with a beginning in the

upward direction, so that water should proceed from fire, earth from water,

and so always some other kind should be produced. For one thing comes

from another in two ways-not in the sense in which ‘from’ means ‘after’ (as

we say ‘from the Isthmian games come the Olympian’), but either (i) as the

man comes from the boy, by the boy’s changing, or (ii) as air comes fromwater. By ‘as the man comes from the boy’ we mean ‘as that which has come

to be from that which is coming to be’ or ‘as that which is finished from that

which is being achieved’ (for as becoming is between being and not being, so

that which is becoming is always between that which is and that which is not;

for the learner is a man of science in the making, and this is what is meant

when we say that from a learner a man of science is being made); on the other

hand,  coming  from  another  thing  as  water  comes  from  air  implies  the

destruction of the other thing. This is why changes of the former kind are not

reversible, and the boy does not come from the man (for it is not that which

comes to be something that comes to be as a result of coming to be, but that

which exists after the coming to be; for it is thus that the day, too, comes

from the morning-in the sense that it comes after the morning; which is the

reason why the morning cannot come from the day); but changes of the other

kind are reversible. But in both cases it is impossible that the number of terms

should be infinite. For terms of the former kind, being intermediates, must

have an end, and terms of the latter kind change back into one another, for the

destruction of either is the generation of the other.

At the same time it is impossible that the first cause, being eternal, should

be destroyed; for since the process of becoming is not infinite in the upward

direction, that which is the first thing by whose destruction something came

to be must be non-eternal.

  Further, the final cause is an end, and that sort of end which is not for the

sake of something else, but for whose sake everything else is; so that if there

is to be a last term of this sort, the process will not be infinite; but if there is

no such term, there will be no final cause, but those who maintain the infinite

series eliminate the Good without knowing it (yet no one would try to do

anything if he were not going to come to a limit); nor would there be reason

in the world; the reasonable man, at least, always acts for a purpose, and this

is a limit; for the end is a limit.

But the essence, also, cannot be reduced to another definition which is

fuller in expression. For the original definition is always more of a definition,

and not the later one; and in a series in which the first term has not the

required character, the next has not it either. Further, those who speak thus

destroy  science;  for  it  is  not  possible  to  have  this  till  one  comes  to  the

unanalysable terms. And knowledge becomes impossible; for how can one

apprehend things that are infinite in this way? For this is not like the case of

the line, to whose divisibility there is no stop, but which we cannot think ifwe do not make a stop (for which reason one who is tracing the infinitely

divisible line cannot be counting the possibilities of section), but the whole

line also must be apprehended by something in us that does not move from

part to part.-Again, nothing infinite can exist; and if it could, at least the

notion of infinity is not infinite.

But if the kinds of causes had been infinite in number, then also knowledge

would have been impossible; for we think we know, only when we have

ascertained the causes, that but that which is infinite by addition cannot be

gone through in a finite time.

<

div id="section27" class="section" title="3">


3


The effect which lectures produce on a hearer depends on his habits; for

we demand the language we are accustomed to, and that which is different

from  this  seems  not  in  keeping  but  somewhat  unintelligible  and  foreign

because of its unwontedness. For it is the customary that is intelligible. The

force of habit is shown by the laws, in which the legendary and childish

elements prevail over our knowledge about them, owing to habit. Thus some

people do not listen to a speaker unless he speaks mathematically, others

unless he gives instances, while others expect him to cite a poet as witness.

And some want to have everything done accurately, while others are annoyed

by accuracy, either because they cannot follow the connexion of thought or

because they regard it as pettifoggery. For accuracy has something of this

character,  so  that  as  in  trade  so  in  argument  some  people  think  it  mean.

Hence  one  must  be  already  trained  to  know  how  to  take  each  sort  of

argument, since it is absurd to seek at the same time knowledge and the way

of attaining knowledge; and it is not easy to get even one of the two.

The minute accuracy of mathematics is not to be demanded in all cases,

but only in the case of things which have no matter. Hence method is not that

of natural science; for presumably the whole of nature has matter. Hence we

must  inquire  first  what  nature  is:  for  thus  we  shall  also  see  what  natural

science  treats  of  (and  whether  it  belongs  to  one  science  or  to  more  to

investigate the causes and the principles of things).                                      Book III


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section28" class="section" title="1">


1


We must, with a view to the science which we are seeking, first recount the

subjects that should be first discussed. These include both the other opinions

that some have held on the first principles, and any point besides these that

happens  to  have  been  overlooked.  For  those  who  wish  to  get  clear  of

difficulties  it  is  advantageous  to  discuss  the  difficulties  well;  for  the

subsequent  free  play  of  thought  implies  the  solution  of  the  previous

difficulties, and it is not possible to untie a knot of which one does not know.

But the difficulty of our thinking points to a ‘knot’ in the object; for in so far

as our thought is in difficulties, it is in like case with those who are bound;

for  in  either  case  it  is  impossible  to  go  forward.  Hence  one  should  have

surveyed all the difficulties beforehand, both for the purposes we have stated

and because people who inquire without first stating the difficulties are like

those who do not know where they have to go; besides, a man does not

otherwise know even whether he has at any given time found what he is

looking for or not; for the end is not clear to such a man, while to him who

has first discussed the difficulties it is clear. Further, he who has heard all the

contending arguments, as if they were the parties to a case, must be in a better

position for judging.

The first problem concerns the subject which we discussed in our prefatory

remarks. It is this-(1) whether the investigation of the causes belongs to one

or to more sciences, and (2) whether such a science should survey only the

first principles of substance, or also the principles on which all men base their

proofs, e.g. whether it is possible at the same time to assert and deny one and

the same thing or not, and all other such questions; and (3) if the science in

question deals with substance, whether one science deals with all substances,

or more than one, and if more, whether all are akin, or some of them must becalled forms of Wisdom and the others something else. And (4) this itself is

also one of the things that must be discussed-whether sensible substances

alone should be said to exist or others also besides them, and whether these

others  are  of  one  kind  or  there  are  several  classes  of  substances,  as  is

supposed by those who believe both in Forms and in mathematical objects

intermediate between these and sensible things. Into these questions, then, as

we say, we must inquire, and also (5) whether our investigation is concerned

only  with  substances  or  also  with  the  essential  attributes  of  substances.

Further,  with  regard  to  the  same  and  other  and  like  and  unlike  and

contrariety, and with regard to prior and posterior and all other such terms

about which the dialecticians try to inquire, starting their investigation from

probable premises only,-whose business is it to inquire into all these? Further,

we must discuss the essential attributes of these themselves; and we must ask

not only what each of these is, but also whether one thing always has one

contrary. Again (6), are the principles and elements of things the genera, or

the parts present in each thing, into which it is divided; and (7) if they are the

genera, are they the genera that are predicated proximately of the individuals,

or the highest genera, e.g. is animal or man the first principle and the more

independent of the individual instance? And (8) we must inquire and discuss

especially whether there is, besides the matter, any thing that is a cause in

itself or not, and whether this can exist apart or not, and whether it is one or

more  in  number,  and  whether  there  is  something  apart  from  the  concrete

thing  (by  the  concrete  thing  I  mean  the  matter  with  something  already

predicated of it), or there is nothing apart, or there is something in some cases

though not in others, and what sort of cases these are. Again (9) we ask

whether the principles are limited in number or in kind, both those in the

definitions and those in the substratum; and (10) whether the principles of

perishable and of imperishable things are the same or different; and whether

they are all imperishable or those of perishable things are perishable. Further

(11) there is the question which is hardest of all and most perplexing, whether

unity and being, as the Pythagoreans and Plato said, are not attributes of

something else but the substance of existing things, or this is not the case, but

the substratum is something else,-as Empedocles says, love; as some one else

says, fire; while another says water or air. Again (12) we ask whether the

principles are universal or like individual things, and (13) whether they exist

potentially or actually, and further, whether they are potential or actual in any

other sense than in reference to movement; for these questions also wouldpresent much difficulty. Further (14), are numbers and lines and figures and

points a kind of substance or not, and if they are substances are they separate

from sensible things or present in them? With regard to all these matters not

only is it hard to get possession of the truth, but it is not easy even to think

out the difficulties well.

<

div id="section29" class="section" title="2">


2


(1) First then with regard to what we mentioned first, does it belong to one

or  to  more  sciences  to  investigate  all  the  kinds  of  causes?  How  could  it

belong to one science to recognize the principles if these are not contrary?

  Further, there are many things to which not all the principles pertain. For

how  can  a  principle  of  change  or  the  nature  of  the  good  exist  for

unchangeable things, since everything that in itself and by its own nature is

good is an end, and a cause in the sense that for its sake the other things both

come to be and are, and since an end or purpose is the end of some action,

and all actions imply change? So in the case of unchangeable things this

principle could not exist, nor could there be a good itself. This is why in

mathematics nothing is proved by means of this kind of cause, nor is there

any demonstration of this kind-’because it is better, or worse’; indeed no one

even  mentions  anything  of  the  kind.  And  so  for  this  reason  some  of  the

Sophists, e.g. Aristippus, used to ridicule mathematics; for in the arts (he

maintained), even in the industrial arts, e.g. in carpentry and cobbling, the

reason always given is ‘because it is better, or worse,’ but the mathematical

sciences take no account of goods and evils.

But if there are several sciences of the causes, and a different science for

each different principle, which of these sciences should be said to be that

which  we  seek,  or  which  of  the  people  who  possess  them  has  the  most

scientific knowledge of the object in question? The same thing may have all

the kinds of causes, e.g. the moving cause of a house is the art or the builder,

the final cause is the function it fulfils, the matter is earth and stones, and the

form is the definition. To judge from our previous discussion of the question

which of the sciences should be called Wisdom, there is reason for applying

the  name  to  each  of  them.  For  inasmuch  as  it  is  most  architectonic  and

authoritative  and  the  other  sciences,  like  slavewomen,  may  not  evencontradict  it,  the  science  of  the  end  and  of  the  good  is  of  the  nature  of

Wisdom (for the other things are for the sake of the end). But inasmuch as it

was described’ as dealing with the first causes and that which is in the highest

sense object of knowledge, the science of substance must be of the nature of

Wisdom. For since men may know the same thing in many ways, we say that

he who recognizes what a thing is by its being so and so knows more fully

than he who recognizes it by its not being so and so, and in the former class

itself  one  knows  more  fully  than  another,  and  he  knows  most  fully  who

knows what a thing is, not he who knows its quantity or quality or what it can

by nature do or have done to it. And further in all cases also we think that the

knowledge of each even of the things of which demonstration is possible is

present only when we know what the thing is, e.g. what squaring a rectangle

is, viz. that it is the finding of a mean; and similarly in all other cases. And

we know about becomings and actions and about every change when we

know the source of the movement; and this is other than and opposed to the

end. Therefore it would seem to belong to different sciences to investigate

these causes severally.

But (2), taking the starting-points of demonstration as well as the causes, it

is a disputable question whether they are the object of one science or of more

(by  the  starting-points  of  demonstration  I  mean  the  common  beliefs,  on

which all men base their proofs); e.g. that everything must be either affirmed

or denied, and that a thing cannot at the same time be and not be, and all

other such premisses:-the question is whether the same science deals with

them as with substance, or a different science, and if it is not one science,

which of the two must be identified with that which we now seek.-It is not

reasonable that these topics should be the object of one science; for why

should it be peculiarly appropriate to geometry or to any other science to

understand these matters? If then it belongs to every science alike, and cannot

belong to all, it is not peculiar to the science which investigates substances,

any more than to any other science, to know about these topics.-And, at the

same time, in what way can there be a science of the first principles? For we

are aware even now what each of them in fact is (at least even other sciences

use them as familiar); but if there is a demonstrative science which deals with

them, there will have to be an underlying kind, and some of them must be

demonstrable attributes and others must be axioms (for it is impossible that

there should be demonstration about all of them); for the demonstration must

start from certain premisses and be about a certain subject and prove certainattributes. Therefore it follows that all attributes that are proved must belong

to a single class; for all demonstrative sciences use the axioms.

But if the science of substance and the science which deals with the axioms

are different, which of them is by nature more authoritative and prior? The

axioms are most universal and are principles of all things. And if it is not the

business of the philosopher, to whom else will it belong to inquire what is

true and what is untrue about them?

(3) In general, do all substances fall under one science or under more than

one?  If  the  latter,  to  what  sort  of  substance  is  the  present  science  to  be

assigned?-On the other hand, it is not reasonable that one science should deal

with all. For then there would be one demonstrative science dealing with all

attributes. For ever demonstrative science investigates with regard to some

subject its essential attributes, starting from the common beliefs. Therefore to

investigate the essential attributes of one class of things, starting from one set

of  beliefs,  is  the  business  of  one  science.  For  the  subject  belongs  to  one

science, and the premisses belong to one, whether to the same or to another;

so  that  the  attributes  do  so  too,  whether  they  are  investigated  by  these

sciences or by one compounded out of them.

(5) Further, does our investigation deal with substances alone or also with

their attributes? I mean for instance, if the solid is a substance and so are lines

and planes, is it the business of the same science to know these and to know

the  attributes  of  each  of  these  classes  (the  attributes  about  which  the

mathematical sciences offer proofs), or of a different science? If of the same,

the  science  of  substance  also  must  be  a  demonstrative  science,  but  it  is

thought that there is no demonstration of the essence of things. And if of

another, what will be the science that investigates the attributes of substance?

This is a very difficult question.

(4) Further, must we say that sensible substances alone exist, or that there

are others besides these? And are substances of one kind or are there in fact

several kinds of substances, as those say who assert the existence both of the

Forms  and  of  the  intermediates,  with  which  they  say  the  mathematical

sciences deal?-The sense in which we say the Forms are both causes and self-

dependent substances has been explained in our first remarks about them;

while the theory presents difficulties in many ways, the most paradoxical

thing of all is the statement that there are certain things besides those in the

material universe, and that these are the same as sensible things except that

they are eternal while the latter are perishable. For they say there is a man-himself and a horse-itself and health-itself, with no further qualification,-a

procedure like that of the people who said there are gods, but in human form.

For they were positing nothing but eternal men, nor are the Platonists making

the Forms anything other than eternal sensible things.

  Further,  if  we  are  to  posit  besides  the  Forms  and  the  sensibles  the

intermediates between them, we shall have many difficulties. For clearly on

the same principle there will be lines besides the lines-themselves and the

sensible lines, and so with each of the other classes of things; so that since

astronomy is one of these mathematical sciences there will also be a heaven

besides the sensible heaven, and a sun and a moon (and so with the other

heavenly bodies) besides the sensible. Yet how are we to believe in these

things? It is not reasonable even to suppose such a body immovable, but to

suppose it moving is quite impossible.-And similarly with the things of which

optics and mathematical harmonics treat; for these also cannot exist apart

from the sensible things, for the same reasons. For if there are sensible things

and  sensations  intermediate  between  Form  and  individual,  evidently  there

will  also  be  animals  intermediate  between  animals-themselves  and  the

perishable animals.-We might also raise the question, with reference to which

kind of existing things we must look for these sciences of intermediates. If

geometry is to differ from mensuration only in this, that the latter deals with

things that we perceive, and the former with things that are not perceptible,

evidently  there  will  also  be  a  science  other  than  medicine,  intermediate

between medical-science-itself and this individual medical science, and so

with each of the other sciences. Yet how is this possible? There would have

to  be  also  healthy  things  besides  the  perceptible  healthy  things  and  the

healthy-itself.—And at the same time not even this is true, that mensuration

deals  with  perceptible  and  perishable  magnitudes;  for  then  it  would  have

perished when they perished.

But  on  the  other  hand  astronomy  cannot  be  dealing  with  perceptible

magnitudes nor with this heaven above us. For neither are perceptible lines

such lines as the geometer speaks of (for no perceptible thing is straight or

round  in  the  way  in  which  he  defines  ‘straight’  and  ‘round’;  for  a  hoop

touches a straight edge not at a point, but as Protagoras used to say it did, in

his refutation of the geometers), nor are the movements and spiral orbits in

the heavens like those of which astronomy treats, nor have geometrical points

the same nature as the actual stars.-Now there are some who say that these

so-called intermediates between the Forms and the perceptible things exist,not apart from the perceptible things, however, but in these; the impossible

results of this view would take too long to enumerate, but it is enough to

consider  even  such  points  as  the  following:-It  is  not  reasonable  that  this

should be so only in the case of these intermediates, but clearly the Forms

also might be in the perceptible things; for both statements are parts of the

same theory. Further, it follows from this theory that there are two solids in

the same place, and that the intermediates are not immovable, since they are

in the moving perceptible things. And in general to what purpose would one

suppose them to exist indeed, but to exist in perceptible things? For the same

paradoxical results will follow which we have already mentioned; there will

be a heaven besides the heaven, only it will be not apart but in the same

place; which is still more impossible.

<

div id="section30" class="section" title="3">


3


(6) Apart from the great difficulty of stating the case truly with regard to

these  matters,  it  is  very  hard  to  say,  with  regard  to  the  first  principles,

whether it is the genera that should be taken as elements and principles, or

rather the primary constituents of a thing; e.g. it is the primary parts of which

articulate sounds consist that are thought to be elements and principles of

articulate sound, not the common genus-articulate sound; and we give the

name of ‘elements’ to those geometrical propositions, the proofs of which are

implied in the proofs of the others, either of all or of most. Further, both those

who say there are several elements of corporeal things and those who say

there is one, say the parts of which bodies are compounded and consist are

principles;  e.g.  Empedocles  says  fire  and  water  and  the  rest  are  the

constituent  elements  of  things,  but  does  not  describe  these  as  genera  of

existing things. Besides this, if we want to examine the nature of anything

else, we examine the parts of which, e.g. a bed consists and how they are put

together, and then we know its nature.

To judge from these arguments, then, the principles of things would not be

the genera; but if we know each thing by its definition, and the genera are the

principles  or  starting-points  of  definitions,  the  genera  must  also  be  the

principles of definable things. And if to get the knowledge of the species

according to which things are named is to get the knowledge of things, thegenera are at least starting-points of the species. And some also of those who

say unity or being, or the great and the small, are elements of things, seem to

treat them as genera.

But, again, it is not possible to describe the principles in both ways. For the

formula of the essence is one; but definition by genera will be different from

that which states the constituent parts of a thing.

(7) Besides this, even if the genera are in the highest degree principles,

should one regard the first of the genera as principles, or those which are

predicated directly of the individuals? This also admits of dispute. For if the

universals  are  always  more  of  the  nature  of  principles,  evidently  the

uppermost of the genera are the principles; for these are predicated of all

things. There will, then, be as many principles of things as there are primary

genera, so that both being and unity will be principles and substances; for

these are most of all predicated of all existing things. But it is not possible

that  either  unity  or  being  should  be  a  single  genus  of  things;  for  the

differentiae of any genus must each of them both have being and be one, but

it is not possible for the genus taken apart from its species (any more than for

the species of the genus) to be predicated of its proper differentiae; so that if

unity or being is a genus, no differentia will either have being or be one. But

if unity and being are not genera, neither will they be principles, if the genera

are  the  principles.  Again,  the  intermediate  kinds,  in  whose  nature  the

differentiae  are  included,  will  on  this  theory  be  genera,  down  to  the

indivisible species; but as it is, some are thought to be genera and others are

not thought to be so. Besides this, the differentiae are principles even more

than the genera; and if these also are principles, there comes to be practically

an infinite number of principles, especially if we suppose the highest genus to

be a principle.-But again, if unity is more of the nature of a principle, and the

indivisible is one, and everything indivisible is so either in quantity or in

species, and that which is so in species is the prior, and genera are divisible

into  species  for  man  is  not  the  genus  of  individual  men),  that  which  is

predicated directly of the individuals will have more unity.-Further, in the

case of things in which the distinction of prior and posterior is present, that

which is predicable of these things cannot be something apart from them (e.g.

if two is the first of numbers, there will not be a Number apart from the kinds

of numbers; and similarly there will not be a Figure apart from the kinds of

figures; and if the genera of these things do not exist apart from the species,

the genera of other things will scarcely do so; for genera of these things arethought to exist if any do). But among the individuals one is not prior and

another posterior. Further, where one thing is better and another worse, the

better is always prior; so that of these also no genus can exist. From these

considerations,  then,  the  species  predicated  of  individuals  seem  to  be

principles rather than the genera. But again, it is not easy to say in what sense

these  are  to  be  taken  as  principles.  For  the  principle  or  cause  must  exist

alongside of the things of which it is the principle, and must be capable of

existing in separation from them; but for what reason should we suppose any

such thing to exist alongside of the individual, except that it is predicated

universally  and  of  all?  But  if  this  is  the  reason,  the  things  that  are  more

universal must be supposed to be more of the nature of principles; so that the

highest genera would be the principles.

<

div id="section31" class="section" title="4">


4


(8) There is a difficulty connected with these, the hardest of all and the

most necessary to examine, and of this the discussion now awaits us. If, on

the  one  hand,  there  is  nothing  apart  from  individual  things,  and  the

individuals are infinite in number, how then is it possible to get knowledge of

the infinite individuals? For all things that we come to know, we come to

know in so far as they have some unity and identity, and in so far as some

attribute belongs to them universally.

But  if  this  is  necessary,  and  there  must  be  something  apart  from  the

individuals,  it  will  be  necessary  that  the  genera  exist  apart  from  the

individuals,  either  the  lowest  or  the  highest  genera;  but  we  found  by

discussion just now that this is impossible.

  Further, if we admit in the fullest sense that something exists apart from

the  concrete  thing,  whenever  something  is  predicated  of  the  matter,  must

there,  if  there  is  something  apart,  be  something  apart  from  each  set  of

individuals, or from some and not from others, or from none? (A) If there is

nothing apart from individuals, there will be no object of thought, but all

things will be objects of sense, and there will not be knowledge of anything,

unless we say that sensation is knowledge. Further, nothing will be eternal or

unmovable; for all perceptible things perish and are in movement. But if there

is nothing eternal, neither can there be a process of coming to be; for theremust be something that comes to be, i.e. from which something comes to be,

and the ultimate term in this series cannot have come to be, since the series

has a limit and since nothing can come to be out of that which is not. Further,

if generation and movement exist there must also be a limit; for no movement

is infinite, but every movement has an end, and that which is incapable of

completing its coming to be cannot be in process of coming to be; and that

which has completed its coming to be must he as soon as it has come to be.

Further,  since  the  matter  exists,  because  it  is  ungenerated,  it  is  a  fortiori

reasonable that the substance or essence, that which the matter is at any time

coming to be, should exist; for if neither essence nor matter is to be, nothing

will be at all, and since this is impossible there must be something besides the

concrete thing, viz. the shape or form.

But again (B) if we are to suppose this, it is hard to say in which cases we

are to suppose it and in which not. For evidently it is not possible to suppose

it  in  all  cases;  we  could  not  suppose  that  there  is  a  house  besides  the

particular houses.-Besides this, will the substance of all the individuals, e.g.

of all men, be one? This is paradoxical, for all the things whose substance is

one  are  one.  But  are  the  substances  many  and  different?  This  also  is

unreasonable.-At the same time, how does the matter become each of the

individuals, and how is the concrete thing these two elements?

(9)  Again,  one  might  ask  the  following  question  also  about  the  first

principles. If they are one in kind only, nothing will be numerically one, not

even unity-itself and being-itself; and how will knowing exist, if there is not

to be something common to a whole set of individuals?

But if there is a common element which is numerically one, and each of

the principles is one, and the principles are not as in the case of perceptible

things different for different things (e.g. since this particular syllable is the

same in kind whenever it occurs, the elements it are also the same in kind;

only in kind, for these also, like the syllable, are numerically different in

different  contexts),-if  it  is  not  like  this  but  the  principles  of  things  are

numerically one, there will be nothing else besides the elements (for there is

no difference of meaning between ‘numerically one’ and ‘individual’; for this

is  just  what  we  mean  by  the  individual-the  numerically  one,  and  by  the

universal we mean that which is predicable of the individuals). Therefore it

will be just as if the elements of articulate sound were limited in number; all

the language in the world would be confined to the ABC, since there could

not be two or more letters of the same kind.(10) One difficulty which is as great as any has been neglected both by

modern  philosophers  and  by  their  predecessors-whether  the  principles  of

perishable and those of imperishable things are the same or different. If they

are the same, how are some things perishable and others imperishable, and

for what reason? The school of Hesiod and all the theologians thought only of

what was plausible to themselves, and had no regard to us. For, asserting the

first principles to be gods and born of gods, they say that the beings which

did not taste of nectar and ambrosia became mortal; and clearly they are

using words which are familiar to themselves, yet what they have said about

the very application of these causes is above our comprehension. For if the

gods taste of nectar and ambrosia for their pleasure, these are in no wise the

causes of their existence; and if they taste them to maintain their existence,

how  can  gods  who  need  food  be  eternal?-But  into  the  subtleties  of  the

mythologists it is not worth our while to inquire seriously; those, however,

who use the language of proof we must cross-examine and ask why, after all,

things  which  consist  of  the  same  elements  are,  some  of  them,  eternal  in

nature, while others perish. Since these philosophers mention no cause, and it

is unreasonable that things should be as they say, evidently the principles or

causes of things cannot be the same. Even the man whom one might suppose

to speak most consistently-Empedocles, even he has made the same mistake;

for he maintains that strife is a principle that causes destruction, but even

strife  would  seem  no  less  to  produce  everything,  except  the  One;  for  all

things excepting God proceed from strife. At least he says:—


  From which all that was and is and will be hereafter-

  Trees, and men and women, took their growth,

And beasts and birds and water-nourished fish,

And long-aged gods.


The implication is evident even apart from these words; for if strife had not

been present in things, all things would have been one, according to him; for

when they have come together, ‘then strife stood outermost.’ Hence it also

follows on his theory that God most blessed is less wise than all others; for he

does not know all the elements; for he has in him no strife, and knowledge is

of the like by the like. ‘For by earth,’ he says,


we see earth, by water water,By ether godlike ether, by fire wasting fire,

  Love by love, and strife by gloomy strife.


  But-and this is the point we started from this at least is evident, that on his

theory  it  follows  that  strife  is  as  much  the  cause  of  existence  as  of

destruction. And similarly love is not specially the cause of existence; for in

collecting things into the One it destroys all other things. And at the same

time Empedocles mentions no cause of the change itself, except that things

are so by nature.


But when strife at last waxed great in the limbs of the

  Sphere,

And sprang to assert its rights as the time was fulfilled

  Which is fixed for them in turn by a mighty oath.


This implies that change was necessary; but he shows no cause of the

necessity. But yet so far at least he alone speaks consistently; for he does not

make  some  things  perishable  and  others  imperishable,  but  makes  all

perishable except the elements. The difficulty we are speaking of now is, why

some things are perishable and others are not, if they consist of the same

principles.

Let this suffice as proof of the fact that the principles cannot be the same.

But if there are different principles, one difficulty is whether these also will

be imperishable or perishable. For if they are perishable, evidently these also

must consist of certain elements (for all things that perish, perish by being

resolved into the elements of which they consist); so that it follows that prior

to the principles there are other principles. But this is impossible, whether the

process has a limit or proceeds to infinity. Further, how will perishable things

exist,  if  their  principles  are  to  be  annulled?  But  if  the  principles  are

imperishable, why will things composed of some imperishable principles be

perishable, while those composed of the others are imperishable? This is not

probable, but is either impossible or needs much proof. Further, no one has

even tried to maintain different principles; they maintain the same principles

for all things. But they swallow the difficulty we stated first as if they took it

to be something trifling.

(11) The inquiry that is both the hardest of all and the most necessary for

knowledge  of  the  truth  is  whether  being  and  unity  are  the  substances  ofthings, and whether each of them, without being anything else, is being or

unity respectively, or we must inquire what being and unity are, with the

implication that they have some other underlying nature. For some people

think they are of the former, others think they are of the latter character. Plato

and the Pythagoreans thought being and unity were nothing else, but this was

their  nature,  their  essence  being  just  unity  and  being.  But  the  natural

philosophers  take  a  different  line;  e.g.  Empedocles-as  though  reducing  to

something more intelligible-says what unity is; for he would seem to say it is

love: at least, this is for all things the cause of their being one. Others say this

unity and being, of which things consist and have been made, is fire, and

others  say  it  is  air.  A  similar  view  is  expressed  by  those  who  make  the

elements more than one; for these also must say that unity and being are

precisely all the things which they say are principles.

(A) If we do not suppose unity and being to be substances, it follows that

none of the other universals is a substance; for these are most universal of all,

and if there is no unity itself or being-itself, there will scarcely be in any other

case anything apart from what are called the individuals. Further, if unity is

not a substance, evidently number also will not exist as an entity separate

from the individual things; for number is units, and the unit is precisely a

certain kind of one.

But (B) if there is a unity-itself and a being itself, unity and being must be

their substance; for it is not something else that is predicated universally of

the things that are and are one, but just unity and being. But if there is to be a

being-itself and a unity-itself, there is much difficulty in seeing how there

will be anything else besides these,-I mean, how things will be more than one

in  number.  For  what  is  different  from  being  does  not  exist,  so  that  it

necessarily follows, according to the argument of Parmenides, that all things

that are are one and this is being.

  There are objections to both views. For whether unity is not a substance or

there is a unity-itself, number cannot be a substance. We have already said

why this result follows if unity is not a substance; and if it is, the same

difficulty arises as arose with regard to being. For whence is there to be

another one besides unity-itself? It must be not-one; but all things are either

one or many, and of the many each is one.

  Further, if unity-itself is indivisible, according to Zeno’s postulate it will

be nothing. For that which neither when added makes a thing greater nor

when  subtracted  makes  it  less,  he  asserts  to  have  no  being,  evidentlyassuming  that  whatever  has  being  is  a  spatial  magnitude.  And  if  it  is  a

magnitude, it is corporeal; for the corporeal has being in every dimension,

while the other objects of mathematics, e.g. a plane or a line, added in one

way will increase what they are added to, but in another way will not do so,

and a point or a unit does so in no way. But, since his theory is of a low

order, and an indivisible thing can exist in such a way as to have a defence

even  against  him  (for  the  indivisible  when  added  will  make  the  number,

though not the size, greater),-yet how can a magnitude proceed from one such

indivisible or from many? It is like saying that the line is made out of points.

But even if ore supposes the case to be such that, as some say, number

proceeds from unity-itself and something else which is not one, none the less

we must inquire why and how the product will be sometimes a number and

sometimes  a  magnitude,  if  the  not-one  was  inequality  and  was  the  same

principle in either case. For it is not evident how magnitudes could proceed

either  from  the  one  and  this  principle,  or  from  some  number  and  this

principle.

<

div id="section32" class="section" title="5">


5


(14) A question connected with these is whether numbers and bodies and

planes and points are substances of a kind, or not. If they are not, it baffles us

to say what being is and what the substances of things are. For modifications

and  movements  and  relations  and  dispositions  and  ratios  do  not  seem  to

indicate the substance of anything; for all are predicated of a subject, and

none is a ‘this’. And as to the things which might seem most of all to indicate

substance,  water  and  earth  and  fire  and  air,  of  which  composite  bodies

consist, heat and cold and the like are modifications of these, not substances,

and the body which is thus modified alone persists as something real and as a

substance. But, on the other hand, the body is surely less of a substance than

the surface, and the surface than the line, and the line than the unit and the

point. For the body is bounded by these; and they are thought to be capable of

existing without body, but body incapable of existing without these. This is

why, while most of the philosophers and the earlier among them thought that

substance and being were identical with body, and that all other things were

modifications of this, so that the first principles of the bodies were the firstprinciples of being, the more recent and those who were held to be wiser

thought numbers were the first principles. As we said, then, if these are not

substance, there is no substance and no being at all; for the accidents of these

it cannot be right to call beings.

But if this is admitted, that lines and points are substance more than bodies,

but we do not see to what sort of bodies these could belong (for they cannot

be in perceptible bodies), there can be no substance.-Further, these are all

evidently  divisions  of  body,-one  in  breadth,  another  in  depth,  another  in

length. Besides this, no sort of shape is present in the solid more than any

other; so that if the Hermes is not in the stone, neither is the half of the cube

in the cube as something determinate; therefore the surface is not in it either;

for if any sort of surface were in it, the surface which marks off the half of the

cube would be in it too. And the same account applies to the line and to the

point and the unit. Therefore, if on the one hand body is in the highest degree

substance, and on the other hand these things are so more than body, but

these are not even instances of substance, it baffles us to say what being is

and  what  the  substance  of  things  is.-For  besides  what  has  been  said,  the

questions of generation and instruction confront us with further paradoxes.

For if substance, not having existed before, now exists, or having existed

before, afterwards does not exist, this change is thought to be accompanied

by a process of becoming or perishing; but points and lines and surfaces

cannot be in process either of becoming or of perishing, when they at one

time exist and at another do not. For when bodies come into contact or are

divided, their boundaries simultaneously become one in the one case when

they touch, and two in the other-when they are divided; so that when they

have been put together one boundary does not exist but has perished, and

when they have been divided the boundaries exist which before did not exist

(for it cannot be said that the point, which is indivisible, was divided into

two). And if the boundaries come into being and cease to be, from what do

they come into being? A similar account may also be given of the ‘now’ in

time; for this also cannot be in process of coming into being or of ceasing to

be,  but  yet  seems  to  be  always  different,  which  shows  that  it  is  not  a

substance. And evidently the same is true of points and lines and planes; for

the same argument applies, since they are all alike either limits or divisions.

<

div id="section33" class="section" title="6">6


In general one might raise the question why after all, besides perceptible

things and the intermediates, we have to look for another class of things, i.e.

the Forms which we posit. If it is for this reason, because the objects of

mathematics, while they differ from the things in this world in some other

respect, differ not at all in that there are many of the same kind, so that their

first principles cannot be limited in number (just as the elements of all the

language in this sensible world are not limited in number, but in kind, unless

one  takes  the  elements  of  this  individual  syllable  or  of  this  individual

articulate sound-whose elements will be limited even in number; so is it also

in the case of the intermediates; for there also the members of the same kind

are  infinite  in  number),  so  that  if  there  are  not-besides  perceptible  and

mathematical objects-others such as some maintain the Forms to be, there

will be no substance which is one in number, but only in kind, nor will the

first principles of things be determinate in number, but only in kind:-if then

this must be so, the Forms also must therefore be held to exist. Even if those

who support this view do not express it articulately, still this is what they

mean,  and  they  must  be  maintaining  the  Forms  just  because  each  of  the

Forms is a substance and none is by accident.

But if we are to suppose both that the Forms exist and that the principles

are one in number, not in kind, we have mentioned the impossible results that

necessarily follow.

(13) Closely connected with this is the question whether the elements exist

potentially or in some other manner. If in some other way, there will be

something else prior to the first principles; for the potency is prior to the

actual cause, and it is not necessary for everything potential to be actual.-But

if the elements exist potentially, it is possible that everything that is should

not be. For even that which is not yet is capable of being; for that which is

not comes to be, but nothing that is incapable of being comes to be.

(12) We must not only raise these questions about the first principles, but

also ask whether they are universal or what we call individuals. If they are

universal,  they  will  not  be  substances;  for  everything  that  is  common

indicates not a ‘this’ but a ‘such’, but substance is a ‘this’. And if we are to be

allowed to lay it down that a common predicate is a ‘this’ and a single thing,

Socrates will be several animals-himself and ‘man’ and ‘animal’, if each of

these indicates a ‘this’ and a single thing.If, then, the principles are universals, these universal. Therefore if there is

to  be  results  follow;  if  they  are  not  universals  but  of  knowledge  of  the

principles  there  must  be  the  nature  of  individuals,  they  will  not  be  other

principles  prior  to  them,  namely  those  knowable;  for  the  knowledge  of

anything is that are universally predicated of them.                                      Book IV


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section34" class="section" title="1">


1


  There is a science which investigates being as being and the attributes

which belong to this in virtue of its own nature. Now this is not the same as

any  of  the  so-called  special  sciences;  for  none  of  these  others  treats

universally of being as being. They cut off a part of being and investigate the

attribute of this part; this is what the mathematical sciences for instance do.

Now since we are seeking the first principles and the highest causes, clearly

there must be some thing to which these belong in virtue of its own nature. If

then those who sought the elements of existing things were seeking these

same principles, it is necessary that the elements must be elements of being

not by accident but just because it is being. Therefore it is of being as being

that we also must grasp the first causes.

<

div id="section35" class="section" title="2">


2


  There are many senses in which a thing may be said to ‘be’, but all that ‘is’

is related to one central point, one definite kind of thing, and is not said to

‘be’ by a mere ambiguity. Everything which is healthy is related to health,

one thing in the sense that it preserves health, another in the sense that it

produces  it,  another  in  the  sense  that  it  is  a  symptom  of  health,  another

because it is capable of it. And that which is medical is relative to the medical

art, one thing being called medical because it possesses it, another because it

is naturally adapted to it, another because it is a function of the medical art.

And we shall find other words used similarly to these. So, too, there are many

senses in which a thing is said to be, but all refer to one starting-point; somethings are said to be because they are substances, others because they are

affections of substance, others because they are a process towards substance,

or  destructions  or  privations  or  qualities  of  substance,  or  productive  or

generative  of  substance,  or  of  things  which  are  relative  to  substance,  or

negations of one of these thing of substance itself. It is for this reason that we

say even of non-being that it is nonbeing. As, then, there is one science which

deals with all healthy things, the same applies in the other cases also. For not

only  in  the  case  of  things  which  have  one  common  notion  does  the

investigation belong to one science, but also in the case of things which are

related to one common nature; for even these in a sense have one common

notion. It is clear then that it is the work of one science also to study the

things that are, qua being.-But everywhere science deals chiefly with that

which is primary, and on which the other things depend, and in virtue of

which they get their names. If, then, this is substance, it will be of substances

that the philosopher must grasp the principles and the causes.

Now for each one class of things, as there is one perception, so there is one

science, as for instance grammar, being one science, investigates all articulate

sounds. Hence to investigate all the species of being qua being is the work of

a science which is generically one, and to investigate the several species is

the work of the specific parts of the science.

If, now, being and unity are the same and are one thing in the sense that

they are implied in one another as principle and cause are, not in the sense

that they are explained by the same definition (though it makes no difference

even if we suppose them to be like that-in fact this would even strengthen our

case); for ‘one man’ and ‘man’ are the same thing, and so are ‘existent man’

and ‘man’, and the doubling of the words in ‘one man and one existent man’

does not express anything different (it is clear that the two things are not

separated  either  in  coming  to  be  or  in  ceasing  to  be);  and  similarly  ‘one

existent man’ adds nothing to ‘existent man’, and that it is obvious that the

addition in these cases means the same thing, and unity is nothing apart from

being;  and  if,  further,  the  substance  of  each  thing  is  one  in  no  merely

accidental way, and similarly is from its very nature something that is:-all this

being so, there must be exactly as many species of being as of unity. And to

investigate the essence of these is the work of a science which is generically

one-I mean, for instance, the discussion of the same and the similar and the

other concepts of this sort; and nearly all contraries may be referred to this

origin;  let  us  take  them  as  having  been  investigated  in  the  ‘Selection  ofContraries’.

And there are as many parts of philosophy as there are kinds of substance,

so that there must necessarily be among them a first philosophy and one

which follows this. For being falls immediately into genera; for which reason

the sciences too will correspond to these genera. For the philosopher is like

the mathematician, as that word is used; for mathematics also has parts, and

there is a first and a second science and other successive ones within the

sphere of mathematics.

Now  since  it  is  the  work  of  one  science  to  investigate  opposites,  and

plurality is opposed to unity-and it belongs to one science to investigate the

negation and the privation because in both cases we are really investigating

the one thing of which the negation or the privation is a negation or privation

(for we either say simply that that thing is not present, or that it is not present

in some particular class; in the latter case difference is present over and above

what is implied in negation; for negation means just the absence of the thing

in question, while in privation there is also employed an underlying nature of

which the privation is asserted):-in view of all these facts, the contraries of

the concepts we named above, the other and the dissimilar and the unequal,

and everything else which is derived either from these or from plurality and

unity,  must  fall  within  the  province  of  the  science  above  named.  And

contrariety is one of these concepts; for contrariety is a kind of difference,

and difference is a kind of otherness. Therefore, since there are many senses

in which a thing is said to be one, these terms also will have many senses, but

yet it belongs to one science to know them all; for a term belongs to different

sciences not if it has different senses, but if it has not one meaning and its

definitions cannot be referred to one central meaning. And since all things are

referred to that which is primary, as for instance all things which are called

one are referred to the primary one, we must say that this holds good also of

the  same  and  the  other  and  of  contraries  in  general;  so  that  after

distinguishing the various senses of each, we must then explain by reference

to what is primary in the case of each of the predicates in question, saying

how  they  are  related  to  it;  for  some  will  be  called  what  they  are  called

because they possess it, others because they produce it, and others in other

such ways.

It is evident, then, that it belongs to one science to be able to give an

account  of  these  concepts  as  well  as  of  substance  (this  was  one  of  the

questions  in  our  book  of  problems),  and  that  it  is  the  function  of  thephilosopher to be able to investigate all things. For if it is not the function of

the philosopher, who is it who will inquire whether Socrates and Socrates

seated are the same thing, or whether one thing has one contrary, or what

contrariety is, or how many meanings it has? And similarly with all other

such questions. Since, then, these are essential modifications of unity qua

unity and of being qua being, not qua numbers or lines or fire, it is clear that

it belongs to this science to investigate both the essence of these concepts and

their properties. And those who study these properties err not by leaving the

sphere of philosophy, but by forgetting that substance, of which they have no

correct  idea,  is  prior  to  these  other  things.  For  number  qua  number  has

peculiar  attributes,  such  as  oddness  and  evenness,  commensurability  and

equality, excess and defect, and these belong to numbers either in themselves

or in relation to one another. And similarly the solid and the motionless and

that which is in motion and the weightless and that which has weight have

other peculiar properties. So too there are certain properties peculiar to being

as such, and it is about these that the philosopher has to investigate the truth.-

An indication of this may be mentioned: dialecticians and sophists assume

the same guise as the philosopher, for sophistic is Wisdom which exists only

in semblance, and dialecticians embrace all things in their dialectic, and being

is common to all things; but evidently their dialectic embraces these subjects

because these are proper to philosophy.-For sophistic and dialectic turn on

the same class of things as philosophy, but this differs from dialectic in the

nature of the faculty required and from sophistic in respect of the purpose of

the philosophic life. Dialectic is merely critical where philosophy claims to

know, and sophistic is what appears to be philosophy but is not.

  Again, in the list of contraries one of the two columns is privative, and all

contraries are reducible to being and non-being, and to unity and plurality, as

for instance rest belongs to unity and movement to plurality. And nearly all

thinkers agree that being and substance are composed of contraries; at least

all name contraries as their first principles-some name odd and even, some

hot and cold, some limit and the unlimited, some love and strife. And all the

others as well are evidently reducible to unity and plurality (this reduction we

must take for granted), and the principles stated by other thinkers fall entirely

under these as their genera. It is obvious then from these considerations too

that it belongs to one science to examine being qua being. For all things are

either contraries or composed of contraries, and unity and plurality are the

starting-points of all contraries. And these belong to one science, whetherthey have or have not one single meaning. Probably the truth is that they have

not; yet even if ‘one’ has several meanings, the other meanings will be related

to the primary meaning (and similarly in the case of the contraries), even if

being or unity is not a universal and the same in every instance or is not

separable from the particular instances (as in fact it probably is not; the unity

is  in  some  cases  that  of  common  reference,  in  some  cases  that  of  serial

succession). And for this reason it does not belong to the geometer to inquire

what is contrariety or completeness or unity or being or the same or the other,

but only to presuppose these concepts and reason from this starting-point.—

Obviously then it is the work of one science to examine being qua being, and

the  attributes  which  belong  to  it  qua  being,  and  the  same  science  will

examine not only substances but also their attributes, both those above named

and the concepts ‘prior’ and ‘posterior’, ‘genus’ and ‘species’, ‘whole’ and

‘part’, and the others of this sort.

<

div id="section36" class="section" title="3">


3


We must state whether it belongs to one or to different sciences to inquire

into the truths which are in mathematics called axioms, and into substance.

Evidently, the inquiry into these also belongs to one science, and that the

science of the philosopher; for these truths hold good for everything that is,

and not for some special genus apart from others. And all men use them,

because they are true of being qua being and each genus has being. But men

use them just so far as to satisfy their purposes; that is, as far as the genus to

which their demonstrations refer extends. Therefore since these truths clearly

hold good for all things qua being (for this is what is common to them), to

him who studies being qua being belongs the inquiry into these as well. And

for  this  reason  no  one  who  is  conducting  a  special  inquiry  tries  to  say

anything  about  their  truth  or  falsity,-neither  the  geometer  nor  the

arithmetician.  Some  natural  philosophers  indeed  have  done  so,  and  their

procedure  was  intelligible  enough;  for  they  thought  that  they  alone  were

inquiring about the whole of nature and about being. But since there is one

kind of thinker who is above even the natural philosopher (for nature is only

one particular genus of being), the discussion of these truths also will belong

to him whose inquiry is universal and deals with primary substance. Physicsalso is a kind of Wisdom, but it is not the first kind.-And the attempts of

some of those who discuss the terms on which truth should be accepted, are

due to a want of training in logic; for they should know these things already

when they come to a special study, and not be inquiring into them while they

are listening to lectures on it.

  Evidently then it belongs to the philosopher, i.e. to him who is studying the

nature of all substance, to inquire also into the principles of syllogism. But he

who knows best about each genus must be able to state the most certain

principles  of  his  subject,  so  that  he  whose  subject  is  existing  things  qua

existing must be able to state the most certain principles of all things. This is

the philosopher, and the most certain principle of all is that regarding which it

is  impossible  to  be  mistaken;  for  such  a  principle  must  be  both  the  best

known (for all men may be mistaken about things which they do not know),

and  non-hypothetical.  For  a  principle  which  every  one  must  have  who

understands anything that is, is not a hypothesis; and that which every one

must know who knows anything, he must already have when he comes to a

special study. Evidently then such a principle is the most certain of all; which

principle this is, let us proceed to say. It is, that the same attribute cannot at

the same time belong and not belong to the same subject and in the same

respect;  we  must  presuppose,  to  guard  against  dialectical  objections,  any

further qualifications which might be added. This, then, is the most certain of

all  principles,  since  it  answers  to  the  definition  given  above.  For  it  is

impossible for any one to believe the same thing to be and not to be, as some

think Heraclitus says. For what a man says, he does not necessarily believe;

and if it is impossible that contrary attributes should belong at the same time

to  the  same  subject  (the  usual  qualifications  must  be  presupposed  in  this

premiss too), and if an opinion which contradicts another is contrary to it,

obviously it is impossible for the same man at the same time to believe the

same thing to be and not to be; for if a man were mistaken on this point he

would have contrary opinions at the same time. It is for this reason that all

who are carrying out a demonstration reduce it to this as an ultimate belief;

for this is naturally the starting-point even for all the other axioms.

<

div id="section37" class="section" title="4">


4  There are some who, as we said, both themselves assert that it is possible

for the same thing to be and not to be, and say that people can judge this to be

the case. And among others many writers about nature use this language. But

we have now posited that it is impossible for anything at the same time to be

and not to be, and by this means have shown that this is the most indisputable

of all principles.-Some indeed demand that even this shall be demonstrated,

but this they do through want of education, for not to know of what things

one should demand demonstration, and of what one should not, argues want

of  education.  For  it  is  impossible  that  there  should  be  demonstration  of

absolutely everything (there would be an infinite regress, so that there would

still be no demonstration); but if there are things of which one should not

demand  demonstration,  these  persons  could  not  say  what  principle  they

maintain to be more self-evident than the present one.

We  can,  however,  demonstrate  negatively  even  that  this  view  is

impossible, if our opponent will only say something; and if he says nothing, it

is absurd to seek to give an account of our views to one who cannot give an

account of anything, in so far as he cannot do so. For such a man, as such, is

from  the  start  no  better  than  a  vegetable.  Now  negative  demonstration  I

distinguish from demonstration proper, because in a demonstration one might

be thought to be begging the question, but if another person is responsible for

the assumption we shall have negative proof, not demonstration. The starting-

point for all such arguments is not the demand that our opponent shall say

that something either is or is not (for this one might perhaps take to be a

begging of the question), but that he shall say something which is significant

both for himself and for another; for this is necessary, if he really is to say

anything.  For,  if  he  means  nothing,  such  a  man  will  not  be  capable  of

reasoning, either with himself or with another. But if any one grants this,

demonstration will be possible; for we shall already have something definite.

The person responsible for the proof, however, is not he who demonstrates

but he who listens; for while disowning reason he listens to reason. And

again  he  who  admits  this  has  admitted  that  something  is  true  apart  from

demonstration (so that not everything will be ‘so and not so’).

First then this at least is obviously true, that the word ‘be’ or ‘not be’ has a

definite meaning, so that not everything will be ‘so and not so’. Again, if

‘man’  has  one  meaning,  let  this  be  ‘two-footed  animal’;  by  having  one

meaning I understand this:-if ‘man’ means ‘X’, then if A is a man ‘X’ will be

what ‘being a man’ means for him. (It makes no difference even if one wereto say a word has several meanings, if only they are limited in number; for to

each definition there might be assigned a different word. For instance, we

might say that ‘man’ has not one meaning but several, one of which would

have  one  definition,  viz.  ‘two-footed  animal’,  while  there  might  be  also

several other definitions if only they were limited in number; for a peculiar

name might be assigned to each of the definitions. If, however, they were not

limited but one were to say that the word has an infinite number of meanings,

obviously reasoning would be impossible; for not to have one meaning is to

have no meaning, and if words have no meaning our reasoning with one

another, and indeed with ourselves, has been annihilated; for it is impossible

to think of anything if we do not think of one thing; but if this is possible, one

name might be assigned to this thing.)

Let it be assumed then, as was said at the beginning, that the name has a

meaning  and  has  one  meaning;  it  is  impossible,  then,  that  ‘being  a  man’

should  mean  precisely  ‘not  being  a  man’,  if  ‘man’  not  only  signifies

something about one subject but also has one significance (for we do not

identify  ‘having  one  significance’  with  ‘signifying  something  about  one

subject’,  since  on  that  assumption  even  ‘musical’  and  ‘white’  and  ‘man’

would have had one significance, so that all things would have been one; for

they would all have had the same significance).

And it will not be possible to be and not to be the same thing, except in

virtue of an ambiguity, just as if one whom we call ‘man’, others were to call

‘not-man’; but the point in question is not this, whether the same thing can at

the same time be and not be a man in name, but whether it can in fact. Now if

‘man’ and ‘not-man’ mean nothing different, obviously ‘not being a man’

will mean nothing different from ‘being a man’; so that ‘being a man’ will be

‘not  being  a  man’;  for  they  will  be  one.  For  being  one  means  this-being

related as ‘raiment’ and ‘dress’ are, if their definition is one. And if ‘being a

man’ and ‘being a not-man’ are to be one, they must mean one thing. But it

was shown earlier’ that they mean different things.-Therefore, if it is true to

say of anything that it is a man, it must be a two-footed animal (for this was

what ‘man’ meant); and if this is necessary, it is impossible that the same

thing should not at that time be a two-footed animal; for this is what ‘being

necessary’ means-that it is impossible for the thing not to be. It is, then,

impossible that it should be at the same time true to say the same thing is a

man and is not a man.

The same account holds good with regard to ‘not being a man’, for ‘beinga man’ and ‘being a not-man’ mean different things, since even ‘being white’

and ‘being a man’ are different; for the former terms are much more different

so that they must a fortiori mean different things. And if any one says that

‘white’ means one and the same thing as ‘man’, again we shall say the same

as what was said before, that it would follow that all things are one, and not

only opposites. But if this is impossible, then what we have maintained will

follow, if our opponent will only answer our question.

And if, when one asks the question simply, he adds the contradictories, he

is not answering the question. For there is nothing to prevent the same thing

from being both a man and white and countless other things: but still, if one

asks whether it is or is not true to say that this is a man, our opponent must

give an answer which means one thing, and not add that ‘it is also white and

large’. For, besides other reasons, it is impossible to enumerate its accidental

attributes, which are infinite in number; let him, then, enumerate either all or

none. Similarly, therefore, even if the same thing is a thousand times a man

and a not-man, he must not, in answering the question whether this is a man,

add that it is also at the same time a not-man, unless he is bound to add also

all the other accidents, all that the subject is or is not; and if he does this, he is

not observing the rules of argument.

And in general those who say this do away with substance and essence.

For they must say that all attributes are accidents, and that there is no such

thing as ‘being essentially a man’ or ‘an animal’. For if there is to be any

such thing as ‘being essentially a man’ this will not be ‘being a not-man’ or

‘not being a man’ (yet these are negations of it); for there was one thing

which it meant, and this was the substance of something. And denoting the

substance of a thing means that the essence of the thing is nothing else. But if

its being essentially a man is to be the same as either being essentially a not-

man or essentially not being a man, then its essence will be something else.

Therefore our opponents must say that there cannot be such a definition of

anything,  but  that  all  attributes  are  accidental;  for  this  is  the  distinction

between substance and accident-’white’ is accidental to man, because though

he is white, whiteness is not his essence. But if all statements are accidental,

there will be nothing primary about which they are made, if the accidental

always implies predication about a subject. The predication, then, must go on

ad infinitum. But this is impossible; for not even more than two terms can be

combined in accidental predication. For (1) an accident is not an accident of

an accident, unless it be because both are accidents of the same subject. Imean, for instance, that the white is musical and the latter is white, only

because both are accidental to man. But (2) Socrates is musical, not in this

sense,  that  both  terms  are  accidental  to  something  else.  Since  then  some

predicates are accidental in this and some in that sense, (a) those which are

accidental in the latter sense, in which white is accidental to Socrates, cannot

form an infinite series in the upward direction; e.g. Socrates the white has not

yet another accident; for no unity can be got out of such a sum. Nor again (b)

will ‘white’ have another term accidental to it, e.g. ‘musical’. For this is no

more accidental to that than that is to this; and at the same time we have

drawn the distinction, that while some predicates are accidental in this sense,

others are so in the sense in which ‘musical’ is accidental to Socrates; and the

accident is an accident of an accident not in cases of the latter kind, but only

in cases of the other kind, so that not all terms will be accidental. There must,

then, even so be something which denotes substance. And if this is so, it has

been shown that contradictories cannot be predicated at the same time.

  Again, if all contradictory statements are true of the same subject at the

same time, evidently all things will be one. For the same thing will be a

trireme, a wall, and a man, if of everything it is possible either to affirm or to

deny anything (and this premiss must be accepted by those who share the

views of Protagoras). For if any one thinks that the man is not a trireme,

evidently he is not a trireme; so that he also is a trireme, if, as they say,

contradictory  statements  are  both  true.  And  we  thus  get  the  doctrine  of

Anaxagoras, that all things are mixed together; so that nothing really exists.

They seem, then, to be speaking of the indeterminate, and, while fancying

themselves to be speaking of being, they are speaking about non-being; for it

is  that  which  exists  potentially  and  not  in  complete  reality  that  is

indeterminate. But they must predicate of every subject the affirmation or the

negation of every attribute. For it is absurd if of each subject its own negation

is to be predicable, while the negation of something else which cannot be

predicated of it is not to be predicable of it; for instance, if it is true to say of

a man that he is not a man, evidently it is also true to say that he is either a

trireme  or  not  a  trireme.  If,  then,  the  affirmative  can  be  predicated,  the

negative must be predicable too; and if the affirmative is not predicable, the

negative, at least, will be more predicable than the negative of the subject

itself. If, then, even the latter negative is predicable, the negative of ‘trireme’

will be also predicable; and, if this is predicable, the affirmative will be so

too.  Those, then, who maintain this view are driven to this conclusion, and to

the further conclusion that it is not necessary either to assert or to deny. For if

it is true that a thing is a man and a not-man, evidently also it will be neither a

man nor a not-man. For to the two assertions there answer two negations, and

if the former is treated as a single proposition compounded out of two, the

latter also is a single proposition opposite to the former.

  Again, either the theory is true in all cases, and a thing is both white and

not-white,  and  existent  and  non-existent,  and  all  other  assertions  and

negations are similarly compatible or the theory is true of some statements

and not of others. And if not of all, the exceptions will be contradictories of

which admittedly only one is true; but if of all, again either the negation will

be true wherever the assertion is, and the assertion true wherever the negation

is, or the negation will be true where the assertion is, but the assertion not

always true where the negation is. And (a) in the latter case there will be

something which fixedly is not, and this will be an indisputable belief; and if

non-being  is  something  indisputable  and  knowable,  the  opposite  assertion

will be more knowable. But (b) if it is equally possible also to assert all that it

is possible to deny, one must either be saying what is true when one separates

the predicates (and says, for instance, that a thing is white, and again that it is

not-white), or not. And if (i) it is not true to apply the predicates separately,

our opponent is not saying what he professes to say, and also nothing at all

exists; but how could non-existent things speak or walk, as he does? Also all

things would on this view be one, as has been already said, and man and God

and trireme and their contradictories will be the same. For if contradictories

can be predicated alike of each subject, one thing will in no wise differ from

another; for if it differ, this difference will be something true and peculiar to

it. And (ii) if one may with truth apply the predicates separately, the above-

mentioned result follows none the less, and, further, it follows that all would

then be right and all would be in error, and our opponent himself confesses

himself  to  be  in  error.-And  at  the  same  time  our  discussion  with  him  is

evidently about nothing at all; for he says nothing. For he says neither ‘yes’

nor ‘no’, but ‘yes and no’; and again he denies both of these and says ‘neither

yes nor no’; for otherwise there would already be something definite.

  Again if when the assertion is true, the negation is false, and when this is

true, the affirmation is false, it will not be possible to assert and deny the

same thing truly at the same time. But perhaps they might say this was the

very question at issue.  Again, is he in error who judges either that the thing is so or that it is not

so, and is he right who judges both? If he is right, what can they mean by

saying that the nature of existing things is of this kind? And if he is not right,

but more right than he who judges in the other way, being will already be of a

definite nature, and this will be true, and not at the same time also not true.

But if all are alike both wrong and right, one who is in this condition will not

be able either to speak or to say anything intelligible; for he says at the same

time both ‘yes’ and ‘no.’ And if he makes no judgement but ‘thinks’ and

‘does not think’, indifferently, what difference will there be between him and

a vegetable?-Thus, then, it is in the highest degree evident that neither any

one of those who maintain this view nor any one else is really in this position.

For why does a man walk to Megara and not stay at home, when he thinks he

ought to be walking there? Why does he not walk early some morning into a

well or over a precipice, if one happens to be in his way? Why do we observe

him guarding against this, evidently because he does not think that falling in

is alike good and not good? Evidently, then, he judges one thing to be better

and another worse. And if this is so, he must also judge one thing to be a man

and another to be not-a-man, one thing to be sweet and another to be not-

sweet. For he does not aim at and judge all things alike, when, thinking it

desirable to drink water or to see a man, he proceeds to aim at these things;

yet he ought, if the same thing were alike a man and not-a-man. But, as was

said,  there  is  no  one  who  does  not  obviously  avoid  some  things  and  not

others. Therefore, as it seems, all men make unqualified judgements, if not

about  all  things,  still  about  what  is  better  and  worse.  And  if  this  is  not

knowledge but opinion, they should be all the more anxious about the truth,

as  a  sick  man  should  be  more  anxious  about  his  health  than  one  who  is

healthy; for he who has opinions is, in comparison with the man who knows,

not in a healthy state as far as the truth is concerned.

  Again, however much all things may be ‘so and not so’, still there is a

more and a less in the nature of things; for we should not say that two and

three  are  equally  even,  nor  is  he  who  thinks  four  things  are  five  equally

wrong with him who thinks they are a thousand. If then they are not equally

wrong, obviously one is less wrong and therefore more right. If then that

which has more of any quality is nearer the norm, there must be some truth to

which the more true is nearer. And even if there is not, still there is already

something better founded and liker the truth, and we shall have got rid of the

unqualified doctrine which would prevent us from determining anything inour thought.

<

div id="section38" class="section" title="5">


5


  From  the  same  opinion  proceeds  the  doctrine  of  Protagoras,  and  both

doctrines  must  be  alike  true  or  alike  untrue.  For  on  the  one  hand,  if  all

opinions and appearances are true, all statements must be at the same time

true and false. For many men hold beliefs in which they conflict with one

another,  and  think  those  mistaken  who  have  not  the  same  opinions  as

themselves; so that the same thing must both be and not be. And on the other

hand, if this is so, all opinions must be true; for those who are mistaken and

those who are right are opposed to one another in their opinions; if, then,

reality is such as the view in question supposes, all will be right in their

beliefs.

  Evidently, then, both doctrines proceed from the same way of thinking.

But the same method of discussion must not be used with all opponents; for

some need persuasion, and others compulsion. Those who have been driven

to this position by difficulties in their thinking can easily be cured of their

ignorance; for it is not their expressed argument but their thought that one has

to meet. But those who argue for the sake of argument can be cured only by

refuting the argument as expressed in speech and in words.

  Those who really feel the difficulties have been led to this opinion by

observation  of  the  sensible  world.  (1)  They  think  that  contradictories  or

contraries are true at the same time, because they see contraries coming into

existence out of the same thing. If, then, that which is not cannot come to be,

the thing must have existed before as both contraries alike, as Anaxagoras

says all is mixed in all, and Democritus too; for he says the void and the full

exist alike in every part, and yet one of these is being, and the other non-

being. To those, then, whose belief rests on these grounds, we shall say that

in a sense they speak rightly and in a sense they err. For ‘that which is’ has

two meanings, so that in some sense a thing can come to be out of that which

is not, while in some sense it cannot, and the same thing can at the same time

be in being and not in being-but not in the same respect. For the same thing

can be potentially at the same time two contraries, but it cannot actually. And

again we shall ask them to believe that among existing things there is alsoanother kind of substance to which neither movement nor destruction nor

generation at all belongs.

And  (2)  similarly  some  have  inferred  from  observation  of  the  sensible

world the truth of appearances. For they think that the truth should not be

determined by the large or small number of those who hold a belief, and that

the same thing is thought sweet by some when they taste it, and bitter by

others, so that if all were ill or all were mad, and only two or three were well

or sane, these would be thought ill and mad, and not the others.

And again, they say that many of the other animals receive impressions

contrary to ours; and that even to the senses of each individual, things do not

always seem the same. Which, then, of these impressions are true and which

are false is not obvious; for the one set is no more true than the other, but

both are alike. And this is why Democritus, at any rate, says that either there

is no truth or to us at least it is not evident.

And  in  general  it  is  because  these  thinkers  suppose  knowledge  to  be

sensation, and this to be a physical alteration, that they say that what appears

to our senses must be true; for it is for these reasons that both Empedocles

and Democritus and, one may almost say, all the others have fallen victims to

opinions  of  this  sort.  For  Empedocles  says  that  when  men  change  their

condition they change their knowledge;

For wisdom increases in men according to what is before them.

And elsewhere he says that:—


So far as their nature changed, so far to them always

  Came changed thoughts into mind.


And Parmenides also expresses himself in the same way:


For as at each time the much-bent limbs are composed,

So is the mind of men; for in each and all men

  ‘Tis one thing thinks-the substance of their limbs:

For that of which there is more is thought.


A saying of Anaxagoras to some of his friends is also related,-that things

would be for them such as they supposed them to be. And they say that

Homer also evidently had this opinion, because he made Hector, when he

was unconscious from the blow, lie ‘thinking other thoughts’,-which implies

that even those who are bereft of thought have thoughts, though not the samethoughts. Evidently, then, if both are forms of knowledge, the real things also

are at the same time ‘both so and not so’. And it is in this direction that the

consequences are most difficult. For if those who have seen most of such

truth as is possible for us (and these are those who seek and love it most)-if

these have such opinions and express these views about the truth, is it not

natural that beginners in philosophy should lose heart? For to seek the truth

would be to follow flying game.

But the reason why these thinkers held this opinion is that while they were

inquiring into the truth of that which is, they thought, ‘that which is’ was

identical with the sensible world; in this, however, there is largely present the

nature of the indeterminate-of that which exists in the peculiar sense which

we have explained; and therefore, while they speak plausibly, they do not say

what is true (for it is fitting to put the matter so rather than as Epicharmus put

it against Xenophanes). And again, because they saw that all this world of

nature is in movement and that about that which changes no true statement

can be made, they said that of course, regarding that which everywhere in

every respect is changing, nothing could truly be affirmed. It was this belief

that blossomed into the most extreme of the views above mentioned, that of

the professed Heracliteans, such as was held by Cratylus, who finally did not

think  it  right  to  say  anything  but  only  moved  his  finger,  and  criticized

Heraclitus for saying that it is impossible to step twice into the same river; for

he thought one could not do it even once.

But we shall say in answer to this argument also that while there is some

justification for their thinking that the changing, when it is changing, does not

exist,  yet  it  is  after  all  disputable;  for  that  which  is  losing  a  quality  has

something of that which is being lost, and of that which is coming to be,

something must already be. And in general if a thing is perishing, will be

present something that exists; and if a thing is coming to be, there must be

something from which it comes to be and something by which it is generated,

and this process cannot go on ad infinitum.-But, leaving these arguments, let

us insist on this, that it is not the same thing to change in quantity and in

quality. Grant that in quantity a thing is not constant; still it is in respect of its

form that we know each thing.-And again, it would be fair to criticize those

who hold this view for asserting about the whole material universe what they

saw only in a minority even of sensible things. For only that region of the

sensible  world  which  immediately  surrounds  us  is  always  in  process  of

destruction and generation; but this is-so to speak-not even a fraction of thewhole,  so  that  it  would  have  been  juster  to  acquit  this  part  of  the  world

because of the other part, than to condemn the other because of this.-And

again, obviously we shall make to them also the same reply that we made

long ago; we must show them and persuade them that there is something

whose nature is changeless. Indeed, those who say that things at the same

time are and are not, should in consequence say that all things are at rest

rather than that they are in movement; for there is nothing into which they

can change, since all attributes belong already to all subjects.

  Regarding the nature of truth, we must maintain that not everything which

appears is true; firstly, because even if sensation-at least of the object peculiar

to  the  sense  in  question-is  not  false,  still  appearance  is  not  the  same  as

sensation.-Again, it is fair to express surprise at our opponents’ raising the

question whether magnitudes are as great, and colours are of such a nature, as

they appear to people at a distance, or as they appear to those close at hand,

and whether they are such as they appear to the healthy or to the sick, and

whether those things are heavy which appear so to the weak or those which

appear so to the strong, and those things true which appear to the slee ing or

to the waking. For obviously they do not think these to be open questions; no

one, at least, if when he is in Libya he has fancied one night that he is in

Athens, starts for the concert hall.-And again with regard to the future, as

Plato says, surely the opinion of the physician and that of the ignorant man

are not equally weighty, for instance, on the question whether a man will get

well  or  not.-And  again,  among  sensations  themselves  the  sensation  of  a

foreign object and that of the appropriate object, or that of a kindred object

and that of the object of the sense in question, are not equally authoritative,

but in the case of colour sight, not taste, has the authority, and in the case of

flavour taste, not sight; each of which senses never says at the same time of

the same object that it simultaneously is ‘so and not so’.-But not even at

different times does one sense disagree about the quality, but only about that

to which the quality belongs. I mean, for instance, that the same wine might

seem, if either it or one’s body changed, at one time sweet and at another

time not sweet; but at least the sweet, such as it is when it exists, has never

yet changed, but one is always right about it, and that which is to be sweet is

of  necessity  of  such  and  such  a  nature.  Yet  all  these  views  destroy  this

necessity, leaving nothing to be of necessity, as they leave no essence of

anything; for the necessary cannot be in this way and also in that, so that if

anything is of necessity, it will not be ‘both so and not so’.  And,  in  general,  if  only  the  sensible  exists,  there  would  be  nothing  if

animate things were not; for there would be no faculty of sense. Now the

view  that  neither  the  sensible  qualities  nor  the  sensations  would  exist  is

doubtless true (for they are affections of the perceiver), but that the substrata

which  cause  the  sensation  should  not  exist  even  apart  from  sensation  is

impossible. For sensation is surely not the sensation of itself, but there is

something beyond the sensation, which must be prior to the sensation; for

that which moves is prior in nature to that which is moved, and if they are

correlative terms, this is no less the case.

<

div id="section39" class="section" title="6">


6


  There are, both among those who have these convictions and among those

who merely profess these views, some who raise a difficulty by asking, who

is to be the judge of the healthy man, and in general who is likely to judge

rightly on each class of questions. But such inquiries are like puzzling over

the question whether we are now asleep or awake. And all such questions

have the same meaning. These people demand that a reason shall be given for

everything;  for  they  seek  a  starting-point,  and  they  seek  to  get  this  by

demonstration,  while  it  is  obvious  from  their  actions  that  they  have  no

conviction. But their mistake is what we have stated it to be; they seek a

reason for things for which no reason can be given; for the starting-point of

demonstration is not demonstration.

These, then, might be easily persuaded of this truth, for it is not difficult to

grasp;  but  those  who  seek  merely  compulsion  in  argument  seek  what  is

impossible; for they demand to be allowed to contradict themselves-a claim

which contradicts itself from the very first.-But if not all things are relative,

but some are self-existent, not everything that appears will be true; for that

which appears is apparent to some one; so that he who says all things that

appear are true, makes all things relative. And, therefore, those who ask for

an irresistible argument, and at the same time demand to be called to account

for their views, must guard themselves by saying that the truth is not that

what appears exists, but that what appears exists for him to whom it appears,

and when, and to the sense to which, and under the conditions under which it

appears. And if they give an account of their view, but do not give it in thisway,  they  will  soon  find  themselves  contradicting  themselves.  For  it  is

possible that the same thing may appear to be honey to the sight, but not to

the taste, and that, since we have two eyes, things may not appear the same to

each, if their sight is unlike. For to those who for the reasons named some

time ago say that what appears is true, and therefore that all things are alike

false and true, for things do not appear either the same to all men or always

the same to the same man, but often have contrary appearances at the same

time (for touch says there are two objects when we cross our fingers, while

sight says there is one)-to these we shall say ‘yes, but not to the same sense

and in the same part of it and under the same conditions and at the same

time’, so that what appears will be with these qualifications true. But perhaps

for this reason those who argue thus not because they feel a difficulty but for

the sake of argument, should say that this is not true, but true for this man.

And as has been said before, they must make everything relative-relative to

opinion  and  perception,  so  that  nothing  either  has  come  to  be  or  will  be

without some one’s first thinking so. But if things have come to be or will be,

evidently not all things will be relative to opinion.-Again, if a thing is one, it

is in relation to one thing or to a definite number of things; and if the same

thing  is  both  half  and  equal,  it  is  not  to  the  double  that  the  equal  is

correlative. If, then, in relation to that which thinks, man and that which is

thought are the same, man will not be that which thinks, but only that which

is thought. And if each thing is to be relative to that which thinks, that which

thinks will be relative to an infinity of specifically different things.

Let this, then, suffice to show (1) that the most indisputable of all beliefs is

that  contradictory  statements  are  not  at  the  same  time  true,  and  (2)  what

consequences follow from the assertion that they are, and (3) why people do

assert this. Now since it is impossible that contradictories should be at the

same time true of the same thing, obviously contraries also cannot belong at

the same time to the same thing. For of contraries, one is a privation no less

than it is a contrary-and a privation of the essential nature; and privation is

the denial of a predicate to a determinate genus. If, then, it is impossible to

affirm and deny truly at the same time, it is also impossible that contraries

should  belong  to  a  subject  at  the  same  time,  unless  both  belong  to  it  in

particular  relations,  or  one  in  a  particular  relation  and  one  without

qualification.

<

div id="section40" class="section" title="7">7


But  on  the  other  hand  there  cannot  be  an  intermediate  between

contradictories, but of one subject we must either affirm or deny any one

predicate. This is clear, in the first place, if we define what the true and the

false are. To say of what is that it is not, or of what is not that it is, is false,

while to say of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is not, is true; so

that he who says of anything that it is, or that it is not, will say either what is

true or what is false; but neither what is nor what is not is said to be or not to

be.-Again, the intermediate between the contradictories will be so either in

the way in which grey is between black and white, or as that which is neither

man nor horse is between man and horse. (a) If it were of the latter kind, it

could not change into the extremes (for change is from not-good to good, or

from good to not-good), but as a matter of fact when there is an intermediate

it is always observed to change into the extremes. For there is no change

except  to  opposites  and  to  their  intermediates.  (b)  But  if  it  is  really

intermediate, in this way too there would have to be a change to white, which

was not from not-white; but as it is, this is never seen.-Again, every object of

understanding  or  reason  the  understanding  either  affirms  or  denies-this  is

obvious from the definition-whenever it says what is true or false. When it

connects in one way by assertion or negation, it says what is true, and when it

does so in another way, what is false.-Again, there must be an intermediate

between  all  contradictories,  if  one  is  not  arguing  merely  for  the  sake  of

argument; so that it will be possible for a man to say what is neither true nor

untrue, and there will be a middle between that which is and that which is

not,  so  that  there  will  also  be  a  kind  of  change  intermediate  between

generation and destruction.-Again, in all classes in which the negation of an

attribute involves the assertion of its contrary, even in these there will be an

intermediate; for instance, in the sphere of numbers there will be number

which is neither odd nor not-odd. But this is impossible, as is obvious from

the definition.-Again, the process will go on ad infinitum, and the number of

realities will be not only half as great again, but even greater. For again it will

be possible to deny this intermediate with reference both to its assertion and

to its negation, and this new term will be some definite thing; for its essence

is something different.-Again, when a man, on being asked whether a thing is

white, says ‘no’, he has denied nothing except that it is; and its not being is a

negation.  Some people have acquired this opinion as other paradoxical opinions have

been acquired; when men cannot refute eristical arguments, they give in to

the argument and agree that the conclusion is true. This, then, is why some

express this view; others do so because they demand a reason for everything.

And the starting-point in dealing with all such people is definition. Now the

definition rests on the necessity of their meaning something; for the form of

words of which the word is a sign will be its definition.-While the doctrine of

Heraclitus, that all things are and are not, seems to make everything true, that

of  Anaxagoras,  that  there  is  an  intermediate  between  the  terms  of  a

contradiction, seems to make everything false; for when things are mixed, the

mixture is neither good nor not-good, so that one cannot say anything that is

true.

<

div id="section41" class="section" title="8">


8


In view of these distinctions it is obvious that the one-sided theories which

some people express about all things cannot be valid-on the one hand the

theory that nothing is true (for, say they, there is nothing to prevent every

statement  from  being  like  the  statement  ‘the  diagonal  of  a  square  is

commensurate with the side’), on the other hand the theory that everything is

true. These views are practically the same as that of Heraclitus; for he who

says  that  all  things  are  true  and  all  are  false  also  makes  each  of  these

statements separately, so that since they are impossible, the double statement

must  be  impossible  too.-Again,  there  are  obviously  contradictories  which

cannot be at the same time true-nor on the other hand can all statements be

false; yet this would seem more possible in the light of what has been said.-

But against all such views we must postulate, as we said above,’ not that

something is or is not, but that something has a meaning, so that we must

argue from a definition, viz. by assuming what falsity or truth means. If that

which it is true to affirm is nothing other than that which it is false to deny, it

is  impossible  that  all  statements  should  be  false;  for  one  side  of  the

contradiction must be true. Again, if it is necessary with regard to everything

either to assert or to deny it, it is impossible that both should be false; for it is

one side of the contradiction that is false.-Therefore all such views are also

exposed to the often expressed objection, that they destroy themselves. For hewho says that everything is true makes even the statement contrary to his own

true, and therefore his own not true (for the contrary statement denies that it

is true), while he who says everything is false makes himself also false.-And

if the former person excepts the contrary statement, saying it alone is not true,

while the latter excepts his own as being not false, none the less they are

driven to postulate the truth or falsity of an infinite number of statements; for

that which says the true statement is true is true, and this process will go on to

infinity.

  Evidently, again, those who say all things are at rest are not right, nor are

those who say all things are in movement. For if all things are at rest, the

same  statements  will  always  be  true  and  the  same  always  false,-but  this

obviously changes; for he who makes a statement, himself at one time was

not and again will not be. And if all things are in motion, nothing will be true;

everything  therefore  will  be  false.  But  it  has  been  shown  that  this  is

impossible. Again, it must be that which is that changes; for change is from

something to something. But again it is not the case that all things are at rest

or in motion sometimes, and nothing for ever; for there is something which

always  moves  the  things  that  are  in  motion,  and  the  first  mover  is  itself

unmoved.                                        Book V


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section42" class="section" title="1">


1


  ‘Beginning’ means (1) that part of a thing from which one would start first,

e.g a line or a road has a beginning in either of the contrary directions. (2)

That from which each thing would best be originated, e.g. even in learning

we must sometimes begin not from the first point and the beginning of the

subject, but from the point from which we should learn most easily. (3) That

from which, as an immanent part, a thing first comes to be, e,g, as the keel of

a ship and the foundation of a house, while in animals some suppose the

heart, others the brain, others some other part, to be of this nature. (4) That

from which, not as an immanent part, a thing first comes to be, and from

which the movement or the change naturally first begins, as a child comes

from its father and its mother, and a fight from abusive language. (5) That at

whose will that which is moved is moved and that which changes changes,

e.g. the magistracies in cities, and oligarchies and monarchies and tyrannies,

are  called  arhchai,  and  so  are  the  arts,  and  of  these  especially  the

architectonic arts. (6) That from which a thing can first be known,-this also is

called the beginning of the thing, e.g. the hypotheses are the beginnings of

demonstrations. (Causes are spoken of in an equal number of senses; for all

causes are beginnings.) It is common, then, to all beginnings to be the first

point from which a thing either is or comes to be or is known; but of these

some are immanent in the thing and others are outside. Hence the nature of a

thing is a beginning, and so is the element of a thing, and thought and will,

and  essence,  and  the  final  cause-for  the  good  and  the  beautiful  are  the

beginning both of the knowledge and of the movement of many things.

<

div id="section43" class="section" title="2">2


  ‘Cause’ means (1) that from which, as immanent material, a thing comes

into being, e.g. the bronze is the cause of the statue and the silver of the

saucer, and so are the classes which include these. (2) The form or pattern,

i.e. the definition of the essence, and the classes which include this (e.g. the

ratio  2:1  and  number  in  general  are  causes  of  the  octave),  and  the  parts

included in the definition. (3) That from which the change or the resting from

change first begins; e.g. the adviser is a cause of the action, and the father a

cause of the child, and in general the maker a cause of the thing made and the

change-producing of the changing. (4) The end, i.e. that for the sake of which

a thing is; e.g. health is the cause of walking. For ‘Why does one walk?’ we

say; ‘that one may be healthy’; and in speaking thus we think we have given

the cause. The same is true of all the means that intervene before the end,

when  something  else  has  put  the  process  in  motion,  as  e.g.  thinning  or

purging or drugs or instruments intervene before health is reached; for all

these are for the sake of the end, though they differ from one another in that

some are instruments and others are actions.

These, then, are practically all the senses in which causes are spoken of,

and as they are spoken of in several senses it follows both that there are

several causes of the same thing, and in no accidental sense (e.g. both the art

of sculpture and the bronze are causes of the statue not in respect of anything

else but qua statue; not, however, in the same way, but the one as matter and

the other as source of the movement), and that things can be causes of one

another  (e.g.  exercise  of  good  condition,  and  the  latter  of  exercise;  not,

however, in the same way, but the one as end and the other as source of

movement).-Again, the same thing is the cause of contraries; for that which

when present causes a particular thing, we sometimes charge, when absent,

with  the  contrary,  e.g.  we  impute  the  shipwreck  to  the  absence  of  the

steersman, whose presence was the cause of safety; and both-the presence

and the privation-are causes as sources of movement.

All the causes now mentioned fall under four senses which are the most

obvious. For the letters are the cause of syllables, and the material is the

cause of manufactured things, and fire and earth and all such things are the

causes of bodies, and the parts are causes of the whole, and the hypotheses

are causes of the conclusion, in the sense that they are that out of which these

respectively are made; but of these some are cause as the substratum (e.g. theparts), others as the essence (the whole, the synthesis, and the form). The

semen, the physician, the adviser, and in general the agent, are all sources of

change or of rest. The remainder are causes as the end and the good of the

other things; for that for the sake of which other things are tends to be the

best and the end of the other things; let us take it as making no difference

whether we call it good or apparent good.

These, then, are the causes, and this is the number of their kinds, but the

varieties of causes are many in number, though when summarized these also

are comparatively few. Causes are spoken of in many senses, and even of

those which are of the same kind some are causes in a prior and others in a

posterior  sense,  e.g.  both  ‘the  physician’  and  ‘the  professional  man’  are

causes of health, and both ‘the ratio 2:1’ and ‘number’ are causes of the

octave, and the classes that include any particular cause are always causes of

the particular effect. Again, there are accidental causes and the classes which

include  these;  e.g.  while  in  one  sense  ‘the  sculptor’  causes  the  statue,  in

another  sense  ‘Polyclitus’  causes  it,  because  the  sculptor  happens  to  be

Polyclitus; and the classes that include the accidental cause are also causes,

e.g. ‘man’-or in general ‘animal’-is the cause of the statue, because Polyclitus

is a man, and man is an animal. Of accidental causes also some are more

remote or nearer than others, as, for instance, if ‘the white’ and ‘the musical’

were  called  causes  of  the  statue,  and  not  only  ‘Polyclitus’  or  ‘man’.  But

besides all these varieties of causes, whether proper or accidental, some are

called  causes  as  being  able  to  act,  others  as  acting;  e.g.  the  cause  of  the

house’s  being  built  is  a  builder,  or  a  builder  who  is  building.-The  same

variety of language will be found with regard to the effects of causes; e.g. a

thing may be called the cause of this statue or of a statue or in general of an

image, and of this bronze or of bronze or of matter in general; and similarly

in the case of accidental effects. Again, both accidental and proper causes

may be spoken of in combination; e.g. we may say not ‘Polyclitus’ nor ‘the

sculptor’ but ‘Polyclitus the sculptor’. Yet all these are but six in number,

while each is spoken of in two ways; for (A) they are causes either as the

individual, or as the genus, or as the accidental, or as the genus that includes

the accidental, and these either as combined, or as taken simply; and (B) all

may be taken as acting or as having a capacity. But they differ inasmuch as

the acting causes, i.e. the individuals, exist, or do not exist, simultaneously

with the things of which they are causes, e.g. this particular man who is

healing, with this particular man who is recovering health, and this particularbuilder with this particular thing that is being built; but the potential causes

are not always in this case; for the house does not perish at the same time as

the builder.

<

div id="section44" class="section" title="3">


3


  ‘Element’  means  (1)  the  primary  component  immanent  in  a  thing,  and

indivisible in kind into other kinds; e.g. the elements of speech are the parts

of which speech consists and into which it is ultimately divided, while they

are no longer divided into other forms of speech different in kind from them.

If they are divided, their parts are of the same kind, as a part of water is water

(while a part of the syllable is not a syllable). Similarly those who speak of

the  elements  of  bodies  mean  the  things  into  which  bodies  are  ultimately

divided, while they are no longer divided into other things differing in kind;

and whether the things of this sort are one or more, they call these elements.

The so-called elements of geometrical proofs, and in general the elements of

demonstrations,  have  a  similar  character;  for  the  primary  demonstrations,

each  of  which  is  implied  in  many  demonstrations,  are  called  elements  of

demonstrations;  and  the  primary  syllogisms,  which  have  three  terms  and

proceed by means of one middle, are of this nature.

(2) People also transfer the word ‘element’ from this meaning and apply it

to that which, being one and small, is useful for many purposes; for which

reason what is small and simple and indivisible is called an element. Hence

come the facts that the most universal things are elements (because each of

them being one and simple is present in a plurality of things, either in all or in

as many as possible), and that unity and the point are thought by some to be

first principles. Now, since the so-called genera are universal and indivisible

(for there is no definition of them), some say the genera are elements, and

more so than the differentia, because the genus is more universal; for where

the differentia is present, the genus accompanies it, but where the genus is

present, the differentia is not always so. It is common to all the meanings that

the element of each thing is the first component immanent in each.

<

div id="section45" class="section" title="4">4


  ‘Nature’  means  (1)  the  genesis  of  growing  things-the  meaning  which

would be suggested if one were to pronounce the ‘u’ in phusis long. (2) That

immanent part of a growing thing, from which its growth first proceeds. (3)

The  source  from  which  the  primary  movement  in  each  natural  object  is

present in it in virtue of its own essence. Those things are said to grow which

derive increase from something else by contact and either by organic unity, or

by organic adhesion as in the case of embryos. Organic unity differs from

contact; for in the latter case there need not be anything besides the contact,

but in organic unities there is something identical in both parts, which makes

them grow together instead of merely touching, and be one in respect of

continuity  and  quantity,  though  not  of  quality.-(4)  ‘Nature’  means  the

primary material of which any natural object consists or out of which it is

made,  which  is  relatively  unshaped  and  cannot  be  changed  from  its  own

potency, as e.g. bronze is said to be the nature of a statue and of bronze

utensils, and wood the nature of wooden things; and so in all other cases; for

when a product is made out of these materials, the first matter is preserved

throughout.  For  it  is  in  this  way  that  people  call  the  elements  of  natural

objects also their nature, some naming fire, others earth, others air, others

water, others something else of the sort, and some naming more than one of

these,  and  others  all  of  them.-(5)  ‘Nature’  means  the  essence  of  natural

objects, as with those who say the nature is the primary mode of composition,

or as Empedocles says:—


  Nothing that is has a nature,

But only mixing and parting of the mixed,

And nature is but a name given them by men.


  Hence as regards the things that are or come to be by nature, though that

from which they naturally come to be or are is already present, we say they

have not their nature yet, unless they have their form or shape. That which

comprises both of these exists by nature, e.g. the animals and their parts; and

not only is the first matter nature (and this in two senses, either the first,

counting from the thing, or the first in general; e.g. in the case of works in

bronze, bronze is first with reference to them, but in general perhaps water is

first, if all things that can be melted are water), but also the form or essence,which is the end of the process of becoming.-(6) By an extension of meaning

from this sense of ‘nature’ every essence in general has come to be called a

‘nature’, because the nature of a thing is one kind of essence.

  From what has been said, then, it is plain that nature in the primary and

strict sense is the essence of things which have in themselves, as such, a

source of movement; for the matter is called the nature because it is qualified

to receive this, and processes of becoming and growing are called nature

because they are movements proceeding from this. And nature in this sense is

the  source  of  the  movement  of  natural  objects,  being  present  in  them

somehow, either potentially or in complete reality.

<

div id="section46" class="section" title="5">


5


We  call  ‘necessary’  (1)  (a)  that  without  which,  as  a  condition,  a  thing

cannot live; e.g. breathing and food are necessary for an animal; for it is

incapable of existing without these; (b) the conditions without which good

cannot be or come to be, or without which we cannot get rid or be freed of

evil; e.g. drinking the medicine is necessary in order that we may be cured of

disease, and a man’s sailing to Aegina is necessary in order that he may get

his money.-(2) The compulsory and compulsion, i.e. that which impedes and

tends  to  hinder,  contrary  to  impulse  and  purpose.  For  the  compulsory  is

called necessary (whence the necessary is painful, as Evenus says: ‘For every

necessary thing is ever irksome’), and compulsion is a form of necessity, as

Sophocles says: ‘But force necessitates me to this act’. And necessity is held

to be something that cannot be persuaded-and rightly, for it is contrary to the

movement which accords with purpose and with reasoning.-(3) We say that

that which cannot be otherwise is necessarily as it is. And from this sense of

‘necessary’ all the others are somehow derived; for a thing is said to do or

suffer what is necessary in the sense of compulsory, only when it cannot act

according to its impulse because of the compelling forces-which implies that

necessity is that because of which a thing cannot be otherwise; and similarly

as regards the conditions of life and of good; for when in the one case good,

in the other life and being, are not possible without certain conditions, these

are  necessary,  and  this  kind  of  cause  is  a  sort  of  necessity.  Again,

demonstration  is  a  necessary  thing  because  the  conclusion  cannot  beotherwise, if there has been demonstration in the unqualified sense; and the

causes  of  this  necessity  are  the  first  premisses,  i.e.  the  fact  that  the

propositions from which the syllogism proceeds cannot be otherwise.

Now some things owe their necessity to something other than themselves;

others do not, but are themselves the source of necessity in other things.

Therefore the necessary in the primary and strict sense is the simple; for this

does not admit of more states than one, so that it cannot even be in one state

and also in another; for if it did it would already be in more than one. If, then,

there are any things that are eternal and unmovable, nothing compulsory or

against their nature attaches to them.

<

div id="section47" class="section" title="6">


6


  ‘One’ means (1) that which is one by accident, (2) that which is one by its

own nature. (1) Instances of the accidentally one are ‘Coriscus and what is

musical’, and ‘musical Coriscus’ (for it is the same thing to say ‘Coriscus and

what is musical’, and ‘musical Coriscus’), and ‘what is musical and what is

just’, and ‘musical Coriscus and just Coriscus’. For all of these are called one

by virtue of an accident, ‘what is just and what is musical’ because they are

accidents of one substance, ‘what is musical and Coriscus’ because the one is

an accident of the other; and similarly in a sense ‘musical Coriscus’ is one

with ‘Coriscus’ because one of the parts of the phrase is an accident of the

other, i.e. ‘musical’ is an accident of Coriscus; and ‘musical Coriscus’ is one

with ‘just Coriscus’ because one part of each is an accident of one and the

same subject. The case is similar if the accident is predicated of a genus or of

any universal name, e.g. if one says that man is the same as ‘musical man’;

for  this  is  either  because  ‘musical’  is  an  accident  of  man,  which  is  one

substance, or because both are accidents of some individual, e.g. Coriscus.

Both, however, do not belong to him in the same way, but one presumably as

genus and included in his substance, the other as a state or affection of the

substance.

The things, then, that are called one in virtue of an accident, are called so

in this way. (2) Of things that are called one in virtue of their own nature

some (a) are so called because they are continuous, e.g. a bundle is made one

by a band, and pieces of wood are made one by glue; and a line, even if it isbent, is called one if it is continuous, as each part of the body is, e.g. the leg

or the arm. Of these themselves, the continuous by nature are more one than

the continuous by art. A thing is called continuous which has by its own

nature one movement and cannot have any other; and the movement is one

when it is indivisible, and it is indivisible in respect of time. Those things are

continuous by their own nature which are one not merely by contact; for if

you put pieces of wood touching one another, you will not say these are one

piece of wood or one body or one continuum of any other sort. Things, then,

that are continuous in any way called one, even if they admit of being bent,

and still more those which cannot be bent; e.g. the shin or the thigh is more

one than the leg, because the movement of the leg need not be one. And the

straight line is more one than the bent; but that which is bent and has an angle

we  call  both  one  and  not  one,  because  its  movement  may  be  either

simultaneous  or  not  simultaneous;  but  that  of  the  straight  line  is  always

simultaneous,  and  no  part  of  it  which  has  magnitude  rests  while  another

moves, as in the bent line.

  (b)(i) Things are called one in another sense because their substratum does

not  differ  in  kind;  it  does  not  differ  in  the  case  of  things  whose  kind  is

indivisible to sense. The substratum meant is either the nearest to, or the

farthest from, the final state. For, one the one hand, wine is said to be one and

water is said to be one, qua indivisible in kind; and, on the other hand, all

juices, e.g. oil and wine, are said to be one, and so are all things that can be

melted, because the ultimate substratum of all is the same; for all of these are

water or air.

(ii)  Those  things  also  are  called  one  whose  genus  is  one  though

distinguished by opposite differentiae-these too are all called one because the

genus which underlies the differentiae is one (e.g. horse, man, and dog form a

unity, because all are animals), and indeed in a way similar to that in which

the matter is one. These are sometimes called one in this way, but sometimes

it is the higher genus that is said to be the same (if they are infimae species of

their genus)-the genus above the proximate genera; e.g. the isosceles and the

equilateral are one and the same figure because both are triangles; but they

are not the same triangles.

(c) Two things are called one, when the definition which states the essence

of  one  is  indivisible  from  another  definition  which  shows  us  the  other

(though  in  itself  every  definition  is  divisible).  Thus  even  that  which  has

increased or is diminishing is one, because its definition is one, as, in the caseof plane figures, is the definition of their form. In general those things the

thought of whose essence is indivisible, and cannot separate them either in

time or in place or in definition, are most of all one, and of these especially

those which are substances. For in general those things that do not admit of

division are called one in so far as they do not admit of it; e.g. if two things

are indistinguishable qua man, they are one kind of man; if qua animal, one

kind of animal; if qua magnitude, one kind of magnitude.-Now most things

are  called  one  because  they  either  do  or  have  or  suffer  or  are  related  to

something else that is one, but the things that are primarily called one are

those whose substance is one,-and one either in continuity or in form or in

definition;  for  we  count  as  more  than  one  either  things  that  are  not

continuous, or those whose form is not one, or those whose definition is not

one.

  While in a sense we call anything one if it is a quantity and continuous, in

a sense we do not unless it is a whole, i.e. unless it has unity of form; e.g. if

we saw the parts of a shoe put together anyhow we should not call them one

all the same (unless because of their continuity); we do this only if they are

put together so as to be a shoe and to have already a certain single form. This

is  why  the  circle  is  of  all  lines  most  truly  one,  because  it  is  whole  and

complete.

(3) The essence of what is one is to be some kind of beginning of number;

for the first measure is the beginning, since that by which we first know each

class is the first measure of the class; the one, then, is the beginning of the

knowable regarding each class. But the one is not the same in all classes. For

here it is a quarter-tone, and there it is the vowel or the consonant; and there

is another unit of weight and another of movement. But everywhere the one

is indivisible either in quantity or in kind. Now that which is indivisible in

quantity is called a unit if it is not divisible in any dimension and is without

position, a point if it is not divisible in any dimension and has position, a line

if it is divisible in one dimension, a plane if in two, a body if divisible in

quantity  in  all—i.e.  in  three—dimensions.  And,  reversing  the  order,  that

which is divisible in two dimensions is a plane, that which is divisible in one

a line, that which is in no way divisible in quantity is a point or a unit,-that

which has not position a unit, that which has position a point.

  Again, some things are one in number, others in species, others in genus,

others by analogy; in number those whose matter is one, in species those

whose  definition  is  one,  in  genus  those  to  which  the  same  figure  ofpredication applies, by analogy those which are related as a third thing is to a

fourth. The latter kinds of unity are always found when the former are; e.g.

things that are one in number are also one in species, while things that are

one in species are not all one in number; but things that are one in species are

all one in genus, while things that are so in genus are not all one in species

but are all one by analogy; while things that are one by analogy are not all

one in genus.

  Evidently  ‘many’  will  have  meanings  opposite  to  those  of  ‘one’;  some

things are many because they are not continuous, others because their matter-

either the proximate matter or the ultimate-is divisible in kind, others because

the definitions which state their essence are more than one.

<

div id="section48" class="section" title="7">


7


  Things are said to ‘be’ (1) in an accidental sense, (2) by their own nature.

(1) In an accidental sense, e.g. we say ‘the righteous doer is musical’, and

‘the  man  is  musical’,  and  ‘the  musician  is  a  man’,  just  as  we  say  ‘the

musician builds’, because the builder happens to be musical or the musician

to be a builder; for here ‘one thing is another’ means ‘one is an accident of

another’. So in the cases we have mentioned; for when we say ‘the man is

musical’ and ‘the musician is a man’, or ‘he who is pale is musical’ or ‘the

musician is pale’, the last two mean that both attributes are accidents of the

same thing; the first that the attribute is an accident of that which is, while

‘the musical is a man’ means that ‘musical’ is an accident of a man. (In this

sense, too, the not-pale is said to be, because that of which it is an accident

is.) Thus when one thing is said in an accidental sense to be another, this is

either because both belong to the same thing, and this is, or because that to

which  the  attribute  belongs  is,  or  because  the  subject  which  has  as  an

attribute that of which it is itself predicated, itself is.

(2) The kinds of essential being are precisely those that are indicated by the

figures of predication; for the senses of ‘being’ are just as many as these

figures. Since, then, some predicates indicate what the subject is, others its

quality, others quantity, others relation, others activity or passivity, others its

‘where’, others its ‘when’, ‘being’ has a meaning answering to each of these.

For  there  is  no  difference  between  ‘the  man  is  recovering’  and  ‘the  manrecovers’, nor between ‘the man is walking or cutting’ and ‘the man walks’

or ‘cuts’; and similarly in all other cases.

(3) Again, ‘being’ and ‘is’ mean that a statement is true, ‘not being’ that it

is not true but falses-and this alike in the case of affirmation and of negation;

e.g. ‘Socrates is musical’ means that this is true, or ‘Socrates is not-pale’

means that this is true; but ‘the diagonal of the square is not commensurate

with the side’ means that it is false to say it is.

(4) Again, ‘being’ and ‘that which is’ mean that some of the things we

have mentioned ‘are’ potentially, others in complete reality. For we say both

of  that  which  sees  potentially  and  of  that  which  sees  actually,  that  it  is

‘seeing’,  and  both  of  that  which  can  actualize  its  knowledge  and  of  that

which is actualizing it, that it knows, and both of that to which rest is already

present and of that which can rest, that it rests. And similarly in the case of

substances; we say the Hermes is in the stone, and the half of the line is in the

line, and we say of that which is not yet ripe that it is corn. When a thing is

potential and when it is not yet potential must be explained elsewhere.

<

div id="section49" class="section" title="8">


8


We call ‘substance’ (1) the simple bodies, i.e. earth and fire and water and

everything of the sort, and in general bodies and the things composed of

them, both animals and divine beings, and the parts of these. All these are

called substance because they are not predicated of a subject but everything

else is predicated of them.-(2) That which, being present in such things as are

not predicated of a subject, is the cause of their being, as the soul is of the

being of an animal.-(3) The parts which are present in such things, limiting

them and marking them as individuals, and by whose destruction the whole is

destroyed, as the body is by the destruction of the plane, as some say, and the

plane by the destruction of the line; and in general number is thought by

some to be of this nature; for if it is destroyed, they say, nothing exists, and it

limits all things.-(4) The essence, the formula of which is a definition, is also

called the substance of each thing.

It follows, then, that ‘substance’ has two senses, (A) ultimate substratum,

which is no longer predicated of anything else, and (B) that which, being a

‘this’, is also separable and of this nature is the shape or form of each thing.<

div id="section50" class="section" title="9">


9


  ‘The same’ means (1) that which is the same in an accidental sense, e.g.

‘the pale’ and ‘the musical’ are the same because they are accidents of the

same thing, and ‘a man’ and ‘musical’ because the one is an accident of the

other; and ‘the musical’ is ‘a man’ because it is an accident of the man. (The

complex entity is the same as either of the simple ones and each of these is

the same as it; for both ‘the man’ and ‘the musical’ are said to be the same as

‘the  musical  man’,  and  this  the  same  as  they.)  This  is  why  all  of  these

statements are made not universally; for it is not true to say that every man is

the same as ‘the musical’ (for universal attributes belong to things in virtue of

their own nature, but accidents do not belong to them in virtue of their own

nature); but of the individuals the statements are made without qualification.

For  ‘Socrates’  and  ‘musical  Socrates’  are  thought  to  be  the  same;  but

‘Socrates’ is not predicable of more than one subject, and therefore we do not

say ‘every Socrates’ as we say ‘every man’.

  Some things are said to be the same in this sense, others (2) are the same

by their own nature, in as many senses as that which is one by its own nature

is so; for both the things whose matter is one either in kind or in number, and

those  whose  essence  is  one,  are  said  to  be  the  same.  Clearly,  therefore,

sameness is a unity of the being either of more than one thing or of one thing

when it is treated as more than one, ie. when we say a thing is the same as

itself; for we treat it as two.

  Things  are  called  ‘other’  if  either  their  kinds  or  their  matters  or  the

definitions of their essence are more than one; and in general ‘other’ has

meanings opposite to those of ‘the same’.

  ‘Different’ is applied (1) to those things which though other are the same

in some respect, only not in number but either in species or in genus or by

analogy; (2) to those whose genus is other, and to contraries, and to an things

that have their otherness in their essence.

  Those  things  are  called  ‘like’  which  have  the  same  attributes  in  every

respect, and those which have more attributes the same than different, and

those whose quality is one; and that which shares with another thing the

greater number or the more important of the attributes (each of them one oftwo contraries) in respect of which things are capable of altering, is like that

other thing. The senses of ‘unlike’ are opposite to those of ‘like’.

<

div id="section51" class="section" title="10">


10


The term ‘opposite’ is applied to contradictories, and to contraries, and to

relative terms, and to privation and possession, and to the extremes from

which and into which generation and dissolution take place; and the attributes

that cannot be present at the same time in that which is receptive of both, are

said to be opposed,-either themselves of their constituents. Grey and white

colour  do  not  belong  at  the  same  time  to  the  same  thing;  hence  their

constituents are opposed.

The term ‘contrary’ is applied (1) to those attributes differing in genus

which cannot belong at the same time to the same subject, (2) to the most

different of the things in the same genus, (3) to the most different of the

attributes in the same recipient subject, (4) to the most different of the things

that fall under the same faculty, (5) to the things whose difference is greatest

either absolutely or in genus or in species. The other things that are called

contrary are so called, some because they possess contraries of the above

kind,  some  because  they  are  receptive  of  such,  some  because  they  are

productive of or susceptible to such, or are producing or suffering them, or

are losses or acquisitions, or possessions or privations, of such. Since ‘one’

and ‘being’ have many senses, the other terms which are derived from these,

and therefore ‘same’, ‘other’, and ‘contrary’, must correspond, so that they

must be different for each category.

The term ‘other in species’ is applied to things which being of the same

genus are not subordinate the one to the other, or which being in the same

genus have a difference, or which have a contrariety in their substance; and

contraries are other than one another in species (either all contraries or those

which are so called in the primary sense), and so are those things whose

definitions differ in the infima species of the genus (e.g. man and horse are

indivisible in genus, but their definitions are different), and those which being

in  the  same  substance  have  a  difference.  ‘The  same  in  species’  has  the

various meanings opposite to these.

<div id="section52" class="section" title="11">


11


The words ‘prior’ and ‘posterior’ are applied (1) to some things (on the

assumption that there is a first, i.e. a beginning, in each class) because they

are nearer some beginning determined either absolutely and by nature, or by

reference to something or in some place or by certain people; e.g. things are

prior in place because they are nearer either to some place determined by

nature (e.g. the middle or the last place), or to some chance object; and that

which is farther is posterior.-Other things are prior in time; some by being

farther from the present, i.e. in the case of past events (for the Trojan war is

prior to the Persian, because it is farther from the present), others by being

nearer the present, i.e. in the case of future events (for the Nemean games are

prior  to  the  Pythian,  if  we  treat  the  present  as  beginning  and  first  point,

because they are nearer the present).-Other things are prior in movement; for

that which is nearer the first mover is prior (e.g. the boy is prior to the man);

and  the  prime  mover  also  is  a  beginning  absolutely.-Others  are  prior  in

power; for that which exceeds in power, i.e. the more powerful, is prior; and

such is that according to whose will the other-i.e. the posterior-must follow,

so that if the prior does not set it in motion the other does not move, and if it

sets it in motion it does move; and here will is a beginning.-Others are prior

in arrangement; these are the things that are placed at intervals in reference to

some one definite thing according to some rule, e.g. in the chorus the second

man is prior to the third, and in the lyre the second lowest string is prior to

the lowest; for in the one case the leader and in the other the middle string is

the beginning.

These, then, are called prior in this sense, but (2) in another sense that

which is prior for knowledge is treated as also absolutely prior; of these, the

things that are prior in definition do not coincide with those that are prior in

relation to perception. For in definition universals are prior, in relation to

perception  individuals.  And  in  definition  also  the  accident  is  prior  to  the

whole, e.g. ‘musical’ to ‘musical man’, for the definition cannot exist as a

whole without the part; yet musicalness cannot exist unless there is some one

who is musical.

(3) The attributes of prior things are called prior, e.g. straightness is prior

to smoothness; for one is an attribute of a line as such, and the other of asurface.

  Some things then are called prior and posterior in this sense, others (4) in

respect of nature and substance, i.e. those which can be without other things,

while the others cannot be without them,-a distinction which Plato used. (If

we consider the various senses of ‘being’, firstly the subject is prior, so that

substance is prior; secondly, according as potency or complete reality is taken

into account, different things are prior, for some things are prior in respect of

potency, others in respect of complete reality, e.g. in potency the half line is

prior  to  the  whole  line,  and  the  part  to  the  whole,  and  the  matter  to  the

concrete substance, but in complete reality these are posterior; for it is only

when the whole has been dissolved that they will exist in complete reality.) In

a sense, therefore, all things that are called prior and posterior are so called

with reference to this fourth sense; for some things can exist without others in

respect of generation, e.g. the whole without the parts, and others in respect

of dissolution, e.g. the part without the whole. And the same is true in all

other cases.

<

div id="section53" class="section" title="12">


12


  ‘Potency’ means (1) a source of movement or change, which is in another

thing than the thing moved or in the same thing qua other; e.g. the art of

building is a potency which is not in the thing built, while the art of healing,

which is a potency, may be in the man healed, but not in him qua healed.

‘Potency’  then  means  the  source,  in  general,  of  change  or  movement  in

another thing or in the same thing qua other, and also (2) the source of a

thing’s being moved by another thing or by itself qua other. For in virtue of

that  principle,  in  virtue  of  which  a  patient  suffers  anything,  we  call  it

‘capable’ of suffering; and this we do sometimes if it suffers anything at all,

sometimes  not  in  respect  of  everything  it  suffers,  but  only  if  it  suffers  a

change for the better—(3) The capacity of performing this well or according

to intention; for sometimes we say of those who merely can walk or speak

but not well or not as they intend, that they cannot speak or walk. So too (4)

in  the  case  of  passivity—(5)  The  states  in  virtue  of  which  things  are

absolutely impassive or unchangeable, or not easily changed for the worse,

are  called  potencies;  for  things  are  broken  and  crushed  and  bent  and  ingeneral destroyed not by having a potency but by not having one and by

lacking something, and things are impassive with respect to such processes if

they are scarcely and slightly affected by them, because of a ‘potency’ and

because they ‘can’ do something and are in some positive state.

  ‘Potency’ having this variety of meanings, so too the ‘potent’ or ‘capable’

in one sense will mean that which can begin a movement (or a change in

general, for even that which can bring things to rest is a ‘potent’ thing) in

another  thing  or  in  itself  qua  other;  and  in  one  sense  that  over  which

something else has such a potency; and in one sense that which has a potency

of changing into something, whether for the worse or for the better (for even

that which perishes is thought to be ‘capable’ of perishing, for it would not

have perished if it had not been capable of it; but, as a matter of fact, it has a

certain  disposition  and  cause  and  principle  which  fits  it  to  suffer  this;

sometimes it is thought to be of this sort because it has something, sometimes

because it is deprived of something; but if privation is in a sense ‘having’ or

‘habit’, everything will be capable by having something, so that things are

capable both by having a positive habit and principle, and by having the

privation of this, if it is possible to have a privation; and if privation is not in

a  sense  ‘habit’,  ‘capable’  is  used  in  two  distinct  senses);  and  a  thing  is

capable in another sense because neither any other thing, nor itself qua other,

has  a  potency  or  principle  which  can  destroy  it.  Again,  all  of  these  are

capable either merely because the thing might chance to happen or not to

happen, or because it might do so well. This sort of potency is found even in

lifeless things, e.g. in instruments; for we say one lyre can speak, and another

cannot speak at all, if it has not a good tone.

  Incapacity  is  privation  of  capacity-i.e.  of  such  a  principle  as  has  been

described either in general or in the case of something that would naturally

have the capacity, or even at the time when it would naturally already have it;

for  the  senses  in  which  we  should  call  a  boy  and  a  man  and  a  eunuch

‘incapable of begetting’ are distinct.-Again, to either kind of capacity there is

an opposite incapacity-both to that which only can produce movement and to

that which can produce it well.

  Some things, then, are called adunata in virtue of this kind of incapacity,

while others are so in another sense; i.e. both dunaton and adunaton are used

as follows. The impossible is that of which the contrary is of necessity true,

e.g. that the diagonal of a square is commensurate with the side is impossible,

because such a statement is a falsity of which the contrary is not only true butalso necessary; that it is commensurate, then, is not only false but also of

necessity false. The contrary of this, the possible, is found when it is not

necessary  that  the  contrary  is  false,  e.g.  that  a  man  should  be  seated  is

possible; for that he is not seated is not of necessity false. The possible, then,

in one sense, as has been said, means that which is not of necessity false; in

one,  that  which  is  true;  in  one,  that  which  may  be  true.-A  ‘potency’  or

‘power’ in geometry is so called by a change of meaning.-These senses of

‘capable’ or ‘possible’ involve no reference to potency. But the senses which

involve a reference to potency all refer to the primary kind of potency; and

this is a source of change in another thing or in the same thing qua other. For

other things are called ‘capable’, some because something else has such a

potency  over  them,  some  because  it  has  not,  some  because  it  has  it  in  a

particular way. The same is true of the things that are incapable. Therefore

the proper definition of the primary kind of potency will be ‘a source of

change in another thing or in the same thing qua other’.

<

div id="section54" class="section" title="13">


13


  ‘Quantum’ means that which is divisible into two or more constituent parts

of which each is by nature a ‘one’ and a ‘this’. A quantum is a plurality if it is

numerable, a magnitude if it is a measurable. ‘Plurality’ means that which is

divisible  potentially  into  non-continuous  parts,  ‘magnitude’  that  which  is

divisible into continuous parts; of magnitude, that which is continuous in one

dimension is length; in two breadth, in three depth. Of these, limited plurality

is number, limited length is a line, breadth a surface, depth a solid.

  Again, some things are called quanta in virtue of their own nature, others

incidentally; e.g. the line is a quantum by its own nature, the musical is one

incidentally. Of the things that are quanta by their own nature some are so as

substances, e.g. the line is a quantum (for ‘a certain kind of quantum’ is

present in the definition which states what it is), and others are modifications

and states of this kind of substance, e.g. much and little, long and short, broad

and narrow, deep and shallow, heavy and light, and all other such attributes.

And also great and small, and greater and smaller, both in themselves and

when taken relatively to each other, are by their own nature attributes of what

is quantitative; but these names are transferred to other things also. Of thingsthat are quanta incidentally, some are so called in the sense in which it was

said that the musical and the white were quanta, viz. because that to which

musicalness and whiteness belong is a quantum, and some are quanta in the

way in which movement and time are so; for these also are called quanta of a

sort  and  continuous  because  the  things  of  which  these  are  attributes  are

divisible. I mean not that which is moved, but the space through which it is

moved;  for  because  that  is  a  quantum  movement  also  is  a  quantum,  and

because this is a quantum time is one.

<

div id="section55" class="section" title="14">


14


  ‘Quality’ means (1) the differentia of the essence, e.g. man is an animal of

a certain quality because he is two-footed, and the horse is so because it is

four-footed; and a circle is a figure of particular quality because it is without

angles,-which shows that the essential differentia is a quality.-This, then, is

one meaning of quality-the differentia of the essence, but (2) there is another

sense in which it applies to the unmovable objects of mathematics, the sense

in  which  the  numbers  have  a  certain  quality,  e.g.  the  composite  numbers

which are not in one dimension only, but of which the plane and the solid are

copies (these are those which have two or three factors); and in general that

which exists in the essence of numbers besides quantity is quality; for the

essence of each is what it is once, e.g. that of is not what it is twice or thrice,

but what it is once; for 6 is once 6.

(3)  All  the  modifications  of  substances  that  move  (e.g.  heat  and  cold,

whiteness and blackness, heaviness and lightness, and the others of the sort)

in virtue of which, when they change, bodies are said to alter. (4) Quality in

respect of virtue and vice, and in general, of evil and good.

  Quality, then, seems to have practically two meanings, and one of these is

the more proper. The primary quality is the differentia of the essence, and of

this the quality in numbers is a part; for it is a differentia of essences, but

either not of things that move or not of them qua moving. Secondly, there are

the modifications of things that move, qua moving, and the differentiae of

movements. Virtue and vice fall among these modifications; for they indicate

differentiae of the movement or activity, according to which the things in

motion act or are acted on well or badly; for that which can be moved or actin one way is good, and that which can do so in another—the contrary—way

is  vicious.  Good  and  evil  indicate  quality  especially  in  living  things,  and

among these especially in those which have purpose.

<

div id="section56" class="section" title="15">


15


  Things are ‘relative’ (1) as double to half, and treble to a third, and in

general  that  which  contains  something  else  many  times  to  that  which  is

contained  many  times  in  something  else,  and  that  which  exceeds  to  that

which is exceeded; (2) as that which can heat to that which can be heated, and

that which can cut to that which can be cut, and in general the active to the

passive;  (3)  as  the  measurable  to  the  measure,  and  the  knowable  to

knowledge, and the perceptible to perception.

(1)  Relative  terms  of  the  first  kind  are  numerically  related  either

indefinitely or definitely, to numbers themselves or to 1. E.g. the double is in

a definite numerical relation to 1, and that which is ‘many times as great’ is in

a  numerical,  but  not  a  definite,  relation  to  1,  i.e.  not  in  this  or  in  that

numerical relation to it; the relation of that which is half as big again as

something else to that something is a definite numerical relation to a number;

that which is n+I/n times something else is in an indefinite relation to that

something, as that which is ‘many times as great’ is in an indefinite relation

to  1;  the  relation  of  that  which  exceeds  to  that  which  is  exceeded  is

numerically  quite  indefinite;  for  number  is  always  commensurate,  and

‘number’ is not predicated of that which is not commensurate, but that which

exceeds is, in relation to that which is exceeded, so much and something

more; and this something is indefinite; for it can, indifferently, be either equal

or  not  equal  to  that  which  is  exceeded.-All  these  relations,  then,  are

numerically expressed and are determinations of number, and so in another

way are the equal and the like and the same. For all refer to unity. Those

things are the same whose substance is one; those are like whose quality is

one;  those  are  equal  whose  quantity  is  one;  and  1  is  the  beginning  and

measure of number, so that all these relations imply number, though not in

the same way.

(2) Things that are active or passive imply an active or a passive potency

and the actualizations of the potencies; e.g. that which is capable of heating isrelated to that which is capable of being heated, because it can heat it, and,

again, that which heats is related to that which is heated and that which cuts

to  that  which  is  cut,  in  the  sense  that  they  actually  do  these  things.  But

numerical relations are not actualized except in the sense which has been

elsewhere stated; actualizations in the sense of movement they have not. Of

relations which imply potency some further imply particular periods of time,

e.g. that which has made is relative to that which has been made, and that

which will make to that which will be made. For it is in this way that a father

is called the father of his son; for the one has acted and the other has been

acted on in a certain way. Further, some relative terms imply privation of

potency, i.e. ‘incapable’ and terms of this sort, e.g. ‘invisible’.

  Relative terms which imply number or potency, therefore, are all relative

because their very essence includes in its nature a reference to something

else, not because something else involves a reference to it; but (3) that which

is measurable or knowable or thinkable is called relative because something

else involves a reference to it. For ‘that which is thinkable’ implies that the

thought of it is possible, but the thought is not relative to ‘that of which it is

the thought’; for we should then have said the same thing twice. Similarly

sight is the sight of something, not ‘of that of which it is the sight’ (though of

course it is true to say this); in fact it is relative to colour or to something else

of the sort. But according to the other way of speaking the same thing would

be said twice,-’the sight is of that of which it is.’

  Things that are by their own nature called relative are called so sometimes

in these senses, sometimes if the classes that include them are of this sort; e.g.

medicine is a relative term because its genus, science, is thought to be a

relative term. Further, there are the properties in virtue of which the things

that have them are called relative, e.g. equality is relative because the equal

is, and likeness because the like is. Other things are relative by accident; e.g.

a man is relative because he happens to be double of something and double is

a relative term; or the white is relative, if the same thing happens to be double

and white.

<

div id="section57" class="section" title="16">


16


  What is called ‘complete’ is (1) that outside which it is not possible to findany, even one, of its parts; e.g. the complete time of each thing is that outside

which it is not possible to find any time which is a part proper to it.-(2) That

which in respect of excellence and goodness cannot be excelled in its kind;

e.g. we have a complete doctor or a complete flute-player, when they lack

nothing  in  respect  of  the  form  of  their  proper  excellence.  And  thus,

transferring the word to bad things, we speak of a complete scandal-monger

and a complete thief; indeed we even call them good, i.e. a good thief and a

good  scandal-monger.  And  excellence  is  a  completion;  for  each  thing  is

complete and every substance is complete, when in respect of the form of its

proper excellence it lacks no part of its natural magnitude.-(3) The things

which have attained their end, this being good, are called complete; for things

are complete in virtue of having attained their end. Therefore, since the end is

something ultimate, we transfer the word to bad things and say a thing has

been completely spoilt, and completely destroyed, when it in no wise falls

short of destruction and badness, but is at its last point. This is why death,

too, is by a figure of speech called the end, because both are last things. But

the ultimate purpose is also an end.-Things, then, that are called complete in

virtue of their own nature are so called in all these senses, some because in

respect of goodness they lack nothing and cannot be excelled and no part

proper to them can be found outside them, others in general because they

cannot be exceeded in their several classes and no part proper to them is

outside  them;  the  others  presuppose  these  first  two  kinds,  and  are  called

complete  because  they  either  make  or  have  something  of  the  sort  or  are

adapted to it or in some way or other involve a reference to the things that are

called complete in the primary sense.

<

div id="section58" class="section" title="17">


17


  ‘Limit’ means (1) the last point of each thing, i.e. the first point beyond

which it is not possible to find any part, and the first point within which every

part is; (2) the form, whatever it may be, of a spatial magnitude or of a thing

that  has  magnitude;  (3)  the  end  of  each  thing  (and  of  this  nature  is  that

towards which the movement and the action are, not that from which they

are-though  sometimes  it  is  both,  that  from  which  and  that  to  which  the

movement is, i.e. the final cause); (4) the substance of each thing, and theessence of each; for this is the limit of knowledge; and if of knowledge, of

the  object  also.  Evidently,  therefore,  ‘limit’  has  as  many  senses  as

‘beginning’, and yet more; for the beginning is a limit, but not every limit is a

beginning.

<

div id="section59" class="section" title="18">


18


  ‘That in virtue of which’ has several meanings:-(1) the form or substance

of each thing, e.g. that in virtue of which a man is good is the good itself, (2)

the proximate subject in which it is the nature of an attribute to be found, e.g.

colour in a surface. ‘That in virtue of which’, then, in the primary sense is the

form, and in a secondary sense the matter of each thing and the proximate

substratum of each.-In general ‘that in virtue of which’ will found in the same

number of senses as ‘cause’; for we say indifferently (3) in virtue of what has

he come?’ or ‘for what end has he come?’; and (4) in virtue of what has he

inferred wrongly, or inferred?’ or ‘what is the cause of the inference, or of the

wrong inference?’-Further (5) Kath’ d is used in reference to position, e.g. ‘at

which he stands’ or ‘along which he walks; for all such phrases indicate place

and position.

  Therefore ‘in virtue of itself’ must likewise have several meanings. The

following belong to a thing in virtue of itself:-(1) the essence of each thing,

e.g. Callias is in virtue of himself Callias and what it was to be Callias;-(2)

whatever  is  present  in  the  ‘what’,  e.g.  Callias  is  in  virtue  of  himself  an

animal.  For  ‘animal’  is  present  in  his  definition;  Callias  is  a  particular

animal.-(3) Whatever attribute a thing receives in itself directly or in one of

its parts; e.g. a surface is white in virtue of itself, and a man is alive in virtue

of himself; for the soul, in which life directly resides, is a part of the man.-(4)

That which has no cause other than itself; man has more than one cause—

animal, two-footed—but yet man is man in virtue of himself.-(5) Whatever

attributes belong to a thing alone, and in so far as they belong to it merely by

virtue of itself considered apart by itself.

<

div id="section60" class="section" title="19">


19  ‘Disposition’ means the arrangement of that which has parts, in respect

either of place or of potency or of kind; for there must be a certain position,

as even the word ‘disposition’ shows.

<

div id="section61" class="section" title="20">


20


  ‘Having’ means (1) a kind of activity of the haver and of what he has-

something like an action or movement. For when one thing makes and one is

made,  between  them  there  is  a  making;  so  too  between  him  who  has  a

garment and the garment which he has there is a having. This sort of having,

then, evidently we cannot have; for the process will go on to infinity, if it is

to be possible to have the having of what we have.-(2) ‘Having’ or ‘habit’

means a disposition according to which that which is disposed is either well

or ill disposed, and either in itself or with reference to something else; e.g.

health is a ‘habit’; for it is such a disposition.-(3) We speak of a ‘habit’ if

there is a portion of such a disposition; and so even the excellence of the parts

is a ‘habit’ of the whole thing.

<

div id="section62" class="section" title="21">


21


  ‘Affection’ means (1) a quality in respect of which a thing can be altered,

e.g. white and black, sweet and bitter, heaviness and lightness, and all others

of  the  kind.-(2)  The  actualization  of  these-the  already  accomplished

alterations.-(3) Especially, injurious alterations and movements, and, above

all painful injuries.-(4) Misfortunes and painful experiences when on a large

scale are called affections.

<

div id="section63" class="section" title="22">


22


We  speak  of  ‘privation’  (1)  if  something  has  not  one  of  the  attributeswhich  a  thing  might  naturally  have,  even  if  this  thing  itself  would  not

naturally have it; e.g. a plant is said to be ‘deprived’ of eyes.-(2) If, though

either the thing itself or its genus would naturally have an attribute, it has it

not; e.g. a blind man and a mole are in different senses ‘deprived’ of sight;

the  latter  in  contrast  with  its  genus,  the  former  in  contrast  with  his  own

normal nature.-(3) If, though it would naturally have the attribute, and when

it would naturally have it, it has it not; for blindness is a privation, but one is

not ‘blind’ at any and every age, but only if one has not sight at the age at

which one would naturally have it. Similarly a thing is called blind if it has

not sight in the medium in which, and in respect of the organ in respect of

which, and with reference to the object with reference to which, and in the

circumstances in which, it would naturally have it.-(4) The violent taking

away of anything is called privation.

Indeed there are just as many kinds of privations as there are of words with

negative prefixes; for a thing is called unequal because it has not equality

though it would naturally have it, and invisible either because it has no colour

at all or because it has a poor colour, and apodous either because it has no

feet at all or because it has imperfect feet. Again, a privative term may be

used because the thing has little of the attribute (and this means having it in a

sense imperfectly), e.g. ‘kernel-less’; or because it has it not easily or not well

(e.g. we call a thing uncuttable not only if it cannot be cut but also if it cannot

be cut easily or well); or because it has not the attribute at all; for it is not the

one-eyed man but he who is sightless in both eyes that is called blind. This is

why not every man is ‘good’ or ‘bad’, ‘just’ or ‘unjust’, but there is also an

intermediate state.

<

div id="section64" class="section" title="23">


23


To ‘have’ or ‘hold’ means many things:-(1) to treat a thing according to

one’s own nature or according to one’s own impulse; so that fever is said to

have a man, and tyrants to have their cities, and people to have the clothes

they wear.-(2) That in which a thing is present as in something receptive of it

is said to have the thing; e.g. the bronze has the form of the statue, and the

body has the disease.-(3) As that which contains holds the things contained;

for a thing is said to be held by that in which it is as in a container; e.g. wesay  that  the  vessel  holds  the  liquid  and  the  city  holds  men  and  the  ship

sailors; and so too that the whole holds the parts.-(4) That which hinders a

thing from moving or acting according to its own impulse is said to hold it, as

pillars hold the incumbent weights, and as the poets make Atlas hold the

heavens, implying that otherwise they would collapse on the earth, as some

of the natural philosophers also say. In this way also that which holds things

together  is  said  to  hold  the  things  it  holds  together,  since  they  would

otherwise separate, each according to its own impulse.

‘Being in something’ has similar and corresponding meanings to ‘holding’

or ‘having’.

<

div id="section65" class="section" title="24">


24


‘To come from something’ means (1) to come from something as from

matter, and this in two senses, either in respect of the highest genus or in

respect of the lowest species; e.g. in a sense all things that can be melted

come from water, but in a sense the statue comes from bronze.-(2) As from

the first moving principle; e.g. ‘what did the fight come from?’ From abusive

language, because this was the origin of the fight.-(3) From the compound of

matter and shape, as the parts come from the whole, and the verse from the

Iliad,  and  the  stones  from  the  house;  (in  every  such  case  the  whole  is  a

compound of matter and shape,) for the shape is the end, and only that which

attains an end is complete.-(4) As the form from its part, e.g. man from ‘two-

footed’and syllable from ‘letter’; for this is a different sense from that in

which the statue comes from bronze; for the composite substance comes from

the sensible matter, but the form also comes from the matter of the form.-

Some things, then, are said to come from something else in these senses; but

(5) others are so described if one of these senses is applicable to a part of that

other thing; e.g. the child comes from its father and mother, and plants come

from the earth, because they come from a part of those things.-(6) It means

coming after a thing in time, e.g. night comes from day and storm from fine

weather, because the one comes after the other. Of these things some are so

described because they admit of change into one another, as in the cases now

mentioned; some merely because they are successive in time, e.g. the voyage

took place ‘from’ the equinox, because it took place after the equinox, andthe festival of the Thargelia comes ‘from’ the Dionysia, because after the

Dionysia.

<

div id="section66" class="section" title="25">


25


  ‘Part’ means (1) (a) that into which a quantum can in any way be divided;

for that which is taken from a quantum qua quantum is always called a part of

it, e.g. two is called in a sense a part of three. It means (b), of the parts in the

first sense, only those which measure the whole; this is why two, though in

one sense it is, in another is not, called a part of three.-(2) The elements into

which a kind might be divided apart from the quantity are also called parts of

it;  for  which  reason  we  say  the  species  are  parts  of  the  genus.-(3)  The

elements into which a whole is divided, or of which it consists-the ‘whole’

meaning either the form or that which has the form; e.g. of the bronze sphere

or of the bronze cube both the bronze-i.e. the matter in which the form is-and

the characteristic angle are parts.-(4) The elements in the definition which

explains a thing are also parts of the whole; this is why the genus is called a

part of the species, though in another sense the species is part of the genus.

<

div id="section67" class="section" title="26">


26


‘A whole’ means (1) that from which is absent none of the parts of which it

is said to be naturally a whole, and (2) that which so contains the things it

contains that they form a unity; and this in two senses-either as being each

severally one single thing, or as making up the unity between them. For (a)

that which is true of a whole class and is said to hold good as a whole (which

implies that it is a kind whole) is true of a whole in the sense that it contains

many things by being predicated of each, and by all of them, e.g. man, horse,

god, being severally one single thing, because all are living things. But (b)

the continuous and limited is a whole, when it is a unity consisting of several

parts, especially if they are present only potentially, but, failing this, even if

they are present actually. Of these things themselves, those which are so bynature are wholes in a higher degree than those which are so by art, as we

said in the case of unity also, wholeness being in fact a sort of oneness.

  Again (3) of quanta that have a beginning and a middle and an end, those

to which the position does not make a difference are called totals, and those

to which it does, wholes. Those which admit of both descriptions are both

wholes and totals. These are the things whose nature remains the same after

transposition, but whose form does not, e.g. wax or a coat; they are called

both  wholes  and  totals;  for  they  have  both  characteristics.  Water  and  all

liquids and number are called totals, but ‘the whole number’ or ‘the whole

water’ one does not speak of, except by an extension of meaning. To things,

to which qua one the term ‘total’ is applied, the term ‘all’ is applied when

they are treated as separate; ‘this total number,’ ‘all these units.’

<

div id="section68" class="section" title="27">


27


It is not any chance quantitative thing that can be said to be ‘mutilated’; it

must be a whole as well as divisible. For not only is two not ‘mutilated’ if

one of the two ones is taken away (for the part removed by mutilation is

never equal to the remainder), but in general no number is thus mutilated; for

it is also necessary that the essence remain; if a cup is mutilated, it must still

be a cup; but the number is no longer the same. Further, even if things consist

of unlike parts, not even these things can all be said to be mutilated, for in a

sense a number has unlike parts (e.g. two and three) as well as like; but in

general of the things to which their position makes no difference, e.g. water

or fire, none can be mutilated; to be mutilated, things must be such as in

virtue  of  their  essence  have  a  certain  position.  Again,  they  must  be

continuous; for a musical scale consists of unlike parts and has position, but

cannot become mutilated. Besides, not even the things that are wholes are

mutilated by the privation of any part. For the parts removed must be neither

those which determine the essence nor any chance parts, irrespective of their

position; e.g. a cup is not mutilated if it is bored through, but only if the

handle or a projecting part is removed, and a man is mutilated not if the flesh

or the spleen is removed, but if an extremity is, and that not every extremity

but  one  which  when  completely  removed  cannot  grow  again.  Therefore

baldness is not a mutilation.<

div id="section69" class="section" title="28">


28


The term ‘race’ or ‘genus’ is used (1) if generation of things which have

the same form is continuous, e.g. ‘while the race of men lasts’ means ‘while

the generation of them goes on continuously’.-(2) It is used with reference to

that which first brought things into existence; for it is thus that some are

called Hellenes by race and others Ionians, because the former proceed from

Hellen and the latter from Ion as their first begetter. And the word is used in

reference to the begetter more than to the matter, though people also get a

race-name from the female, e.g. ‘the descendants of Pyrrha’.-(3) There is

genus in the sense in which ‘plane’ is the genus of plane figures and solid’ of

solids; for each of the figures is in the one case a plane of such and such a

kind,  and  in  the  other  a  solid  of  such  and  such  a  kind;  and  this  is  what

underlies  the  differentiae.  Again  (4)  in  definitions  the  first  constituent

element, which is included in the ‘what’, is the genus, whose differentiae the

qualities are said to be ‘Genus’ then is used in all these ways, (1) in reference

to continuous generation of the same kind, (2) in reference to the first mover

which is of the same kind as the things it moves, (3) as matter; for that to

which  the  differentia  or  quality  belongs  is  the  substratum,  which  we  call

matter.

  Those things are said to be ‘other in genus’ whose proximate substratum is

different, and which are not analysed the one into the other nor both into the

same thing (e.g. form and matter are different in genus); and things which

belong to different categories of being (for some of the things that are said to

‘be’ signify essence, others a quality, others the other categories we have

before distinguished); these also are not analysed either into one another or

into some one thing.

<

div id="section70" class="section" title="29">


29


  ‘The false’ means (1) that which is false as a thing, and that (a) because itis not put together or cannot be put together, e.g. ‘that the diagonal of a

square is commensurate with the side’ or ‘that you are sitting’; for one of

these is false always, and the other sometimes; it is in these two senses that

they are non-existent. (b) There are things which exist, but whose nature it is

to appear either not to be such as they are or to be things that do not exist, e.g.

a  sketch  or  a  dream;  for  these  are  something,  but  are  not  the  things  the

appearance of which they produce in us. We call things false in this way,

then,-either because they themselves do not exist, or because the appearance

which results from them is that of something that does not exist.

(2) A false account is the account of non-existent objects, in so far as it is

false. Hence every account is false when applied to something other than that

of which it is true; e.g. the account of a circle is false when applied to a

triangle. In a sense there is one account of each thing, i.e. the account of its

essence, but in a sense there are many, since the thing itself and the thing

itself with an attribute are in a sense the same, e.g. Socrates and musical

Socrates (a false account is not the account of anything, except in a qualified

sense).  Hence  Antisthenes  was  too  simple-minded  when  he  claimed  that

nothing could be described except by the account proper to it,-one predicate

to one subject; from which the conclusion used to be drawn that there could

be no contradiction, and almost that there could be no error. But it is possible

to describe each thing not only by the account of itself, but also by that of

something else. This may be done altogether falsely indeed, but there is also a

way in which it may be done truly; e.g. eight may be described as a double

number by the use of the definition of two.

  These things, then, are called false in these senses, but (3) a false man is

one who is ready at and fond of such accounts, not for any other reason but

for their own sake, and one who is good at impressing such accounts on other

people, just as we say things are which produce a false appearance. This is

why  the  proof  in  the  Hippias  that  the  same  man  is  false  and  true  is

misleading. For it assumes that he is false who can deceive (i.e. the man who

knows and is wise); and further that he who is willingly bad is better. This is

a false result of induction-for a man who limps willingly is better than one

who does so unwillingly-by ‘limping’ Plato means ‘mimicking a limp’, for if

the man were lame willingly, he would presumably be worse in this case as in

the corresponding case of moral character.

<

div id="section71" class="section" title="30">30


  ‘Accident’ means (1) that which attaches to something and can be truly

asserted, but neither of necessity nor usually, e.g. if some one in digging a

hole for a plant has found treasure. This-the finding of treasure-is for the man

who dug the hole an accident; for neither does the one come of necessity

from the other or after the other, nor, if a man plants, does he usually find

treasure. And a musical man might be pale; but since this does not happen of

necessity  nor  usually,  we  call  it  an  accident.  Therefore  since  there  are

attributes and they attach to subjects, and some of them attach to these only in

a particular place and at a particular time, whatever attaches to a subject, but

not because it was this subject, or the time this time, or the place this place,

will be an accident. Therefore, too, there is no definite cause for an accident,

but a chance cause, i.e. an indefinite one. Going to Aegina was an accident

for a man, if he went not in order to get there, but because he was carried out

of his way by a storm or captured by pirates. The accident has happened or

exists,-not in virtue of the subject’s nature, however, but of something else;

for the storm was the cause of his coming to a place for which he was not

sailing, and this was Aegina.

  ‘Accident’ has also (2) another meaning, i.e. all that attaches to each thing

in virtue of itself but is not in its essence, as having its angles equal to two

right angles attaches to the triangle. And accidents of this sort may be eternal,

but no accident of the other sort is. This is explained elsewhere.                                      Book VI


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section72" class="section" title="1">


1


We are seeking the principles and the causes of the things that are, and

obviously of them qua being. For, while there is a cause of health and of good

condition, and the objects of mathematics have first principles and elements

and  causes,  and  in  general  every  science  which  is  ratiocinative  or  at  all

involves reasoning deals with causes and principles, more or less precise, all

these sciences mark off some particular being-some genus, and inquire into

this, but not into being simply nor qua being, nor do they offer any discussion

of the essence of the things of which they treat; but starting from the essence-

some making it plain to the senses, others assuming it as a hypothesis-they

then demonstrate, more or less cogently, the essential attributes of the genus

with which they deal. It is obvious, therefore, that such an induction yields no

demonstration  of  substance  or  of  the  essence,  but  some  other  way  of

exhibiting it. And similarly the sciences omit the question whether the genus

with which they deal exists or does not exist, because it belongs to the same

kind of thinking to show what it is and that it is.

And since natural science, like other sciences, is in fact about one class of

being, i.e. to that sort of substance which has the principle of its movement

and rest present in itself, evidently it is neither practical nor productive. For

in the case of things made the principle is in the maker-it is either reason or

art or some faculty, while in the case of things done it is in the doer-viz. will,

for that which is done and that which is willed are the same. Therefore, if all

thought  is  either  practical  or  productive  or  theoretical,  physics  must  be  a

theoretical science, but it will theorize about such being as admits of being

moved,  and  about  substance-as-defined  for  the  most  part  only  as  not

separable from matter. Now, we must not fail to notice the mode of being of

the essence and of its definition, for, without this, inquiry is but idle. Ofthings defined, i.e. of ‘whats’, some are like ‘snub’, and some like ‘concave’.

And these differ because ‘snub’ is bound up with matter (for what is snub is a

concave nose), while concavity is independent of perceptible matter. If then

all natural things are a analogous to the snub in their nature; e.g. nose, eye,

face, flesh, bone, and, in general, animal; leaf, root, bark, and, in general,

plant (for none of these can be defined without reference to movement-they

always have matter), it is clear how we must seek and define the ‘what’ in the

case of natural objects, and also that it belongs to the student of nature to

study even soul in a certain sense, i.e. so much of it as is not independent of

matter.

That  physics,  then,  is  a  theoretical  science,  is  plain  from  these

considerations.  Mathematics  also,  however,  is  theoretical;  but  whether  its

objects are immovable and separable from matter, is not at present clear; still,

it is clear that some mathematical theorems consider them qua immovable

and qua separable from matter. But if there is something which is eternal and

immovable and separable, clearly the knowledge of it belongs to a theoretical

science,-not,  however,  to  physics  (for  physics  deals  with  certain  movable

things) nor to mathematics, but to a science prior to both. For physics deals

with things which exist separately but are not immovable, and some parts of

mathematics deal with things which are immovable but presumably do not

exist separately, but as embodied in matter; while the first science deals with

things which both exist separately and are immovable. Now all causes must

be eternal, but especially these; for they are the causes that operate on so

much of the divine as appears to us. There must, then, be three theoretical

philosophies, mathematics, physics, and what we may call theology, since it

is obvious that if the divine is present anywhere, it is present in things of this

sort. And the highest science must deal with the highest genus. Thus, while

the theoretical sciences are more to be desired than the other sciences, this is

more to be desired than the other theoretical sciences. For one might raise the

question whether first philosophy is universal, or deals with one genus, i.e.

some one kind of being; for not even the mathematical sciences are all alike

in this respect,-geometry and astronomy deal with a certain particular kind of

thing, while universal mathematics applies alike to all. We answer that if

there is no substance other than those which are formed by nature, natural

science will be the first science; but if there is an immovable substance, the

science of this must be prior and must be first philosophy, and universal in

this way, because it is first. And it will belong to this to consider being quabeing-both what it is and the attributes which belong to it qua being.

<

div id="section73" class="section" title="2">


2


But since the unqualified term ‘being’ has several meanings, of which one

was seen’ to be the accidental, and another the true (’non-being’ being the

false), while besides these there are the figures of predication (e.g. the ‘what’,

quality, quantity, place, time, and any similar meanings which ‘being’ may

have),  and  again  besides  all  these  there  is  that  which  ‘is’  potentially  or

actually:-since  ‘being’  has  many  meanings,  we  must  say  regarding  the

accidental, that there can be no scientific treatment of it. This is confirmed by

the  fact  that  no  science  practical,  productive,  or  theoretical  troubles  itself

about it. For on the one hand he who produces a house does not produce all

the  attributes  that  come  into  being  along  with  the  house;  for  these  are

innumerable; the house that has been made may quite well be pleasant for

some people, hurtful for some, and useful to others, and different-to put it

shortly from all things that are; and the science of building does not aim at

producing any of these attributes. And in the same way the geometer does not

consider the attributes which attach thus to figures, nor whether ‘triangle’ is

different from ‘triangle whose angles are equal to two right angles’.-And this

happens naturally enough; for the accidental is practically a mere name. And

so Plato was in a sense not wrong in ranking sophistic as dealing with that

which is not. For the arguments of the sophists deal, we may say, above all

with the accidental; e.g. the question whether ‘musical’ and ‘lettered’ are

different or the same, and whether ‘musical Coriscus’ and ‘Coriscus’ are the

same, and whether ‘everything which is, but is not eternal, has come to be’,

with the paradoxical conclusion that if one who was musical has come to be

lettered, he must also have been lettered and have come to be musical, and all

the other arguments of this sort; the accidental is obviously akin to non-being.

And this is clear also from arguments such as the following: things which are

in another sense come into being and pass out of being by a process, but

things which are accidentally do not. But still we must, as far as we can, say

further, regarding the accidental, what its nature is and from what cause it

proceeds; for it will perhaps at the same time become clear why there is no

science of it.  Since, among things which are, some are always in the same state and are

of necessity (not necessity in the sense of compulsion but that which we

assert  of  things  because  they  cannot  be  otherwise),  and  some  are  not  of

necessity nor always, but for the most part, this is the principle and this the

cause of the existence of the accidental; for that which is neither always nor

for the most part, we call accidental. For instance, if in the dog-days there is

wintry and cold weather, we say this is an accident, but not if there is sultry

heat, because the latter is always or for the most part so, but not the former.

And it is an accident that a man is pale (for this is neither always nor for the

most part so), but it is not by accident that he is an animal. And that the

builder produces health is an accident, because it is the nature not of the

builder but of the doctor to do this,-but the builder happened to be a doctor.

Again,  a  confectioner,  aiming  at  giving  pleasure,  may  make  something

wholesome, but not in virtue of the confectioner’s art; and therefore we say

‘it was an accident’, and while there is a sense in which he makes it, in the

unqualified sense he does not. For to other things answer faculties productive

of them, but to accidental results there corresponds no determinate art nor

faculty; for of things which are or come to be by accident, the cause also is

accidental.  Therefore,  since  not  all  things  either  are  or  come  to  be  of

necessity and always, but, the majority of things are for the most part, the

accidental must exist; for instance a pale man is not always nor for the most

part musical, but since this sometimes happens, it must be accidental (if not,

everything will be of necessity). The matter, therefore, which is capable of

being otherwise than as it usually is, must be the cause of the accidental. And

we must take as our starting-point the question whether there is nothing that

is neither always nor for the most part. Surely this is impossible. There is,

then, besides these something which is fortuitous and accidental. But while

the usual exists, can nothing be said to be always, or are there eternal things?

This must be considered later,’ but that there is no science of the accidental is

obvious; for all science is either of that which is always or of that which is for

the most part. (For how else is one to learn or to teach another? The thing

must be determined as occurring either always or for the most part, e.g. that

honey-water is useful for a patient in a fever is true for the most part.) But

that which is contrary to the usual law science will be unable to state, i.e.

when the thing does not happen, e.g.’on the day of new moon’; for even that

which happens on the day of new moon happens then either always or for the

most part; but the accidental is contrary to such laws. We have stated, then,what the accidental is, and from what cause it arises, and that there is no

science which deals with it.

<

div id="section74" class="section" title="3">


3


That there are principles and causes which are generable and destructible

without ever being in course of being generated or destroyed, is obvious. For

otherwise all things will be of necessity, since that which is being generated

or destroyed must have a cause which is not accidentally its cause. Will A

exist or not? It will if B happens; and if not, not. And B will exist if C

happens. And thus if time is constantly subtracted from a limited extent of

time, one will obviously come to the present. This man, then, will die by

violence, if he goes out; and he will do this if he gets thirsty; and he will get

thirsty if something else happens; and thus we shall come to that which is

now present, or to some past event. For instance, he will go out if he gets

thirsty; and he will get thirsty if he is eating pungent food; and this is either

the case or not; so that he will of necessity die, or of necessity not die. And

similarly if one jumps over to past events, the same account will hold good;

for  this-I  mean  the  past  condition-is  already  present  in  something.

Everything, therefore, that will be, will be of necessity; e.g. it is necessary

that he who lives shall one day die; for already some condition has come into

existence, e.g. the presence of contraries in the same body. But whether he is

to die by disease or by violence is not yet determined, but depends on the

happening of something else. Clearly then the process goes back to a certain

starting-point, but this no longer points to something further. This then will

be the starting-point for the fortuitous, and will have nothing else as cause of

its coming to be. But to what sort of starting-point and what sort of cause we

thus refer the fortuitous-whether to matter or to the purpose or to the motive

power, must be carefully considered.

<

div id="section75" class="section" title="4">


4Let us dismiss accidental being; for we have sufficiently determined its

nature. But since that which is in the sense of being true, or is not in the sense

of being false, depends on combination and separation, and truth and falsity

together depend on the allocation of a pair of contradictory judgements (for

the  true  judgement  affirms  where  the  subject  and  predicate  really  are

combined, and denies where they are separated, while the false judgement

has the opposite of this allocation; it is another question, how it happens that

we think things together or apart; by ‘together’ and ‘apart’ I mean thinking

them so that there is no succession in the thoughts but they become a unity);

for falsity and truth are not in things-it is not as if the good were true, and the

bad were in itself false-but in thought; while with regard to simple concepts

and ‘whats’ falsity and truth do not exist even in thought—this being so, we

must consider later what has to be discussed with regard to that which is or is

not in this sense. But since the combination and the separation are in thought

and not in the things, and that which is in this sense is a different sort of

‘being’ from the things that are in the full sense (for the thought attaches or

removes either the subject’s ‘what’ or its having a certain quality or quantity

or something else), that which is accidentally and that which is in the sense of

being true must be dismissed. For the cause of the former is indeterminate,

and that of the latter is some affection of the thought, and both are related to

the  remaining  genus  of  being,  and  do  not  indicate  the  existence  of  any

separate class of being. Therefore let these be dismissed, and let us consider

the causes and the principles of being itself, qua being. (It was clear in our

discussion  of  the  various  meanings  of  terms,  that  ‘being’  has  several

meanings.)                                      Book VII


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section76" class="section" title="1">


1


  There  are  several  senses  in  which  a  thing  may  be  said  to  ‘be’,  as  we

pointed out previously in our book on the various senses of words;’ for in one

sense the ‘being’ meant is ‘what a thing is’ or a ‘this’, and in another sense it

means a quality or quantity or one of the other things that are predicated as

these  are.  While  ‘being’  has  all  these  senses,  obviously  that  which  ‘is’

primarily is the ‘what’, which indicates the substance of the thing. For when

we say of what quality a thing is, we say that it is good or bad, not that it is

three cubits long or that it is a man; but when we say what it is, we do not say

‘white’ or ‘hot’ or ‘three cubits long’, but ‘a man’ or ‘a ‘god’. And all other

things are said to be because they are, some of them, quantities of that which

is in this primary sense, others qualities of it, others affections of it, and

others  some  other  determination  of  it.  And  so  one  might  even  raise  the

question whether the words ‘to walk’, ‘to be healthy’, ‘to sit’ imply that each

of these things is existent, and similarly in any other case of this sort; for

none  of  them  is  either  self-subsistent  or  capable  of  being  separated  from

substance, but rather, if anything, it is that which walks or sits or is healthy

that is an existent thing. Now these are seen to be more real because there is

something definite which underlies them (i.e. the substance or individual),

which is implied in such a predicate; for we never use the word ‘good’ or

‘sitting’ without implying this. Clearly then it is in virtue of this category that

each of the others also is. Therefore that which is primarily, i.e. not in a

qualified sense but without qualification, must be substance.

Now  there  are  several  senses  in  which  a  thing  is  said  to  be  first;  yet

substance is first in every sense-(1) in definition, (2) in order of knowledge,

(3) in time. For (3) of the other categories none can exist independently, but

only substance. And (1) in definition also this is first; for in the definition ofeach term the definition of its substance must be present. And (2) we think

we know each thing most fully, when we know what it is, e.g. what man is or

what fire is, rather than when we know its quality, its quantity, or its place;

since we know each of these predicates also, only when we know what the

quantity or the quality is.

And indeed the question which was raised of old and is raised now and

always, and is always the subject of doubt, viz. what being is, is just the

question, what is substance? For it is this that some assert to be one, others

more  than  one,  and  that  some  assert  to  be  limited  in  number,  others

unlimited. And so we also must consider chiefly and primarily and almost

exclusively what that is which is in this sense.

<

div id="section77" class="section" title="2">


2


  Substance is thought to belong most obviously to bodies; and so we say

that  not  only  animals  and  plants  and  their  parts  are  substances,  but  also

natural bodies such as fire and water and earth and everything of the sort, and

all things that are either parts of these or composed of these (either of parts or

of the whole bodies), e.g. the physical universe and its parts, stars and moon

and sun. But whether these alone are substances, or there are also others, or

only some of these, or others as well, or none of these but only some other

things, are substances, must be considered. Some think the limits of body, i.e.

surface, line, point, and unit, are substances, and more so than body or the

solid.

  Further, some do not think there is anything substantial besides sensible

things,  but  others  think  there  are  eternal  substances  which  are  more  in

number and more real; e.g. Plato posited two kinds of substance-the Forms

and  objects  of  mathematics-as  well  as  a  third  kind,  viz.  the  substance  of

sensible  bodies.  And  Speusippus  made  still  more  kinds  of  substance,

beginning with the One, and assuming principles for each kind of substance,

one for numbers, another for spatial magnitudes, and then another for the

soul; and by going on in this way he multiplies the kinds of substance. And

some say Forms and numbers have the same nature, and the other things

come  after  them-lines  and  planes-until  we  come  to  the  substance  of  the

material universe and to sensible bodies.  Regarding  these  matters,  then,  we  must  inquire  which  of  the  common

statements are right and which are not right, and what substances there are,

and whether there are or are not any besides sensible substances, and how

sensible  substances  exist,  and  whether  there  is  a  substance  capable  of

separate existence (and if so why and how) or no such substance, apart from

sensible substances; and we must first sketch the nature of substance.

<

div id="section78" class="section" title="3">


3


The word ‘substance’ is applied, if not in more senses, still at least to four

main  objects;  for  both  the  essence  and  the  universal  and  the  genus,  are

thought to be the substance of each thing, and fourthly the substratum. Now

the substratum is that of which everything else is predicated, while it is itself

not predicated of anything else. And so we must first determine the nature of

this; for that which underlies a thing primarily is thought to be in the truest

sense its substance. And in one sense matter is said to be of the nature of

substratum, in another, shape, and in a third, the compound of these. (By the

matter I mean, for instance, the bronze, by the shape the pattern of its form,

and by the compound of these the statue, the concrete whole.) Therefore if

the form is prior to the matter and more real, it will be prior also to the

compound of both, for the same reason.

We  have  now  outlined  the  nature  of  substance,  showing  that  it  is  that

which is not predicated of a stratum, but of which all else is predicated. But

we  must  not  merely  state  the  matter  thus;  for  this  is  not  enough.  The

statement  itself  is  obscure,  and  further,  on  this  view,  matter  becomes

substance. For if this is not substance, it baffles us to say what else is. When

all else is stripped off evidently nothing but matter remains. For while the rest

are affections, products, and potencies of bodies, length, breadth, and depth

are quantities and not substances (for a quantity is not a substance), but the

substance is rather that to which these belong primarily. But when length and

breadth  and  depth  are  taken  away  we  see  nothing  left  unless  there  is

something  that  is  bounded  by  these;  so  that  to  those  who  consider  the

question thus matter alone must seem to be substance. By matter I mean that

which  in  itself  is  neither  a  particular  thing  nor  of  a  certain  quantity  nor

assigned to any other of the categories by which being is determined. Forthere  is  something  of  which  each  of  these  is  predicated,  whose  being  is

different from that of each of the predicates (for the predicates other than

substance  are  predicated  of  substance,  while  substance  is  predicated  of

matter).  Therefore  the  ultimate  substratum  is  of  itself  neither  a  particular

thing nor of a particular quantity nor otherwise positively characterized; nor

yet is it the negations of these, for negations also will belong to it only by

accident.

If we adopt this point of view, then, it follows that matter is substance. But

this is impossible; for both separability and ‘thisness’ are thought to belong

chiefly to substance. And so form and the compound of form and matter

would  be  thought  to  be  substance,  rather  than  matter.  The  substance

compounded of both, i.e. of matter and shape, may be dismissed; for it is

posterior and its nature is obvious. And matter also is in a sense manifest. But

we  must  inquire  into  the  third  kind  of  substance;  for  this  is  the  most

perplexing.

  Some of the sensible substances are generally admitted to be substances, so

that we must look first among these. For it is an advantage to advance to that

which is more knowable. For learning proceeds for all in this way-through

that which is less knowable by nature to that which is more knowable; and

just as in conduct our task is to start from what is good for each and make

what is without qualification good good for each, so it is our task to start

from what is more knowable to oneself and make what is knowable by nature

knowable to oneself. Now what is knowable and primary for particular sets of

people is often knowable to a very small extent, and has little or nothing of

reality.  But  yet  one  must  start  from  that  which  is  barely  knowable  but

knowable to oneself, and try to know what is knowable without qualification,

passing, as has been said, by way of those very things which one does know.

<

div id="section79" class="section" title="4">


4


  Since  at  the  start  we  distinguished  the  various  marks  by  which  we

determine substance, and one of these was thought to be the essence, we must

investigate this. And first let us make some linguistic remarks about it. The

essence of each thing is what it is said to be propter se. For being you is not

being musical, since you are not by your very nature musical. What, then,you are by your very nature is your essence.

Nor yet is the whole of this the essence of a thing; not that which is propter

se as white is to a surface, because being a surface is not identical with being

white. But again the combination of both-’being a white surface’-is not the

essence of surface, because ‘surface’ itself is added. The formula, therefore,

in which the term itself is not present but its meaning is expressed, this is the

formula of the essence of each thing. Therefore if to be a white surface is to

be a smooth surface, to be white and to be smooth are one and the same.

But since there are also compounds answering to the other categories (for

there is a substratum for each category, e.g. for quality, quantity, time, place,

and motion), we must inquire whether there is a formula of the essence of

each of them, i.e. whether to these compounds also there belongs an essence,

e.g.  ‘white  man’.  Let  the  compound  be  denoted  by  ‘cloak’.  What  is  the

essence of cloak? But, it may be said, this also is not a propter se expression.

We reply that there are just two ways in which a predicate may fail to be true

of a subject propter se, and one of these results from the addition, and the

other  from  the  omission,  of  a  determinant.  One  kind  of  predicate  is  not

propter se because the term that is being defined is combined with another

determinant, e.g. if in defining the essence of white one were to state the

formula of white man; the other because in the subject another determinant is

combined with that which is expressed in the formula, e.g. if ‘cloak’ meant

‘white  man’,  and  one  were  to  define  cloak  as  white;  white  man  is  white

indeed, but its essence is not to be white.

But is being-a-cloak an essence at all? Probably not. For the essence is

precisely what something is; but when an attribute is asserted of a subject

other than itself, the complex is not precisely what some ‘this’ is, e.g. white

man  is  not  precisely  what  some  ‘this’  is,  since  thisness  belongs  only  to

substances. Therefore there is an essence only of those things whose formula

is a definition. But we have a definition not where we have a word and a

formula identical in meaning (for in that case all formulae or sets of words

would  be  definitions;  for  there  will  be  some  name  for  any  set  of  words

whatever, so that even the Iliad will be a definition), but where there is a

formula of something primary; and primary things are those which do not

imply the predication of one element in them of another element. Nothing,

then, which is not a species of a genus will have an essence-only species will

have it, for these are thought to imply not merely that the subject participates

in the attribute and has it as an affection, or has it by accident; but for everthing else as well, if it has a name, there be a formula of its meaning-viz. that

this attribute belongs to this subject; or instead of a simple formula we shall

be  able  to  give  a  more  accurate  one;  but  there  will  be  no  definition  nor

essence.

Or has ‘definition’, like ‘what a thing is’, several meanings? ‘What a thing

is’ in one sense means substance and the ‘this’, in another one or other of the

predicates, quantity, quality, and the like. For as ‘is’ belongs to all things, not

however in the same sense, but to one sort of thing primarily and to others in

a secondary way, so too ‘what a thing is’ belongs in the simple sense to

substance, but in a limited sense to the other categories. For even of a quality

we might ask what it is, so that quality also is a ‘what a thing is’,-not in the

simple sense, however, but just as, in the case of that which is not, some say,

emphasizing the linguistic form, that that is which is not is-not is simply, but

is non-existent; so too with quality.

We must no doubt inquire how we should express ourselves on each point,

but certainly not more than how the facts actually stand. And so now also,

since it is evident what language we use, essence will belong, just as ‘what a

thing  is’  does,  primarily  and  in  the  simple  sense  to  substance,  and  in  a

secondary way to the other categories also,-not essence in the simple sense,

but the essence of a quality or of a quantity. For it must be either by an

equivocation  that  we  say  these  are,  or  by  adding  to  and  taking  from  the

meaning of ‘are’ (in the way in which that which is not known may be said to

be known),-the truth being that we use the word neither ambiguously nor in

the  same  sense,  but  just  as  we  apply  the  word  ‘medical’  by  virtue  of  a

reference to one and the same thing, not meaning one and the same thing, nor

yet speaking ambiguously; for a patient and an operation and an instrument

are called medical neither by an ambiguity nor with a single meaning, but

with reference to a common end. But it does not matter at all in which of the

two ways one likes to describe the facts; this is evident, that definition and

essence  in  the  primary  and  simple  sense  belong  to  substances.  Still  they

belong  to  other  things  as  well,  only  not  in  the  primary  sense.  For  if  we

suppose this it does not follow that there is a definition of every word which

means the same as any formula; it must mean the same as a particular kind of

formula; and this condition is satisfied if it is a formula of something which is

one, not by continuity like the Iliad or the things that are one by being bound

together, but in one of the main senses of ‘one’, which answer to the senses

of ‘is’; now ‘that which is’ in one sense denotes a ‘this’, in another a quantity,in another a quality. And so there can be a formula or definition even of

white man, but not in the sense in which there is a definition either of white

or of a substance.

<

div id="section80" class="section" title="5">


5


It  is  a  difficult  question,  if  one  denies  that  a  formula  with  an  added

determinant is a definition, whether any of the terms that are not simple but

coupled  will  be  definable.  For  we  must  explain  them  by  adding  a

determinant. E.g. there is the nose, and concavity, and snubness, which is

compounded out of the two by the presence of the one in the other, and it is

not  by  accident  that  the  nose  has  the  attribute  either  of  concavity  or  of

snubness, but in virtue of its nature; nor do they attach to it as whiteness does

to Callias, or to man (because Callias, who happens to be a man, is white),

but as ‘male’ attaches to animal and ‘equal’ to quantity, and as all so-called

‘attributes propter se’ attach to their subjects. And such attributes are those in

which  is  involved  either  the  formula  or  the  name  of  the  subject  of  the

particular attribute, and which cannot be explained without this; e.g. white

can  be  explained  apart  from  man,  but  not  female  apart  from  animal.

Therefore there is either no essence and definition of any of these things, or if

there is, it is in another sense, as we have said.

But  there  is  also  a  second  difficulty  about  them.  For  if  snub  nose  and

concave nose are the same thing, snub and concave will be the thing; but if

snub and concave are not the same (because it is impossible to speak of

snubness  apart  from  the  thing  of  which  it  is  an  attribute  propter  se,  for

snubness is concavity-in-a-nose), either it is impossible to say ‘snub nose’ or

the same thing will have been said twice, concave-nose nose; for snub nose

will be concave-nose nose. And so it is absurd that such things should have

an essence; if they have, there will be an infinite regress; for in snub-nose

nose yet another ‘nose’ will be involved.

  Clearly, then, only substance is definable. For if the other categories also

are definable, it must be by addition of a determinant, e.g. the qualitative is

defined thus, and so is the odd, for it cannot be defined apart from number;

nor can female be defined apart from animal. (When I say ‘by addition’ I

mean the expressions in which it turns out that we are saying the same thingtwice, as in these instances.) And if this is true, coupled terms also, like ‘odd

number’,  will  not  be  definable  (but  this  escapes  our  notice  because  our

formulae are not accurate.). But if these also are definable, either it is in some

other way or, as we definition and essence must be said to have more than

one sense. Therefore in one sense nothing will have a definition and nothing

will have an essence, except substances, but in another sense other things will

have them. Clearly, then, definition is the formula of the essence, and essence

belongs  to  substances  either  alone  or  chiefly  and  primarily  and  in  the

unqualified sense.

<

div id="section81" class="section" title="6">


6


We  must  inquire  whether  each  thing  and  its  essence  are  the  same  or

different. This is of some use for the inquiry concerning substance; for each

thing is thought to be not different from its substance, and the essence is said

to be the substance of each thing.

Now in the case of accidental unities the two would be generally thought to

be different, e.g. white man would be thought to be different from the essence

of white man. For if they are the same, the essence of man and that of white

man are also the same; for a man and a white man are the same thing, as

people say, so that the essence of white man and that of man would be also

the same. But perhaps it does not follow that the essence of accidental unities

should be the same as that of the simple terms. For the extreme terms are not

in the same way identical with the middle term. But perhaps this might be

thought to follow, that the extreme terms, the accidents, should turn out to be

the same, e.g. the essence of white and that of musical; but this is not actually

thought to be the case.

But in the case of so-called self-subsistent things, is a thing necessarily the

same as its essence? E.g. if there are some substances which have no other

substances nor entities prior to them-substances such as some assert the Ideas

to  be?-If  the  essence  of  good  is  to  be  different  from  good-itself,  and  the

essence of animal from animal-itself, and the essence of being from being-

itself, there will, firstly, be other substances and entities and Ideas besides

those which are asserted, and, secondly, these others will be prior substances,

if  essence  is  substance.  And  if  the  posterior  substances  and  the  prior  aresevered from each other, (a) there will be no knowledge of the former, and

(b) the latter will have no being. (By ‘severed’ I mean, if the good-itself has

not the essence of good, and the latter has not the property of being good.)

For (a) there is knowledge of each thing only when we know its essence. And

(b) the case is the same for other things as for the good; so that if the essence

of good is not good, neither is the essence of reality real, nor the essence of

unity one. And all essences alike exist or none of them does; so that if the

essence of reality is not real, neither is any of the others. Again, that to which

the essence of good does not belong is not good.-The good, then, must be one

with the essence of good, and the beautiful with the essence of beauty, and so

with all things which do not depend on something else but are self-subsistent

and primary. For it is enough if they are this, even if they are not Forms; or

rather, perhaps, even if they are Forms. (At the same time it is clear that if

there are Ideas such as some people say there are, it will not be substratum

that  is  substance;  for  these  must  be  substances,  but  not  predicable  of  a

substratum; for if they were they would exist only by being participated in.)

Each thing itself, then, and its essence are one and the same in no merely

accidental way, as is evident both from the preceding arguments and because

to know each thing, at least, is just to know its essence, so that even by the

exhibition of instances it becomes clear that both must be one.

(But of an accidental term, e.g.’the musical’ or ‘the white’, since it has two

meanings, it is not true to say that it itself is identical with its essence; for

both that to which the accidental quality belongs, and the accidental quality,

are white, so that in a sense the accident and its essence are the same, and in a

sense they are not; for the essence of white is not the same as the man or the

white man, but it is the same as the attribute white.)

The absurdity of the separation would appear also if one were to assign a

name to each of the essences; for there would be yet another essence besides

the  original  one,  e.g.  to  the  essence  of  horse  there  will  belong  a  second

essence. Yet why should not some things be their essences from the start,

since essence is substance? But indeed not only are a thing and its essence

one, but the formula of them is also the same, as is clear even from what has

been said; for it is not by accident that the essence of one, and the one, are

one. Further, if they are to be different, the process will go on to infinity; for

we shall have (1) the essence of one, and (2) the one, so that to terms of the

former kind the same argument will be applicable.

  Clearly, then, each primary and self-subsistent thing is one and the same asits  essence.  The  sophistical  objections  to  this  position,  and  the  question

whether  Socrates  and  to  be  Socrates  are  the  same  thing,  are  obviously

answered  by  the  same  solution;  for  there  is  no  difference  either  in  the

standpoint from which the question would be asked, or in that from which

one could answer it successfully. We have explained, then, in what sense

each thing is the same as its essence and in what sense it is not.

<

div id="section82" class="section" title="7">


7


Of things that come to be, some come to be by nature, some by art, some

spontaneously. Now everything that comes to be comes to be by the agency

of  something  and  from  something  and  comes  to  be  something.  And  the

something which I say it comes to be may be found in any category; it may

come to be either a ‘this’ or of some size or of some quality or somewhere.

Now natural comings to be are the comings to be of those things which

come to be by nature; and that out of which they come to be is what we call

matter;  and  that  by  which  they  come  to  be  is  something  which  exists

naturally; and the something which they come to be is a man or a plant or one

of the things of this kind, which we say are substances if anything is-all

things produced either by nature or by art have matter; for each of them is

capable both of being and of not being, and this capacity is the matter in

each-and, in general, both that from which they are produced is nature, and

the type according to which they are produced is nature (for that which is

produced, e.g. a plant or an animal, has a nature), and so is that by which they

are produced—the so-called ‘formal’ nature, which is specifically the same

(though this is in another individual); for man begets man.

  Thus, then, are natural products produced; all other productions are called

‘makings’. And all makings proceed either from art or from a faculty or from

thought. Some of them happen also spontaneously or by luck just as natural

products  sometimes  do;  for  there  also  the  same  things  sometimes  are

produced without seed as well as from seed. Concerning these cases, then, we

must inquire later, but from art proceed the things of which the form is in the

soul of the artist. (By form I mean the essence of each thing and its primary

substance.)  For  even  contraries  have  in  a  sense  the  same  form;  for  the

substance of a privation is the opposite substance, e.g. health is the substanceof disease (for disease is the absence of health); and health is the formula in

the soul or the knowledge of it. The healthy subject is produced as the result

of the following train of thought:-since this is health, if the subject is to be

healthy this must first be present, e.g. a uniform state of body, and if this is to

be present, there must be heat; and the physician goes on thinking thus until

he reduces the matter to a final something which he himself can produce.

Then the process from this point onward, i.e. the process towards health, is

called a ‘making’. Therefore it follows that in a sense health comes from

health and house from house, that with matter from that without matter; for

the medical art and the building art are the form of health and of the house,

and when I speak of substance without matter I mean the essence.

Of the productions or processes one part is called thinking and the other

making,-that which proceeds from the starting-point and the form is thinking,

and that which proceeds from the final step of the thinking is making. And

each of the other, intermediate, things is produced in the same way. I mean,

for instance, if the subject is to be healthy his bodily state must be made

uniform. What then does being made uniform imply? This or that. And this

depends on his being made warm. What does this imply? Something else.

And this something is present potentially; and what is present potentially is

already in the physician’s power.

The active principle then and the starting point for the process of becoming

healthy is, if it happens by art, the form in the soul, and if spontaneously, it is

that, whatever it is, which starts the making, for the man who makes by art, as

in healing the starting-point is perhaps the production of warmth (and this the

physician produces by rubbing). Warmth in the body, then, is either a part of

health or is followed (either directly or through several intermediate steps) by

something similar which is a part of health; and this, viz. that which produces

the part of health, is the limiting-point—and so too with a house (the stones

are the limiting-point here) and in all other cases. Therefore, as the saying

goes, it is impossible that anything should be produced if there were nothing

existing  before.  Obviously  then  some  part  of  the  result  will  pre-exist  of

necessity; for the matter is a part; for this is present in the process and it is

this  that  becomes  something.  But  is  the  matter  an  element  even  in  the

formula? We certainly describe in both ways what brazen circles are; we

describe both the matter by saying it is brass, and the form by saying that it is

such  and  such  a  figure;  and  figure  is  the  proximate  genus  in  which  it  is

placed. The brazen circle, then, has its matter in its formula.As for that out of which as matter they are produced, some things are said,

when they have been produced, to be not that but ‘thaten’; e.g. the statue is

not gold but golden. And a healthy man is not said to be that from which he

has come. The reason is that though a thing comes both from its privation and

from its substratum, which we call its matter (e.g. what becomes healthy is

both a man and an invalid), it is said to come rather from its privation (e.g. it

is from an invalid rather than from a man that a healthy subject is produced).

And so the healthy subject is not said to he an invalid, but to be a man, and

the man is said to be healthy. But as for the things whose privation is obscure

and nameless, e.g. in brass the privation of a particular shape or in bricks and

timber the privation of arrangement as a house, the thing is thought to be

produced  from  these  materials,  as  in  the  former  case  the  healthy  man  is

produced from an invalid. And so, as there also a thing is not said to be that

from which it comes, here the statue is not said to be wood but is said by a

verbal change to be wooden, not brass but brazen, not gold but golden, and

the house is said to be not bricks but bricken (though we should not say

without qualification, if we looked at the matter carefully, even that a statue

is produced from wood or a house from bricks, because coming to be implies

change in that from which a thing comes to be, and not permanence). It is for

this reason, then, that we use this way of speaking.

<

div id="section83" class="section" title="8">


8


  Since anything which is produced is produced by something (and this I call

the starting-point of the production), and from something (and let this be

taken to be not the privation but the matter; for the meaning we attach to this

has already been explained), and since something is produced (and this is

either a sphere or a circle or whatever else it may chance to be), just as we do

not make the substratum (the brass), so we do not make the sphere, except

incidentally, because the brazen sphere is a sphere and we make the forme.

For to make a ‘this’ is to make a ‘this’ out of the substratum in the full sense

of the word. (I mean that to make the brass round is not to make the round or

the  sphere,  but  something  else,  i.e.  to  produce  this  form  in  something

different  from  itself.  For  if  we  make  the  form,  we  must  make  it  out  of

something else; for this was assumed. E.g. we make a brazen sphere; and thatin the sense that out of this, which is brass, we make this other, which is a

sphere.) If, then, we also make the substratum itself, clearly we shall make it

in  the  same  way,  and  the  processes  of  making  will  regress  to  infinity.

Obviously then the form also, or whatever we ought to call the shape present

in the sensible thing, is not produced, nor is there any production of it, nor is

the essence produced; for this is that which is made to be in something else

either  by  art  or  by  nature  or  by  some  faculty.  But  that  there  is  a  brazen

sphere, this we make. For we make it out of brass and the sphere; we bring

the form into this particular matter, and the result is a brazen sphere. But if

the  essence  of  sphere  in  general  is  to  be  produced,  something  must  be

produced out of something. For the product will always have to be divisible,

and one part must be this and another that; I mean the one must be matter and

the other form. If, then, a sphere is ‘the figure whose circumference is at all

points equidistant from the centre’, part of this will be the medium in which

the thing made will be, and part will be in that medium, and the whole will be

the thing produced, which corresponds to the brazen sphere. It is obvious,

then,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  that  which  is  spoken  of  as  form  or

substance is not produced, but the concrete thing which gets its name from

this is produced, and that in everything which is generated matter is present,

and one part of the thing is matter and the other form.

Is there, then, a sphere apart from the individual spheres or a house apart

from the bricks? Rather we may say that no ‘this’ would ever have been

coming to be, if this had been so, but that the ‘form’ means the ‘such’, and is

not a ‘this’-a definite thing; but the artist makes, or the father begets, a ‘such’

out of a ‘this’; and when it has been begotten, it is a ‘this such’. And the

whole ‘this’, Callias or Socrates, is analogous to ‘this brazen sphere’, but man

and animal to ‘brazen sphere’ in general. Obviously, then, the cause which

consists  of  the  Forms  (taken  in  the  sense  in  which  some  maintain  the

existence of the Forms, i.e. if they are something apart from the individuals)

is useless, at least with regard to comings-to-be and to substances; and the

Forms need not, for this reason at least, be self-subsistent substances. In some

cases indeed it is even obvious that the begetter is of the same kind as the

begotten (not, however, the same nor one in number, but in form), i.e. in the

case of natural products (for man begets man), unless something happens

contrary to nature, e.g. the production of a mule by a horse. (And even these

cases are similar; for that which would be found to be common to horse and

ass,  the  genus  next  above  them,  has  not  received  a  name,  but  it  woulddoubtless be both in fact something like a mule.) Obviously, therefore, it is

quite unnecessary to set up a Form as a pattern (for we should have looked

for Forms in these cases if in any; for these are substances if anything is so);

the begetter is adequate to the making of the product and to the causing of the

form in the matter. And when we have the whole, such and such a form in

this flesh and in these bones, this is Callias or Socrates; and they are different

in virtue of their matter (for that is different), but the same in form; for their

form is indivisible.

<

div id="section84" class="section" title="9">


9


The  question  might  be  raised,  why  some  things  are  produced

spontaneously as well as by art, e.g. health, while others are not, e.g. a house.

The reason is that in some cases the matter which governs the production in

the making and producing of any work of art, and in which a part of the

product is present,-some matter is such as to be set in motion by itself and

some is not of this nature, and of the former kind some can move itself in the

particular way required, while other matter is incapable of this; for many

things can be set in motion by themselves but not in some particular way, e.g.

that of dancing. The things, then, whose matter is of this sort, e.g. stones,

cannot be moved in the particular way required, except by something else,

but in another way they can move themselves-and so it is with fire. Therefore

some things will not exist apart from some one who has the art of making

them, while others will; for motion will be started by these things which have

not the art but can themselves be moved by other things which have not the

art or with a motion starting from a part of the product.

And it is clear also from what has been said that in a sense every product

of art is produced from a thing which shares its name (as natural products are

produced), or from a part of itself which shares its name (e.g. the house is

produced from a house, qua produced by reason; for the art of building is the

form  of  the  house),  or  from  something  which  contains  a  art  of  it,-if  we

exclude things produced by accident; for the cause of the thing’s producing

the product directly per se is a part of the product. The heat in the movement

caused heat in the body, and this is either health, or a part of health, or is

followed by a part of health or by health itself. And so it is said to causehealth, because it causes that to which health attaches as a consequence.

  Therefore, as in syllogisms, substance is the starting-point of everything. It

is from ‘what a thing is’ that syllogisms start; and from it also we now find

processes of production to start.

  Things which are formed by nature are in the same case as these products

of art. For the seed is productive in the same way as the things that work by

art; for it has the form potentially, and that from which the seed comes has in

a sense the same name as the offspring only in a sense, for we must not

expect parent and offspring always to have exactly the same name, as in the

production  of  ‘human  being’  from  ‘human’  for  a  ‘woman’  also  can  be

produced by a ‘man’-unless the offspring be an imperfect form; which is the

reason why the parent of a mule is not a mule. The natural things which (like

the artificial objects previously considered) can be produced spontaneously

are those whose matter can be moved even by itself in the way in which the

seed usually moves it; those things which have not such matter cannot be

produced except from the parent animals themselves.

But not only regarding substance does our argument prove that its form

does not come to be, but the argument applies to all the primary classes alike,

i.e. quantity, quality, and the other categories. For as the brazen sphere comes

to be, but not the sphere nor the brass, and so too in the case of brass itself, if

it comes to be, it is its concrete unity that comes to be (for the matter and the

form must always exist before), so is it both in the case of substance and in

that of quality and quantity and the other categories likewise; for the quality

does not come to be, but the wood of that quality, and the quantity does not

come to be, but the wood or the animal of that size. But we may learn from

these instances a peculiarity of substance, that there must exist beforehand in

complete reality another substance which produces it, e.g. an animal if an

animal is produced; but it is not necessary that a quality or quantity should

pre-exist otherwise than potentially.

<

div id="section85" class="section" title="10">


10


  Since a definition is a formula, and every formula has parts, and as the

formula is to the thing, so is the part of the formula to the part of the thing,

the question is already being asked whether the formula of the parts must bepresent in the formula of the whole or not. For in some cases the formulae of

the parts are seen to be present, and in some not. The formula of the circle

does not include that of the segments, but that of the syllable includes that of

the  letters;  yet  the  circle  is  divided  into  segments  as  the  syllable  is  into

letters.-And further if the parts are prior to the whole, and the acute angle is a

part of the right angle and the finger a part of the animal, the acute angle will

be prior to the right angle and finger to the man. But the latter are thought to

be prior; for in formula the parts are explained by reference to them, and in

respect also of the power of existing apart from each other the wholes are

prior to the parts.

  Perhaps we should rather say that ‘part’ is used in several senses. One of

these is ‘that which measures another thing in respect of quantity’. But let

this  sense  be  set  aside;  let  us  inquire  about  the  parts  of  which  substance

consists. If then matter is one thing, form another, the compound of these a

third, and both the matter and the form and the compound are substance even

the matter is in a sense called part of a thing, while in a sense it is not, but

only  the  elements  of  which  the  formula  of  the  form  consists.  E.g.  of

concavity flesh (for this is the matter in which it is produced) is not a part, but

of snubness it is a part; and the bronze is a part of the concrete statue, but not

of the statue when this is spoken of in the sense of the form. (For the form, or

the thing as having form, should be said to be the thing, but the material

element by itself must never be said to be so.) And so the formula of the

circle does not include that of the segments, but the formula of the syllable

includes that of the letters; for the letters are parts of the formula of the form,

and not matter, but the segments are parts in the sense of matter on which the

form  supervenes;  yet  they  are  nearer  the  form  than  the  bronze  is  when

roundness is produced in bronze. But in a sense not even every kind of letter

will be present in the formula of the syllable, e.g. particular waxen letters or

the  letters  as  movements  in  the  air;  for  in  these  also  we  have  already

something that is part of the syllable only in the sense that it is its perceptible

matter. For even if the line when divided passes away into its halves, or the

man  into  bones  and  muscles  and  flesh,  it  does  not  follow  that  they  are

composed of these as parts of their essence, but rather as matter; and these are

parts of the concrete thing, but not also of the form, i.e. of that to which the

formula refers; wherefore also they are not present in the formulae. In one

kind of formula, then, the formula of such parts will be present, but in another

it  must  not  be  present,  where  the  formula  does  not  refer  to  the  concreteobject. For it is for this reason that some things have as their constituent

principles  parts  into  which  they  pass  away,  while  some  have  not.  Those

things which are the form and the matter taken together, e.g. the snub, or the

bronze circle, pass away into these materials, and the matter is a part of them;

but those things which do not involve matter but are without matter, and

whose formulae are formulae of the form only, do not pass away,-either not

at all or at any rate not in this way. Therefore these materials are principles

and parts of the concrete things, while of the form they are neither parts nor

principles. And therefore the clay statue is resolved into clay and the ball into

bronze  and  Callias  into  flesh  and  bones,  and  again  the  circle  into  its

segments; for there is a sense of ‘circle’ in which involves matter. For ‘circle’

is used ambiguously, meaning both the circle, unqualified, and the individual

circle, because there is no name peculiar to the individuals.

The truth has indeed now been stated, but still let us state it yet more

clearly, taking up the question again. The parts of the formula, into which the

formula is divided, are prior to it, either all or some of them. The formula of

the right angle, however, does not include the formula of the acute, but the

formula of the acute includes that of the right angle; for he who defines the

acute uses the right angle; for the acute is ‘less than a right angle’. The circle

and the semicircle also are in a like relation; for the semicircle is defined by

the circle; and so is the finger by the whole body, for a finger is ‘such and

such a part of a man’. Therefore the parts which are of the nature of matter,

and into which as its matter a thing is divided, are posterior; but those which

are of the nature of parts of the formula, and of the substance according to its

formula, are prior, either all or some of them. And since the soul of animals

(for this is the substance of a living being) is their substance according to the

formula, i.e. the form and the essence of a body of a certain kind (at least we

shall  define  each  part,  if  we  define  it  well,  not  without  reference  to  its

function, and this cannot belong to it without perception), so that the parts of

soul are prior, either all or some of them, to the concrete ‘animal’, and so too

with each individual animal; and the body and parts are posterior to this, the

essential substance, and it is not the substance but the concrete thing that is

divided into these parts as its matter:-this being so, to the concrete thing these

are in a sense prior, but in a sense they are not. For they cannot even exist if

severed from the whole; for it is not a finger in any and every state that is the

finger of a living thing, but a dead finger is a finger only in name. Some parts

are neither prior nor posterior to the whole, i.e. those which are dominant andin which the formula, i.e. the essential substance, is immediately present, e.g.

perhaps the heart or the brain; for it does not matter in the least which of the

two has this quality. But man and horse and terms which are thus applied to

individuals, but universally, are not substance but something composed of

this particular formula and this particular matter treated as universal; and as

regards the individual, Socrates already includes in him ultimate individual

matter; and similarly in all other cases. ‘A part’ may be a part either of the

form (i.e. of the essence), or of the compound of the form and the matter, or

of the matter itself. But only the parts of the form are parts of the formula,

and the formula is of the universal; for ‘being a circle’ is the same as the

circle, and ‘being a soul’ the same as the soul. But when we come to the

concrete  thing,  e.g.  this  circle,  i.e.  one  of  the  individual  circles,  whether

perceptible or intelligible (I mean by intelligible circles the mathematical, and

by  perceptible  circles  those  of  bronze  and  of  wood),-of  these  there  is  no

definition,  but  they  are  known  by  the  aid  of  intuitive  thinking  or  of

perception; and when they pass out of this complete realization it is not clear

whether they exist or not; but they are always stated and recognized by means

of the universal formula. But matter is unknowable in itself. And some matter

is  perceptible  and  some  intelligible,  perceptible  matter  being  for  instance

bronze and wood and all matter that is changeable, and intelligible matter

being that which is present in perceptible things not qua perceptible, i.e. the

objects of mathematics.

We have stated, then, how matters stand with regard to whole and part, and

their priority and posteriority. But when any one asks whether the right angle

and the circle and the animal are prior, or the things into which they are

divided and of which they consist, i.e. the parts, we must meet the inquiry by

saying that the question cannot be answered simply. For if even bare soul is

the animal or the living thing, or the soul of each individual is the individual

itself, and ‘being a circle’ is the circle, and ‘being a right angle’ and the

essence of the right angle is the right angle, then the whole in one sense must

be called posterior to the art in one sense, i.e. to the parts included in the

formula and to the parts of the individual right angle (for both the material

right angle which is made of bronze, and that which is formed by individual

lines, are posterior to their parts); while the immaterial right angle is posterior

to  the  parts  included  in  the  formula,  but  prior  to  those  included  in  the

particular  instance,  and  the  question  must  not  be  answered  simply.  If,

however, the soul is something different and is not identical with the animal,even so some parts must, as we have maintained, be called prior and others

must not.

<

div id="section86" class="section" title="11">


11


  Another question is naturally raised, viz. what sort of parts belong to the

form and what sort not to the form, but to the concrete thing. Yet if this is not

plain it is not possible to define any thing; for definition is of the universal

and of the form. If then it is not evident what sort of parts are of the nature of

matter and what sort are not, neither will the formula of the thing be evident.

In  the  case  of  things  which  are  found  to  occur  in  specifically  different

materials, as a circle may exist in bronze or stone or wood, it seems plain that

these, the bronze or the stone, are no part of the essence of the circle, since it

is found apart from them. Of things which are not seen to exist apart, there is

no reason why the same may not be true, just as if all circles that had ever

been seen were of bronze; for none the less the bronze would be no part of

the form; but it is hard to eliminate it in thought. E.g. the form of man is

always found in flesh and bones and parts of this kind; are these then also

parts of the form and the formula? No, they are matter; but because man is

not found also in other matters we are unable to perform the abstraction.

  Since this is thought to be possible, but it is not clear when it is the case,

some people already raise the question even in the case of the circle and the

triangle, thinking that it is not right to define these by reference to lines and

to the continuous, but that all these are to the circle or the triangle as flesh

and bones are to man, and bronze or stone to the statue; and they reduce all

things to numbers, and they say the formula of ‘line’ is that of ‘two’. And of

those who assert the Ideas some make ‘two’ the line-itself, and others make it

the Form of the line; for in some cases they say the Form and that of which it

is the Form are the same, e.g. ‘two’ and the Form of two; but in the case of

‘line’ they say this is no longer so.

It  follows  then  that  there  is  one  Form  for  many  things  whose  form  is

evidently different (a conclusion which confronted the Pythagoreans also);

and it is possible to make one thing the Form-itself of all, and to hold that the

others are not Forms; but thus all things will be one.

We have pointed out, then, that the question of definitions contains somedifficulty, and why this is so. And so to reduce all things thus to Forms and to

eliminate the matter is useless labour; for some things surely are a particular

form in a particular matter, or particular things in a particular state. And the

comparison which Socrates the younger used to make in the case of ‘animal’

is not sound; for it leads away from the truth, and makes one suppose that

man can possibly exist without his parts, as the circle can without the bronze.

But the case is not similar; for an animal is something perceptible, and it is

not  possible  to  define  it  without  reference  to  movement-nor,  therefore,

without reference to the parts’ being in a certain state. For it is not a hand in

any and every state that is a part of man, but only when it can fulfil its work,

and therefore only when it is alive; if it is not alive it is not a part.

  Regarding the objects of mathematics, why are the formulae of the parts

not parts of the formulae of the wholes; e.g. why are not the semicircles

included in the formula of the circle? It cannot be said, ‘because these parts

are  perceptible  things’;  for  they  are  not.  But  perhaps  this  makes  no

difference; for even some things which are not perceptible must have matter;

indeed there is some matter in everything which is not an essence and a bare

form but a ‘this’. The semicircles, then, will not be parts of the universal

circle, but will be parts of the individual circles, as has been said before; for

while one kind of matter is perceptible, there is another which is intelligible.

It is clear also that the soul is the primary substance and the body is matter,

and man or animal is the compound of both taken universally; and ‘Socrates’

or ‘Coriscus’, if even the soul of Socrates may be called Socrates, has two

meanings  (for  some  mean  by  such  a  term  the  soul,  and  others  mean  the

concrete thing), but if ‘Socrates’ or ‘Coriscus’ means simply this particular

soul and this particular body, the individual is analogous to the universal in

its composition.

  Whether there is, apart from the matter of such substances, another kind of

matter,  and  one  should  look  for  some  substance  other  than  these,  e.g.

numbers or something of the sort, must be considered later. For it is for the

sake  of  this  that  we  are  trying  to  determine  the  nature  of  perceptible

substances as well, since in a sense the inquiry about perceptible substances

is the work of physics, i.e. of second philosophy; for the physicist must come

to know not only about the matter, but also about the substance expressed in

the  formula,  and  even  more  than  about  the  other.  And  in  the  case  of

definitions, how the elements in the formula are parts of the definition, and

why the definition is one formula (for clearly the thing is one, but in virtue ofwhat is the thing one, although it has parts?),-this must be considered later.

  What the essence is and in what sense it is independent, has been stated

universally in a way which is true of every case, and also why the formula of

the essence of some things contains the parts of the thing defined, while that

of others does not. And we have stated that in the formula of the substance

the  material  parts  will  not  be  present  (for  they  are  not  even  parts  of  the

substance in that sense, but of the concrete substance; but of this there is in a

sense a formula, and in a sense there is not; for there is no formula of it with

its matter, for this is indefinite, but there is a formula of it with reference to

its primary substance-e.g. in the case of man the formula of the soul-, for the

substance is the indwelling form, from which and the matter the so-called

concrete substance is derived; e.g. concavity is a form of this sort, for from

this  and  the  nose  arise  ‘snub  nose’  and  ‘snubness’);  but  in  the  concrete

substance, e.g. a snub nose or Callias, the matter also will be present. And we

have stated that the essence and the thing itself are in some cases the same; ie.

in the case of primary substances, e.g. curvature and the essence of curvature

if this is primary. (By a ‘primary’ substance I mean one which does not imply

the presence of something in something else, i.e. in something that underlies

it which acts as matter.) But things which are of the nature of matter, or of

wholes  that  include  matter,  are  not  the  same  as  their  essences,  nor  are

accidental unities like that of ‘Socrates’ and ‘musical’; for these are the same

only by accident.

<

div id="section87" class="section" title="12">


12


Now let us treat first of definition, in so far as we have not treated of it in

the  Analytics;  for  the  problem  stated  in  them  is  useful  for  our  inquiries

concerning substance. I mean this problem:-wherein can consist the unity of

that, the formula of which we call a definition, as for instance, in the case of

man, ‘two-footed animal’; for let this be the formula of man. Why, then, is

this one, and not many, viz. ‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’? For in the case of

‘man’ and ‘pale’ there is a plurality when one term does not belong to the

other, but a unity when it does belong and the subject, man, has a certain

attribute; for then a unity is produced and we have ‘the pale man’. In the

present case, on the other hand, one does not share in the other; the genus isnot thought to share in its differentiae (for then the same thing would share in

contraries; for the differentiae by which the genus is divided are contrary).

And even if the genus does share in them, the same argument applies, since

the differentiae present in man are many, e.g. endowed with feet, two-footed,

featherless. Why are these one and not many? Not because they are present in

one thing; for on this principle a unity can be made out of all the attributes of

a thing. But surely all the attributes in the definition must be one; for the

definition is a single formula and a formula of substance, so that it must be a

formula of some one thing; for substance means a ‘one’ and a ‘this’, as we

maintain.

We must first inquire about definitions reached by the method of divisions.

There is nothing in the definition except the first-named and the differentiae.

The other genera are the first genus and along with this the differentiae that

are taken with it, e.g. the first may be ‘animal’, the next ‘animal which is

two-footed’,  and  again  ‘animal  which  is  two-footed  and  featherless’,  and

similarly if the definition includes more terms. And in general it makes no

difference whether it includes many or few terms,-nor, therefore, whether it

includes few or simply two; and of the two the one is differentia and the other

genus;  e.g.  in  ‘two-footed  animal’  ‘animal’  is  genus,  and  the  other  is

differentia.

If then the genus absolutely does not exist apart from the species-of-a-

genus, or if it exists but exists as matter (for the voice is genus and matter,

but its differentiae make the species, i.e. the letters, out of it), clearly the

definition is the formula which comprises the differentiae.

But  it  is  also  necessary  that  the  division  be  by  the  differentia  of  the

diferentia; e.g. ‘endowed with feet’ is a differentia of ‘animal’; again the

differentia of ‘animal endowed with feet’ must be of it qua endowed with

feet. Therefore we must not say, if we are to speak rightly, that of that which

is endowed with feet one part has feathers and one is featherless (if we do this

we do it through incapacity); we must divide it only into cloven-footed and

not cloven; for these are differentiae in the foot; cloven-footedness is a form

of footedness. And the process wants always to go on so till it reaches the

species that contain no differences. And then there will be as many kinds of

foot as there are differentiae, and the kinds of animals endowed with feet will

be  equal  in  number  to  the  differentiae.  If  then  this  is  so,  clearly  the  last

differentia will be the substance of the thing and its definition, since it is not

right to state the same things more than once in our definitions; for it issuperfluous. And this does happen; for when we say ‘animal endowed with

feet and two-footed’ we have said nothing other than ‘animal having feet,

having two feet’; and if we divide this by the proper division, we shall be

saying the same thing more than once-as many times as there are differentiae.

If then a differentia of a differentia be taken at each step, one differentia-

the last-will be the form and the substance; but if we divide according to

accidental qualities, e.g. if we were to divide that which is endowed with feet

into the white and the black, there will be as many differentiae as there are

cuts. Therefore it is plain that the definition is the formula which contains the

differentiae, or, according to the right method, the last of these. This would

be evident, if we were to change the order of such definitions, e.g. of that of

man,  saying  ‘animal  which  is  two-footed  and  endowed  with  feet’;  for

‘endowed  with  feet’  is  superfluous  when  ‘two-footed’  has  been  said.  But

there is no order in the substance; for how are we to think the one element

posterior  and  the  other  prior?  Regarding  the  definitions,  then,  which  are

reached by the method of divisions, let this suffice as our first attempt at

stating their nature.

<

div id="section88" class="section" title="13">


13


Let us return to the subject of our inquiry, which is substance. As the

substratum and the essence and the compound of these are called substance,

so also is the universal. About two of these we have spoken; both about the

essence and about the substratum, of which we have said that it underlies in

two  senses,  either  being  a  ‘this’-which  is  the  way  in  which  an  animal

underlies its attributes-or as the matter underlies the complete reality. The

universal also is thought by some to be in the fullest sense a cause, and a

principle; therefore let us attack the discussion of this point also. For it seems

impossible that any universal term should be the name of a substance. For

firstly the substance of each thing is that which is peculiar to it, which does

not belong to anything else; but the universal is common, since that is called

universal  which  is  such  as  to  belong  to  more  than  one  thing.  Of  which

individual then will this be the substance? Either of all or of none; but it

cannot be the substance of all. And if it is to be the substance of one, this one

will be the others also; for things whose substance is one and whose essenceis one are themselves also one.

  Further, substance means that which is not predicable of a subject, but the

universal is predicable of some subject always.

But perhaps the universal, while it cannot be substance in the way in which

the essence is so, can be present in this; e.g. ‘animal’ can be present in ‘man’

and ‘horse’. Then clearly it is a formula of the essence. And it makes no

difference even if it is not a formula of everything that is in the substance; for

none the less the universal will be the substance of something, as ‘man’ is the

substance of the individual man in whom it is present, so that the same result

will follow once more; for the universal, e.g. ‘animal’, will be the substance

of that in which it is present as something peculiar to it. And further it is

impossible and absurd that the ‘this’, i.e. the substance, if it consists of parts,

should not consist of substances nor of what is a ‘this’, but of quality; for that

which is not substance, i.e. the quality, will then be prior to substance and to

the ‘this’. Which is impossible; for neither in formula nor in time nor in

coming to be can the modifications be prior to the substance; for then they

will  also  be  separable  from  it.  Further,  Socrates  will  contain  a  substance

present in a substance, so that this will be the substance of two things. And in

general it follows, if man and such things are substance, that none of the

elements in their formulae is the substance of anything, nor does it exist apart

from the species or in anything else; I mean, for instance, that no ‘animal’

exists apart from the particular kinds of animal, nor does any other of the

elements present in formulae exist apart.

If,  then,  we  view  the  matter  from  these  standpoints,  it  is  plain  that  no

universal attribute is a substance, and this is plain also from the fact that no

common  predicate  indicates  a  ‘this’,  but  rather  a  ‘such’.  If  not,  many

difficulties follow and especially the ‘third man’.

The  conclusion  is  evident  also  from  the  following  consideration.  A

substance cannot consist of substances present in it in complete reality; for

things that are thus in complete reality two are never in complete reality one,

though  if  they  are  potentially  two,  they  can  be  one  (e.g.  the  double  line

consists of two halves-potentially; for the complete realization of the halves

divides them from one another); therefore if the substance is one, it will not

consist of substances present in it and present in this way, which Democritus

describes rightly; he says one thing cannot be made out of two nor two out of

one; for he identifies substances with his indivisible magnitudes. It is clear

therefore that the same will hold good of number, if number is a synthesis ofunits, as is said by some; for two is either not one, or there is no unit present

in it in complete reality. But our result involves a difficulty. If no substance

can consist of universals because a universal indicates a ‘such’, not a ‘this’,

and  if  no  substance  can  be  composed  of  substances  existing  in  complete

reality, every substance would be incomposite, so that there would not even

be a formula of any substance. But it is thought by all and was stated long

ago that it is either only, or primarily, substance that can defined; yet now it

seems that not even substance can. There cannot, then, be a definition of

anything; or in a sense there can be, and in a sense there cannot. And what we

are saying will be plainer from what follows.

<

div id="section89" class="section" title="14">


14


It is clear also from these very facts what consequence confronts those who

say the Ideas are substances capable of separate existence, and at the same

time  make  the  Form  consist  of  the  genus  and  the  differentiae.  For  if  the

Forms exist and ‘animal’ is present in ‘man’ and ‘horse’, it is either one and

the same in number, or different. (In formula it is clearly one; for he who

states the formula will go through the formula in either case.) If then there is

a ‘man-in-himself’ who is a ‘this’ and exists apart, the parts also of which he

consists,  e.g.  ‘animal’  and  ‘two-footed’,  must  indicate  ‘thises’,  and  be

capable of separate existence, and substances; therefore ‘animal’, as well as

‘man’, must be of this sort.

Now (1) if the ‘animal’ in ‘the horse’ and in ‘man’ is one and the same, as

you are with yourself, (a) how will the one in things that exist apart be one,

and how will this ‘animal’ escape being divided even from itself?

  Further,  (b)  if  it  is  to  share  in  ‘two-footed’  and  ‘many-footed’,  an

impossible conclusion follows; for contrary attributes will belong at the same

time to it although it is one and a ‘this’. If it is not to share in them, what is

the relation implied when one says the animal is two-footed or possessed of

feet? But perhaps the two things are ‘put together’ and are ‘in contact’, or are

‘mixed’. Yet all these expressions are absurd.

But (2) suppose the Form to be different in each species. Then there will be

practically an infinite number of things whose substance is animal’; for it is

not by accident that ‘man’ has ‘animal’ for one of its elements. Further, manythings will be ‘animal-itself’. For (i) the ‘animal’ in each species will be the

substance of the species; for it is after nothing else that the species is called;

if it were, that other would be an element in ‘man’, i.e. would be the genus of

man. And further, (ii) all the elements of which ‘man’ is composed will be

Ideas. None of them, then, will be the Idea of one thing and the substance of

another; this is impossible. The ‘animal’, then, present in each species of

animals  will  be  animal-itself.  Further,  from  what  is  this  ‘animal’  in  each

species derived, and how will it be derived from animal-itself? Or how can

this ‘animal’, whose essence is simply animality, exist apart from animal-

itself?

  Further,  (3)in  the  case  of  sensible  things  both  these  consequences  and

others still more absurd follow. If, then, these consequences are impossible,

clearly there are not Forms of sensible things in the sense in which some

maintain their existence.

<

div id="section90" class="section" title="15">


15


  Since substance is of two kinds, the concrete thing and the formula (I mean

that one kind of substance is the formula taken with the matter, while another

kind  is  the  formula  in  its  generality),  substances  in  the  former  sense  are

capable of destruction (for they are capable also of generation), but there is

no destruction of the formula in the sense that it is ever in course of being

destroyed (for there is no generation of it either; the being of house is not

generated,  but  only  the  being  of  this  house),  but  without  generation  and

destruction formulae are and are not; for it has been shown that no one begets

nor  makes  these.  For  this  reason,  also,  there  is  neither  definition  of  nor

demonstration about sensible individual substances, because they have matter

whose nature is such that they are capable both of being and of not being; for

which reason all the individual instances of them are destructible. If then

demonstration is of necessary truths and definition is a scientific process, and

if,  just  as  knowledge  cannot  be  sometimes  knowledge  and  sometimes

ignorance, but the state which varies thus is opinion, so too demonstration

and definition cannot vary thus, but it is opinion that deals with that which

can be otherwise than as it is, clearly there can neither be definition of nor

demonstration about sensible individuals. For perishing things are obscure tothose who have the relevant knowledge, when they have passed from our

perception; and though the formulae remain in the soul unchanged, there will

no  longer  be  either  definition  or  demonstration.  And  so  when  one  of  the

definition-mongers  defines  any  individual,  he  must  recognize  that  his

definition may always be overthrown; for it is not possible to define such

things.

Nor is it possible to define any Idea. For the Idea is, as its supporters say,

an individual, and can exist apart; and the formula must consist of words; and

he who defines must not invent a word (for it would be unknown), but the

established words are common to all the members of a class; these then must

apply to something besides the thing defined; e.g. if one were defining you,

he would say ‘an animal which is lean’ or ‘pale’, or something else which

will  apply  also  to  some  one  other  than  you.  If  any  one  were  to  say  that

perhaps  all  the  attributes  taken  apart  may  belong  to  many  subjects,  but

together they belong only to this one, we must reply first that they belong

also to both the elements; e.g. ‘two-footed animal’ belongs to animal and to

the two-footed. (And in the case of eternal entities this is even necessary,

since the elements are prior to and parts of the compound; nay more, they can

also exist apart, if ‘man’ can exist apart. For either neither or both can. If,

then, neither can, the genus will not exist apart from the various species; but

if it does, the differentia will also.) Secondly, we must reply that ‘animal’ and

‘two-footed’ are prior in being to ‘two-footed animal’; and things which are

prior to others are not destroyed when the others are.

  Again,  if  the  Ideas  consist  of  Ideas  (as  they  must,  since  elements  are

simpler than the compound), it will be further necessary that the elements

also of which the Idea consists, e.g. ‘animal’ and ‘two-footed’, should be

predicated of many subjects. If not, how will they come to be known? For

there will then be an Idea which cannot be predicated of more subjects than

one. But this is not thought possible-every Idea is thought to be capable of

being shared.

As has been said, then, the impossibility of defining individuals escapes

notice in the case of eternal things, especially those which are unique, like the

sun or the moon. For people err not only by adding attributes whose removal

the sun would survive, e.g. ‘going round the earth’ or ‘night-hidden’ (for

from their view it follows that if it stands still or is visible, it will no longer

be  the  sun;  but  it  is  strange  if  this  is  so;  for  ‘the  sun’  means  a  certain

substance); but also by the mention of attributes which can belong to anothersubject; e.g. if another thing with the stated attributes comes into existence,

clearly it will be a sun; the formula therefore is general. But the sun was

supposed to be an individual, like Cleon or Socrates. After all, why does not

one of the supporters of the Ideas produce a definition of an Idea? It would

become clear, if they tried, that what has now been said is true.

<

div id="section91" class="section" title="16">


16


  Evidently even of the things that are thought to be substances, most are

only potencies,-both the parts of animals (for none of them exists separately;

and  when  they  are  separated,  then  too  they  exist,  all  of  them,  merely  as

matter) and earth and fire and air; for none of them is a unity, but as it were a

mere heap, till they are worked up and some unity is made out of them. One

might most readily suppose the parts of living things and the parts of the soul

nearly related to them to turn out to be both, i.e. existent in complete reality

as well as in potency, because they have sources of movement in something

in their joints; for which reason some animals live when divided. Yet all the

parts  must  exist  only  potentially,  when  they  are  one  and  continuous  by

nature,-not by force or by growing into one, for such a phenomenon is an

abnormality.

  Since the term ‘unity’ is used like the term ‘being’, and the substance of

that which is one is one, and things whose substance is numerically one are

numerically one, evidently neither unity nor being can be the substance of

things, just as being an element or a principle cannot be the substance, but we

ask what, then, the principle is, that we may reduce the thing to something

more  knowable.  Now  of  these  concepts  ‘being’  and  ‘unity’  are  more

substantial than ‘principle’ or ‘element’ or ‘cause’, but not even the former

are  substance,  since  in  general  nothing  that  is  common  is  substance;  for

substance does not belong to anything but to itself and to that which has it, of

which it is the substance. Further, that which is one cannot be in many places

at the same time, but that which is common is present in many places at the

same time; so that clearly no universal exists apart from its individuals.

But those who say the Forms exist, in one respect are right, in giving the

Forms separate existence, if they are substances; but in another respect they

are not right, because they say the one over many is a Form. The reason fortheir doing this is that they cannot declare what are the substances of this sort,

the  imperishable  substances  which  exist  apart  from  the  individual  and

sensible substances. They make them, then, the same in kind as the perishable

things  (for  this  kind  of  substance  we  know)—’man-himself’  and  ‘horse-

itself’, adding to the sensible things the word ‘itself’. Yet even if we had not

seen  the  stars,  none  the  less,  I  suppose,  would  they  have  been  eternal

substances apart from those which we knew; so that now also if we do not

know what non-sensible substances there are, yet it is doubtless necessary

that there should he some.-Clearly, then, no universal term is the name of a

substance, and no substance is composed of substances.

<

div id="section92" class="section" title="17">


17


Let us state what, i.e. what kind of thing, substance should be said to be,

taking once more another starting-point; for perhaps from this we shall get a

clear view also of that substance which exists apart from sensible substances.

Since, then, substance is a principle and a cause, let us pursue it from this

starting-point. The ‘why’ is always sought in this form—’why does one thing

attach to some other?’ For to inquire why the musical man is a musical man,

is  either  to  inquire—as  we  have  said  why  the  man  is  musical,  or  it  is

something else. Now ‘why a thing is itself’ is a meaningless inquiry (for (to

give meaning to the question ‘why’) the fact or the existence of the thing

must already be evident-e.g. that the moon is eclipsed-but the fact that a thing

is itself is the single reason and the single cause to be given in answer to all

such questions as why the man is man, or the musician musical’, unless one

were to answer ‘because each thing is inseparable from itself, and its being

one just meant this’; this, however, is common to all things and is a short and

easy way with the question). But we can inquire why man is an animal of

such and such a nature. This, then, is plain, that we are not inquiring why he

who is a man is a man. We are inquiring, then, why something is predicable

of something (that it is predicable must be clear; for if not, the inquiry is an

inquiry into nothing). E.g. why does it thunder? This is the same as ‘why is

sound produced in the clouds?’ Thus the inquiry is about the predication of

one  thing  of  another.  And  why  are  these  things,  i.e.  bricks  and  stones,  a

house? Plainly we are seeking the cause. And this is the essence (to speakabstractly), which in some cases is the end, e.g. perhaps in the case of a house

or a bed, and in some cases is the first mover; for this also is a cause. But

while the efficient cause is sought in the case of genesis and destruction, the

final cause is sought in the case of being also.

The object of the inquiry is most easily overlooked where one term is not

expressly  predicated  of  another  (e.g.  when  we  inquire  ‘what  man  is’),

because we do not distinguish and do not say definitely that certain elements

make up a certain whole. But we must articulate our meaning before we

begin to inquire; if not, the inquiry is on the border-line between being a

search  for  something  and  a  search  for  nothing.  Since  we  must  have  the

existence of the thing as something given, clearly the question is why the

matter is some definite thing; e.g. why are these materials a house? Because

that which was the essence of a house is present. And why is this individual

thing, or this body having this form, a man? Therefore what we seek is the

cause, i.e. the form, by reason of which the matter is some definite thing; and

this is the substance of the thing. Evidently, then, in the case of simple terms

no inquiry nor teaching is possible; our attitude towards such things is other

than that of inquiry.

  Since that which is compounded out of something so that the whole is one,

not like a heap but like a syllable-now the syllable is not its elements, ba is

not  the  same  as  b  and  a,  nor  is  flesh  fire  and  earth  (for  when  these  are

separated the wholes, i.e. the flesh and the syllable, no longer exist, but the

elements of the syllable exist, and so do fire and earth); the syllable, then, is

something-not  only  its  elements  (the  vowel  and  the  consonant)  but  also

something else, and the flesh is not only fire and earth or the hot and the cold,

but  also  something  else:-if,  then,  that  something  must  itself  be  either  an

element or composed of elements, (1) if it is an element the same argument

will  again  apply;  for  flesh  will  consist  of  this  and  fire  and  earth  and

something still further, so that the process will go on to infinity. But (2) if it

is a compound, clearly it will be a compound not of one but of more than one

(or else that one will be the thing itself), so that again in this case we can use

the same argument as in the case of flesh or of the syllable. But it would seem

that this ‘other’ is something, and not an element, and that it is the cause

which makes this thing flesh and that a syllable. And similarly in all other

cases. And this is the substance of each thing (for this is the primary cause of

its being); and since, while some things are not substances, as many as are

substances are formed in accordance with a nature of their own and by aprocess of nature, their substance would seem to be this kind of ‘nature’,

which is not an element but a principle. An element, on the other hand, is that

into which a thing is divided and which is present in it as matter; e.g. a and b

are the elements of the syllable.                                      Book VIII


Translated by W. D. Ross


<

div id="section93" class="section" title="1">


1


We  must  reckon  up  the  results  arising  from  what  has  been  said,  and

compute the sum of them, and put the finishing touch to our inquiry. We have

said that the causes, principles, and elements of substances are the object of

our search. And some substances are recognized by every one, but some have

been  advocated  by  particular  schools.  Those  generally  recognized  are  the

natural substances, i.e. fire, earth, water, air, &c., the simple bodies; second

plants and their parts, and animals and the parts of animals; and finally the

physical universe and its parts; while some particular schools say that Forms

and the objects of mathematics are substances. But there are arguments which

lead to the conclusion that there are other substances, the essence and the

substratum. Again, in another way the genus seems more substantial than the

various spccies, and the universal than the particulars. And with the universal

and the genus the Ideas are connected; it is in virtue of the same argument

that they are thought to be substances. And since the essence is substance,

and  the  definition  is  a  formula  of  the  essence,  for  this  reason  we  have

discussed  definition  and  essential  predication.  Since  the  definition  is  a

formula, and a formula has parts, we had to consider also with respect to the

notion  of  ‘part’,  what  are  parts  of  the  substance  and  what  are  not,  and

whether the parts of the substance are also parts of the definition. Further,

too, neither the universal nor the genus is a substance; we must inquire later

into  the  Ideas  and  the  objects  of  mathematics;  for  some  say  these  are

substances as well as the sensible substances.

But  now  let  us  resume  the  discussion  of  the  generally  recognized

substances.  These  are  the  sensible  substances,  and  sensible  substances  all

have matter. The substratum is substance, and this is in one sense the matter

(and by matter I mean that which, not being a ‘this’ actually, is potentially a‘this’), and in another sense the formula or shape (that which being a ‘this’

can be separately formulated), and thirdly the complex of these two, which

alone is generated and destroyed, and is, without qualification, capable of

separate  existence;  for  of  substances  completely  expressible  in  a  formula

some are separable and some are separable and some are not.

But clearly matter also is substance; for in all the opposite changes that

occur there is something which underlies the changes, e.g. in respect of place

that which is now here and again elsewhere, and in respect of increase that

which is now of one size and again less or greater, and in respect of alteration

that which is now healthy and again diseased; and similarly in respect of

substance there is something that is now being generated and again being

destroyed, and now underlies the process as a ‘this’ and again underlies it in

respect of a privation of positive character. And in this change the others are

involved. But in either one or two of the others this is not involved; for it is

not necessary if a thing has matter for change of place that it should also have

matter for generation and destruction.

The  difference  between  becoming  in  the  full  sense  and  becoming  in  a

qualified sense has been stated in our physical works.

<

div id="section94" class="section" title="2">


2


  Since the substance which exists as underlying and as matter is generally

recognized, and this that which exists potentially, it remains for us to say

what is the substance, in the sense of actuality, of sensible things. Democritus

seems  to  think  there  are  three  kinds  of  difference  between  things;  the

underlying body, the matter, is one and the same, but they differ either in

rhythm, i.e. shape, or in turning, i.e. position, or in inter-contact, i.e. order.

But  evidently  there  are  many  differences;  for  instance,  some  things  are

characterized  by  the  mode  of  composition  of  their  matter,  e.g.  the  things

formed  by  blending,  such  as  honey-water;  and  others  by  being  bound

together, e.g. bundle; and others by being glued together, e.g. a book; and

others by being nailed together, e.g. a casket; and others in more than one of

these ways; and others by position, e.g. threshold and lintel (for these differ

by  being  placed  in  a  certain  way);  and  others  by  time,  e.g.  dinner  and

breakfast; and others by place, e.g. the winds; and others by the affectionsproper  to  sensible  things,  e.g.  hardness  and  softness,  density  and  rarity,

dryness and wetness; and some things by some of these qualities, others by

them all, and in general some by excess and some by defect. Clearly, then,

the word ‘is’ has just as many meanings; a thing is a threshold because it lies

in such and such a position, and its being means its lying in that position,

while being ice means having been solidified in such and such a way. And

the being of some things will be defined by all these qualities, because some

parts of them are mixed, others are blended, others are bound together, others

are solidified, and others use the other differentiae; e.g. the hand or the foot

requires  such  complex  definition.  We  must  grasp,  then,  the  kinds  of

differentiae (for these will be the principles of the being of things), e.g. the

things characterized by the more and the less, or by the dense and the rare,

and by other such qualities; for all these are forms of excess and defect. And

anything that is characterized by shape or by smoothness and roughness is

characterized by the straight and the curved. And for other things their being

will mean their being mixed, and their not being will mean the opposite.

It is clear, then, from these facts that, since its substance is the cause of

each thing’s being, we must seek in these differentiae what is the cause of the

being of each of these things. Now none of these differentiae is substance,

even when coupled with matter, yet it is what is analogous to substance in

each case; and as in substances that which is predicated of the matter is the

actuality itself, in all other definitions also it is what most resembles full

actuality. E.g. if we had to define a threshold, we should say ‘wood or stone

in such and such a position’, and a house we should define as ‘bricks and

timbers in such and such a position’,(or a purpose may exist as well in some

cases), and if we had to define ice we should say ‘water frozen or solidified

in such and such a way’, and harmony is ‘such and such a blending of high

and low’; and similarly in all other cases.

  Obviously, then, the actuality or the formula is different when the matter is

different; for in some cases it is the composition, in others the mixing, and in

others some other of the attributes we have named. And so, of the people who

go in for defining, those who define a house as stones, bricks, and timbers are

speaking  of  the  potential  house,  for  these  are  the  matter;  but  those  who

propose ‘a receptacle to shelter chattels and living beings’, or something of

the sort, speak of the actuality. Those who combine both of these speak of the

third  kind  of  substance,  which  is  composed  of  matter  and  form  (for  the

formula that gives the differentiae seems to be an account of the form oractuality, while that which gives the components is rather an account of the

matter); and the same is true of the kind of definitions which Archytas used

to accept; they are accounts of the combined form and matter. E.g. what is

still weather? Absence of motion in a large expanse of air; air is the matter,

and  absence  of  motion  is  the  actuality  and  substance.  What  is  a  calm?

Smoothness of sea; the material substratum is the sea, and the actuality or

shape  is  smoothness.  It  is  obvious  then,  from  what  has  been  said,  what

sensible substance is and how it exists-one kind of it as matter, another as

form or actuality, while the third kind is that which is composed of these two.

<

div id="section95" class="section" title="3">


3


We must not fail to notice that sometimes it is not clear whether a name

means the composite substance, or the actuality or form, e.g. whether ‘house’

is a sign for the composite thing, ‘a covering consisting of bricks and stones

laid thus and thus’, or for the actuality or form, ‘a covering’, and whether a

line is ‘twoness in length’ or ‘twoness’, and whether an animal is soul in a

body’  or  ‘a  soul’;  for  soul  is  the  substance  or  actuality  of  some  body.

‘Animal’ might even be applied to both, not as something definable by one

formula, but as related to a single thing. But this question, while important

for  another  purpose,  is  of  no  importance  for  the  inquiry  into  sensible

substance; for the essence certainly attaches to the form and the actuality. For

‘soul’ and ‘to be soul’ are the same, but ‘to be man’ and ‘man’ are not the

same,  unless  even  the  bare  soul  is  to  be  called  man;  and  thus  on  one

interpretation the thing is the same as its essence, and on another it is not.

If we examine we find that the syllable does not consist of the letters +

juxtaposition, nor is the house bricks + juxtaposition. And this is right; for the

juxtaposition or mixing does not consist of those things of which it is the

juxtaposition or mixing. And the same is true in all other cases; e.g. if the

threshold is characterized by its position, the position is not constituted by the

threshold, but rather the latter is constituted by the former. Nor is man animal

+  biped,  but  there  must  be  something  besides  these,  if  these  are  matter,-

something which is neither an element in the whole nor a compound, but is

the substance; but this people eliminate, and state only the matter. If, then,

this is the cause of the thing’s being, and if the cause of its being is itssubstance, they will not be stating the substance itself.

(This, then, must either be eternal or it must be destructible without being

ever in course of being destroyed, and must have come to be without ever

being  in  course  of  coming  to  be.  But  it  has  been  proved  and  explained

elsewhere that no one makes or begets the form, but it is the individual that is

made, i.e. the complex of form and matter that is generated. Whether the

substances of destructible things can exist apart, is not yet at all clear; except

that obviously this is impossible in some cases-in the case of things which

cannot  exist  apart  from  the  individual  instances,  e.g.  house  or  utensil.

Perhaps, indeed, neither these things themselves, nor any of the other things

which are not formed by nature, are substances at all; for one might say that

the nature in natural objects is the only substance to be found in destructible

things.)

  Therefore  the  difficulty  which  used  to  be  raised  by  the  school  of

Antisthenes and other such uneducated people has a certain timeliness. They

said that the ‘what’ cannot be defined (for the definition so called is a ‘long

rigmarole’) but of what sort a thing, e.g. silver, is, they thought it possible

actually to explain, not saying what it is, but that it is like tin. Therefore one

kind of substance can be defined and formulated, i.e. the composite kind,

whether it be perceptible or intelligible; but the primary parts of which this

consists cannot be defined, since a definitory formula predicates something of

something, and one part of the definition must play the part of matter and the

other that of form.

It is also obvious that, if substances are in a sense numbers, they are so in

this sense and not, as some say, as numbers of units. For a definition is a sort

of number; for (1) it is divisible, and into indivisible parts (for definitory

formulae are not infinite), and number also is of this nature. And (2) as, when

one of the parts of which a number consists has been taken from or added to

the number, it is no longer the same number, but a different one, even if it is

the very smallest part that has been taken away or added, so the definition

and the essence will no longer remain when anything has been taken away or

added. And (3) the number must be something in virtue of which it is one,

and this these thinkers cannot state, what makes it one, if it is one (for either

it is not one but a sort of heap, or if it is, we ought to say what it is that makes

one out of many); and the definition is one, but similarly they cannot say

what  makes  it  one.  And  this  is  a  natural  result;  for  the  same  reason  is

applicable, and substance is one in the sense which we have explained, andnot, as some say, by being a sort of unit or point; each is a complete reality

and a definite nature. And (4) as number does not admit of the more and the

less, neither does substance, in the sense of form, but if any substance does, it

is only the substance which involves matter. Let this, then, suffice for an

account of the generation and destruction of so-called substances in what

sense it is possible and in what sense impossible—and of the reduction of

things to number.

<

div id="section96" class="section" title="4">


4


  Regarding material substance we must not forget that even if all things

come from the same first cause or have the same things for their first causes,

and if the same matter serves as starting-point for their generation, yet there is

a matter proper to each, e.g. for phlegm the sweet or the fat, and for bile the

bitter, or something else; though perhaps these come from the same original

matter. And there come to be several matters for the same thing, when the

one matter is matter for the other; e.g. phlegm comes from the fat and from

the sweet, if the fat comes from the sweet; and it comes from bile by analysis

of the bile into its ultimate matter. For one thing comes from another in two

senses,  either  because  it  will  be  found  at  a  later  stage,  or  because  it  is

produced  if  the  other  is  analysed  into  its  original  constituents.  When  the

matter is one, different things may be produced owing to difference in the

moving cause; e.g. from wood may be made both a chest and a bed. But some

different things must have their matter different; e.g. a saw could not be made

of wood, nor is this in the power of the moving cause; for it could not make a

saw of wool or of wood. But if, as a matter of fact, the same thing can be

made of different material, clearly the art, i.e. the moving principle, is the

same; for if both the matter and the moving cause were different, the product

would be so too.

  When one inquires into the cause of something, one should, since ‘causes’

are spoken of in several senses, state all the possible causes. what is the

material cause of man? Shall we say ‘the menstrual fluid’? What is moving

cause? Shall we say ‘the seed’? The formal cause? His essence. The final

cause? His end. But perhaps the latter two are the same.-It is the proximate

causes we must state. What is the material cause? We must name not fire orearth, but the matter peculiar to the thing.

  Regarding the substances that are natural and generable, if the causes are

really these and of this number and we have to learn the causes, we must

inquire thus, if we are to inquire rightly. But in the case of natural but eternal

substances another account must be given. For perhaps some have no matter,

or not matter of this sort but only such as can be moved in respect of place.

Nor does matter belong to those things which exist by nature but are not

substances;  their  substratum  is  the  substance.  E.g  what  is  the  cause  of

eclipse? What is its matter? There is none; the moon is that which suffers

eclipse. What is the moving cause which extinguished the light? The earth.

The final cause perhaps does not exist. The formal principle is the definitory

formula, but this is obscure if it does not include the cause. E.g. what is

eclipse?  Deprivation  of  light.  But  if  we  add  ‘by  the  earth’s  coming  in

between’, this is the formula which includes the cause. In the case of sleep it

is not clear what it is that proximately has this affection. Shall we say that it

is the animal? Yes, but the animal in virtue of what, i.e. what is the proximate

subject? The heart or some other part. Next, by what is it produced? Next,

what is the affection-that of the proximate subject, not of the whole animal?

Shall we say that it is immobility of such and such a kind? Yes, but to what

process in the proximate subject is this due?

<

div id="section97" class="section" title="5">


5


  Since some things are and are not, without coming to be and ceasing to be,

e.g. points, if they can be said to be, and in general forms (for it is not ‘white’

comes to be, but the wood comes to be white, if everything that comes to be

comes from something and comes to be something), not all contraries can

come from one another, but it is in different senses that a pale man comes

from a dark man, and pale comes from dark. Nor has everything matter, but

only  those  things  which  come  to  be  and  change  into  one  another.  Those

things which, without ever being in course of changing, are or are not, have

no matter.

  There is difficulty in the question how the matter of each thing is related to

its  contrary  states.  E.g.  if  the  body  is  potentially  healthy,  and  disease  is

contrary to health, is it potentially both healthy and diseased? And is waterpotentially wine and vinegar? We answer that it is the matter of one in virtue

of its positive state and its form, and of the other in virtue of the privation of

its positive state and the corruption of it contrary to its nature. It is also hard

to say why wine is not said to be the matter of vinegar nor potentially vinegar

(though vinegar is produced from it), and why a living man is not said to be

potentially  dead.  In  fact  they  are  not,  but  the  corruptions  in  question  are

accidental, and it is the matter of the animal that is itself in virtue of its

corruption the potency and matter of a corpse, and it is water that is the

matter of vinegar. For the corpse comes from the animal, and vinegar from

wine,  as  night  from  day.  And  all  the  things  which  change  thus  into  one

another must go back to their matter; e.g. if from a corpse is produced an

animal, the corpse first goes back to its matter, and only then becomes an

animal; and vinegar first goes back to water, and only then becomes wine.

<

div id="section98" class="section" title="6">


6


To  return  to  the  difficulty  which  has  been  stated  with  respect  both  to

definitions and to numbers, what is the cause of their unity? In the case of all

things which have several parts and in which the totality is not, as it were, a

mere heap, but the whole is something beside the parts, there is a cause; for

even in bodies contact is the cause of unity in some cases, and in others

viscosity or some other such quality. And a definition is a set of words which

is one not by being connected together, like the Iliad, but by dealing with one

object.-What then, is it that makes man one; why is he one and not many, e.g.

animal + biped, especially if there are, as some say, an animal-itself and a

biped-itself?  Why  are  not  those  Forms  themselves  the  man,  so  that  men

would exist by participation not in man, nor in-one Form, but in two, animal

and biped, and in general man would be not one but more than one thing,

animal and biped?

  Clearly, then, if people proceed thus in their usual manner of definition and

speech, they cannot explain and solve the difficulty. But if, as we say, one

element is matter and another is form, and one is potentially and the other

actually, the question will no longer be thought a difficulty. For this difficulty

is the same as would arise if ‘round bronze’ were the definition of ‘cloak’; for

this word would be a sign of the definitory formula, so that the question is,what  is  the  cause  of  the  unity  of  ‘round’  and  ‘bronze’?  The  difficulty

disappears, because the one is matter, the other form. What, then, causes this-

that which was potentially to be actually-except, in the case of things which

are generated, the agent? For there is no other cause of the potential sphere’s

becoming actually a sphere, but this was the essence of either. Of matter

some is intelligible, some perceptible, and in a formula there is always an

element of matter as well as one of actuality; e.g. the circle is ‘a plane figure’.

But of the things which have no matter, either intelligible or perceptible, each

is by its nature essentially a kind of unity, as it is essentially a kind of being-

individual substance, quality, or quantity (and so neither ‘existent’ nor ‘one’

is present in their definitions), and the essence of each of them is by its very

nature a kind of unity as it is a kind of being-and so none of these has any

reason outside itself, for being one, nor for being a kind of being; for each is

by its nature a kind of being and a kind of unity, not as being in the genus

‘being’ or ‘one’ nor in the sense that being and unity can exist apart from

particulars.

Owing to the difficulty about unity some speak of ‘participation’, and raise

the question, what is the cause of participation and what is it to participate;

and  others  speak  of  ‘communion’,  as  Lycophron  says  knowledge  is  a

communion of knowing with the soul; and others say life is a ‘composition’

or ‘connexion’ of soul with body. Yet the same account applies to all cases;

for being healthy, too, will on this showing be either a ‘communion’ or a

‘connexion’  or  a  ‘composition’  of  soul  and  health,  and  the  fact  that  the

bronze is a triangle will be a ‘composition’ of bronze and triangle, and the

fact that a thing is white will be a ‘composition’ of surface and whiteness.

The  reason  is  that  people  look  for  a  unifying  formula,  and  a  difference,

between potency and complete reality. But, as has been said, the proximate

matter and the form are one and the same thing, the one potentially, and the

other actually. Therefore it is like asking what in general is the cause of unity

and of a thing’s being one; for each thing is a unity, and the potential and the

actual are somehow one. Therefore there is no other cause here unless there is

something which caused the movement from potency into actuality. And all

things which have no matter are without qualification essentially unities.