things  what  they  are  for  the  whole  Cosmos:  if  we  are  to  distinguish  and

identify organs according to their functions, the roots of plants are analogous

to the head in animals. Further, we must ask what is the force that holds

together the earth and the fire which tend to travel in contrary directions; if

there is no counteracting force, they will be torn asunder; if there is, this must

be the soul and the cause of nutrition and growth. By some the element of fire

is held to be the cause of nutrition and growth, for it alone of the primary

bodies  or  elements  is  observed  to  feed  and  increase  itself.  Hence  the

suggestion that in both plants and animals it is it which is the operative force.

A concurrent cause in a sense it certainly is, but not the principal cause, that

is rather the soul; for while the growth of fire goes on without limit so long as

there is a supply of fuel, in the case of all complex wholes formed in the

course  of  nature  there  is  a  limit  or  ratio  which  determines  their  size  and

increase, and limit and ratio are marks of soul but not of fire, and belong to

the side of formulable essence rather than that of matter.

  Nutrition and reproduction are due to one and the same psychic power. It is

necessary  first  to  give  precision  to  our  account  of  food,  for  it  is  by  this

function of absorbing food that this psychic power is distinguished from all

the others. The current view is that what serves as food to a living thing is

what is contrary to it-not that in every pair of contraries each is food to the

other: to be food a contrary must not only be transformable into the other and

vice versa, it must also in so doing increase the bulk of the other. Many a

contrary is transformed into its other and vice versa, where neither is even a

quantum and so cannot increase in bulk, e.g. an invalid into a healthy subject.

It is clear that not even those contraries which satisfy both the conditions

mentioned above are food to one another in precisely the same sense; water

may be said to feed fire, but not fire water. Where the members of the pair are

elementary bodies only one of the contraries, it would appear, can be said to

feed the other. But there is a difficulty here. One set of thinkers assert that

like fed, as well as increased in amount, by like. Another set, as we have said,

maintain the very reverse, viz. that what feeds and what is fed are contrary to

one another; like, they argue, is incapable of being affected by like; but food

is  changed  in  the  process  of  digestion,  and  change  is  always  to  what  is

opposite or to what is intermediate. Further, food is acted upon by what is

nourished by it, not the other way round, as timber is worked by a carpenter

and  not  conversely;  there  is  a  change  in  the  carpenter  but  it  is  merely  a

change from not-working to working. In answering this problem it makes allthe difference whether we mean by ‘the food’ the ‘finished’ or the ‘raw’

product. If we use the word food of both, viz. of the completely undigested

and the completely digested matter, we can justify both the rival accounts of

it; taking food in the sense of undigested matter, it is the contrary of what is

fed by it, taking it as digested it is like what is fed by it. Consequently it is

clear  that  in  a  certain  sense  we  may  say  that  both  parties  are  right,  both

wrong.

  Since nothing except what is alive can be fed, what is fed is the besouled

body and just because it has soul in it. Hence food is essentially related to

what  has  soul  in  it.  Food  has  a  power  which  is  other  than  the  power  to

increase the bulk of what is fed by it; so far forth as what has soul in it is a

quantum, food may increase its quantity, but it is only so far as what has soul

in it is a ‘this-somewhat’ or substance that food acts as food; in that case it

maintains the being of what is fed, and that continues to be what it is so long

as the process of nutrition continues. Further, it is the agent in generation, i.e.

not the generation of the individual fed but the reproduction of another like it;

the substance of the individual fed is already in existence; the existence of no

substance is a self-generation but only a self-maintenance.

  Hence the psychic power which we are now studying may be described as

that which tends to maintain whatever has this power in it of continuing such

as it was, and food helps it to do its work. That is why, if deprived of food, it

must cease to be.

The process of nutrition involves three factors, (a) what is fed, (b) that

wherewith it is fed, (c) what does the feeding; of these (c) is the first soul, (a)

the body which has that soul in it, (b) the food. But since it is right to call

things  after  the  ends  they  realize,  and  the  end  of  this  soul  is  to  generate

another being like that in which it is, the first soul ought to be named the

reproductive soul. The expression (b) ‘wherewith it is fed’ is ambiguous just

as is the expression ‘wherewith the ship is steered’; that may mean either (i)

the hand or (ii) the rudder, i.e. either (i) what is moved and sets in movement,

or (ii) what is merely moved. We can apply this analogy here if we recall that

all food must be capable of being digested, and that what produces digestion

is warmth; that is why everything that has soul in it possesses warmth.

We have now given an outline account of the nature of food; further details

must be given in the appropriate place.


5  Having made these distinctions let us now speak of sensation in the widest

sense. Sensation depends, as we have said, on a process of movement or

affection from without, for it is held to be some sort of change of quality.

Now some thinkers assert that like is affected only by like; in what sense this

is possible and in what sense impossible, we have explained in our general

discussion of acting and being acted upon.

Here arises a problem: why do we not perceive the senses themselves as

well  as  the  external  objects  of  sense,  or  why  without  the  stimulation  of

external objects do they not produce sensation, seeing that they contain in

themselves fire, earth, and all the other elements, which are the direct or

indirect  objects  is  so  of  sense?  It  is  clear  that  what  is  sensitive  is  only

potentially,  not  actually.  The  power  of  sense  is  parallel  to  what  is

combustible, for that never ignites itself spontaneously, but requires an agent

which has the power of starting ignition; otherwise it could have set itself on

fire, and would not have needed actual fire to set it ablaze.

In reply we must recall that we use the word ‘perceive’ in two ways, for

we say (a) that what has the power to hear or see, ‘sees’ or ‘hears’, even

though it is at the moment asleep, and also (b) that what is actually seeing or

hearing, ‘sees’ or ‘hears’. Hence ‘sense’ too must have two meanings, sense

potential, and sense actual. Similarly ‘to be a sentient’ means either (a) to

have a certain power or (b) to manifest a certain activity. To begin with, for a

time, let us speak as if there were no difference between (i) being moved or

affected, and (ii) being active, for movement is a kind of activity-an imperfect

kind,  as  has  elsewhere  been  explained.  Everything  that  is  acted  upon  or

moved is acted upon by an agent which is actually at work. Hence it is that in

one sense, as has already been stated, what acts and what is acted upon are

like, in another unlike, i.e. prior to and during the change the two factors are

unlike, after it like.

But we must now distinguish not only between what is potential and what

is actual but also different senses in which things can be said to be potential

or actual; up to now we have been speaking as if each of these phrases had

only one sense. We can speak of something as ‘a knower’ either (a) as when

we say that man is a knower, meaning that man falls within the class of

beings that know or have knowledge, or (b) as when we are speaking of a

man who possesses a knowledge of grammar; each of these is so called as

having in him a certain potentiality, but there is a difference between their

respective potentialities, the one (a) being a potential knower, because hiskind or matter is such and such, the other (b), because he can in the absence

of any external counteracting cause realize his knowledge in actual knowing

at will. This implies a third meaning of ‘a knower’ (c), one who is already

realizing his knowledge-he is a knower in actuality and in the most proper

sense is knowing, e.g. this A. Both the former are potential knowers, who

realize their respective potentialities, the one (a) by change of quality, i.e.

repeated transitions from one state to its opposite under instruction, the other

(b) by the transition from the inactive possession of sense or grammar to their

active exercise. The two kinds of transition are distinct.

  Also the expression ‘to be acted upon’ has more than one meaning; it may

mean either (a) the extinction of one of two contraries by the other, or (b) the

maintenance of what is potential by the agency of what is actual and already

like what is acted upon, with such likeness as is compatible with one’s being

actual and the other potential. For what possesses knowledge becomes an

actual knower by a transition which is either not an alteration of it at all

(being in reality a development into its true self or actuality) or at least an

alteration in a quite different sense from the usual meaning.

  Hence it is wrong to speak of a wise man as being ‘altered’ when he uses

his wisdom, just as it would be absurd to speak of a builder as being altered

when he is using his skill in building a house.

  What in the case of knowing or understanding leads from potentiality to

actuality  ought  not  to  be  called  teaching  but  something  else.  That  which

starting with the power to know learns or acquires knowledge through the

agency of one who actually knows and has the power of teaching either (a)

ought not to be said ‘to be acted upon’ at all or (b) we must recognize two

senses of alteration, viz. (i) the substitution of one quality for another, the

first being the contrary of the second, or (ii) the development of an existent

quality from potentiality in the direction of fixity or nature.

In the case of what is to possess sense, the first transition is due to the

action of the male parent and takes place before birth so that at birth the

living thing is, in respect of sensation, at the stage which corresponds to the

possession of knowledge. Actual sensation corresponds to the stage of the

exercise  of  knowledge.  But  between  the  two  cases  compared  there  is  a

difference; the objects that excite the sensory powers to activity, the seen, the

heard, &c., are outside. The ground of this difference is that what actual

sensation  apprehends  is  individuals,  while  what  knowledge  apprehends  is

universals, and these are in a sense within the soul. That is why a man canexercise his knowledge when he wishes, but his sensation does not depend

upon himself a sensible object must be there. A similar statement must be

made about our knowledge of what is sensible-on the same ground, viz. that

the sensible objects are individual and external.

A later more appropriate occasion may be found thoroughly to clear up all

this. At present it must be enough to recognize the distinctions already drawn;

a thing may be said to be potential in either of two senses, (a) in the sense in

which we might say of a boy that he may become a general or (b) in the sense

in which we might say the same of an adult, and there are two corresponding

senses of the term ‘a potential sentient’. There are no separate names for the

two stages of potentiality; we have pointed out that they are different and

how they are different. We cannot help using the incorrect terms ‘being acted

upon or altered’ of the two transitions involved. As we have said, has the

power of sensation is potentially like what the perceived object is actually;

that is, while at the beginning of the process of its being acted upon the two

interacting factors are dissimilar, at the end the one acted upon is assimilated

to the other and is identical in quality with it.


6


In  dealing  with  each  of  the  senses  we  shall  have  first  to  speak  of  the

objects which are perceptible by each. The term ‘object of sense’ covers three

kinds  of  objects,  two  kinds  of  which  are,  in  our  language,  directly

perceptible, while the remaining one is only incidentally perceptible. Of the

first two kinds one (a) consists of what is perceptible by a single sense, the

other (b) of what is perceptible by any and all of the senses. I call by the

name of special object of this or that sense that which cannot be perceived by

any other sense than that one and in respect of which no error is possible; in

this sense colour is the special object of sight, sound of hearing, flavour of

taste. Touch, indeed, discriminates more than one set of different qualities.

Each  sense  has  one  kind  of  object  which  it  discerns,  and  never  errs  in

reporting that what is before it is colour or sound (though it may err as to

what it is that is coloured or where that is, or what it is that is sounding or

where that is.) Such objects are what we propose to call the special objects of

this or that sense.

  ‘Common sensibles’ are movement, rest, number, figure, magnitude; these

are not peculiar to any one sense, but are common to all. There are at any ratecertain kinds of movement which are perceptible both by touch and by sight.

We  speak  of  an  incidental  object  of  sense  where  e.g.  the  white  object

which we see is the son of Diares; here because ‘being the son of Diares’ is

incidental to the directly visible white patch we speak of the son of Diares as

being (incidentally) perceived or seen by us. Because this is only incidentally

an object of sense, it in no way as such affects the senses. Of the two former

kinds, both of which are in their own nature perceptible by sense, the first

kind-that  of  special  objects  of  the  several  senses-constitute  the  objects  of

sense in the strictest sense of the term and it is to them that in the nature of

things the structure of each several sense is adapted.


7


The object of sight is the visible, and what is visible is (a) colour and (b) a

certain kind of object which can be described in words but which has no

single name; what we mean by (b) will be abundantly clear as we proceed.

Whatever is visible is colour and colour is what lies upon what is in its own

nature visible; ‘in its own nature’ here means not that visibility is involved in

the definition of what thus underlies colour, but that that substratum contains

in itself the cause of visibility. Every colour has in it the power to set in

movement what is actually transparent; that power constitutes its very nature.

That is why it is not visible except with the help of light; it is only in light

that the colour of a thing is seen. Hence our first task is to explain what light

is.

Now there clearly is something which is transparent, and by ‘transparent’ I

mean  what  is  visible,  and  yet  not  visible  in  itself,  but  rather  owing  its

visibility to the colour of something else; of this character are air, water, and

many solid bodies. Neither air nor water is transparent because it is air or

water; they are transparent because each of them has contained in it a certain

substance which is the same in both and is also found in the eternal body

which  constitutes  the  uppermost  shell  of  the  physical  Cosmos.  Of  this

substance light is the activity-the activity of what is transparent so far forth as

it has in it the determinate power of becoming transparent; where this power

is present, there is also the potentiality of the contrary, viz. darkness. Light is

as it were the proper colour of what is transparent, and exists whenever the

potentially  transparent  is  excited  to  actuality  by  the  influence  of  fire  or

something resembling ‘the uppermost body’; for fire too contains somethingwhich is one and the same with the substance in question.

We have now explained what the transparent is and what light is; light is

neither fire nor any kind whatsoever of body nor an efflux from any kind of

body (if it were, it would again itself be a kind of body)-it is the presence of

fire or something resembling fire in what is transparent. It is certainly not a

body, for two bodies cannot be present in the same place. The opposite of

light is darkness; darkness is the absence from what is transparent of the

corresponding positive state above characterized; clearly therefore, light is

just the presence of that.

  Empedocles  (and  with  him  all  others  who  used  the  same  forms  of

expression) was wrong in speaking of light as ‘travelling’ or being at a given

moment  between  the  earth  and  its  envelope,  its  movement  being

unobservable  by  us;  that  view  is  contrary  both  to  the  clear  evidence  of

argument and to the observed facts; if the distance traversed were short, the

movement might have been unobservable, but where the distance is from

extreme East to extreme West, the draught upon our powers of belief is too

great.

  What is capable of taking on colour is what in itself is colourless, as what

can take on sound is what is soundless; what is colourless includes (a) what is

transparent and (b) what is invisible or scarcely visible, i.e. what is ‘dark’.

The latter (b) is the same as what is transparent, when it is potentially, not of

course when it is actually transparent; it is the same substance which is now

darkness, now light.

  Not everything that is visible depends upon light for its visibility. This is

only true of the ‘proper’ colour of things. Some objects of sight which in light

are invisible, in darkness stimulate the sense; that is, things that appear fiery

or shining. This class of objects has no simple common name, but instances

of it are fungi, flesh, heads, scales, and eyes of fish. In none of these is what

is seen their own proper’ colour. Why we see these at all is another question.

At present what is obvious is that what is seen in light is always colour. That

is why without the help of light colour remains invisible. Its being colour at

all means precisely its having in it the power to set in movement what is

already actually transparent, and, as we have seen, the actuality of what is

transparent is just light.

The following experiment makes the necessity of a medium clear. If what

has colour is placed in immediate contact with the eye, it cannot be seen.

Colour sets in movement not the sense organ but what is transparent, e.g. theair, and that, extending continuously from the object to the organ, sets the

latter in movement. Democritus misrepresents the facts when he expresses

the opinion that if the interspace were empty one could distinctly see an ant

on the vault of the sky; that is an impossibility. Seeing is due to an affection

or change of what has the perceptive faculty, and it cannot be affected by the

seen colour itself; it remains that it must be affected by what comes between.

Hence it is indispensable that there be something in between-if there were

nothing, so far from seeing with greater distinctness, we should see nothing at

all.

We have now explained the cause why colour cannot be seen otherwise

than in light. Fire on the other hand is seen both in darkness and in light; this

double possibility follows necessarily from our theory, for it is just fire that

makes what is potentially transparent actually transparent.

The same account holds also of sound and smell; if the object of either of

these senses is in immediate contact with the organ no sensation is produced.

In both cases the object sets in movement only what lies between, and this in

turn sets the organ in movement: if what sounds or smells is brought into

immediate contact with the organ, no sensation will be produced. The same,

in spite of all appearances, applies also to touch and taste; why there is this

apparent difference will be clear later. What comes between in the case of

sounds is air; the corresponding medium in the case of smell has no name.

But, corresponding to what is transparent in the case of colour, there is a

quality found both in air and water, which serves as a medium for what has

smell-I say ‘in water’ because animals that live in water as well as those that

live on land seem to possess the sense of smell, and ‘in air’ because man and

all other land animals that breathe, perceive smells only when they breathe air

in. The explanation of this too will be given later.


8


Now  let  us,  to  begin  with,  make  certain  distinctions  about  sound  and

hearing.

  Sound may mean either of two things (a) actual, and (b) potential, sound.

There are certain things which, as we say, ‘have no sound’, e.g. sponges or

wool,  others  which  have,  e.g.  bronze  and  in  general  all  things  which  are

smooth and solid-the latter are said to have a sound because they can make a

sound, i.e. can generate actual sound between themselves and the organ ofhearing.

  Actual sound requires for its occurrence (i, ii) two such bodies and (iii) a

space between them; for it is generated by an impact. Hence it is impossible

for one body only to generate a sound-there must be a body impinging and a

body impinged upon; what sounds does so by striking against something else,

and this is impossible without a movement from place to place.

As we have said, not all bodies can by impact on one another produce

sound; impact on wool makes no sound, while the impact on bronze or any

body  which  is  smooth  and  hollow  does.  Bronze  gives  out  a  sound  when

struck because it is smooth; bodies which are hollow owing to reflection

repeat the original impact over and over again, the body originally set in

movement being unable to escape from the concavity.

  Further,  we  must  remark  that  sound  is  heard  both  in  air  and  in  water,

though less distinctly in the latter. Yet neither air nor water is the principal

cause of sound. What is required for the production of sound is an impact of

two solids against one another and against the air. The latter condition is

satisfied when the air impinged upon does not retreat before the blow, i.e. is

not dissipated by it.

That is why it must be struck with a sudden sharp blow, if it is to sound-the

movement of the whip must outrun the dispersion of the air, just as one might

get in a stroke at a heap or whirl of sand as it was traveling rapidly past.

An echo occurs, when, a mass of air having been unified, bounded, and

prevented  from  dissipation  by  the  containing  walls  of  a  vessel,  the  air

originally struck by the impinging body and set in movement by it rebounds

from  this  mass  of  air  like  a  ball  from  a  wall.  It  is  probable  that  in  all

generation of sound echo takes place, though it is frequently only indistinctly

heard. What happens here must be analogous to what happens in the case of

light; light is always reflected-otherwise it would not be diffused and outside

what was directly illuminated by the sun there would be blank darkness; but

this reflected light is not always strong enough, as it is when it is reflected

from water, bronze, and other smooth bodies, to cast a shadow, which is the

distinguishing mark by which we recognize light.

It is rightly said that an empty space plays the chief part in the production

of hearing, for what people mean by ‘the vacuum’ is the air, which is what

causes hearing, when that air is set in movement as one continuous mass; but

owing to its friability it emits no sound, being dissipated by impinging upon

any surface which is not smooth. When the surface on which it impinges isquite smooth, what is produced by the original impact is a united mass, a

result due to the smoothness of the surface with which the air is in contact at

the other end.

  What has the power of producing sound is what has the power of setting in

movement a single mass of air which is continuous from the impinging body

up to the organ of hearing. The organ of hearing is physically united with air,

and because it is in air, the air inside is moved concurrently with the air

outside. Hence animals do not hear with all parts of their bodies, nor do all

parts admit of the entrance of air; for even the part which can be moved and

can sound has not air everywhere in it. Air in itself is, owing to its friability,

quite  soundless;  only  when  its  dissipation  is  prevented  is  its  movement

sound. The air in the ear is built into a chamber just to prevent this dissipating

movement, in order that the animal may accurately apprehend all varieties of

the movements of the air outside. That is why we hear also in water, viz.

because  the  water  cannot  get  into  the  air  chamber  or  even,  owing  to  the

spirals, into the outer ear. If this does happen, hearing ceases, as it also does

if the tympanic membrane is damaged, just as sight ceases if the membrane

covering the pupil is damaged. It is also a test of deafness whether the ear

does or does not reverberate like a horn; the air inside the ear has always a

movement  of  its  own,  but  the  sound  we  hear  is  always  the  sounding  of

something else, not of the organ itself. That is why we say that we hear with

what is empty and echoes, viz. because what we hear with is a chamber

which contains a bounded mass of air.

  Which is it that ‘sounds’, the striking body or the struck? Is not the answer

‘it is both, but each in a different way’? Sound is a movement of what can

rebound from a smooth surface when struck against it. As we have explained’

not everything sounds when it strikes or is struck, e.g. if one needle is struck

against another, neither emits any sound. In order, therefore, that sound may

be generated, what is struck must be smooth, to enable the air to rebound and

be shaken off from it in one piece.

The distinctions between different sounding bodies show themselves only

in  actual  sound;  as  without  the  help  of  light  colours  remain  invisible,  so

without the help of actual sound the distinctions between acute and grave

sounds remain inaudible. Acute and grave are here metaphors, transferred

from their proper sphere, viz. that of touch, where they mean respectively (a)

what moves the sense much in a short time, (b) what moves the sense little in

a long time. Not that what is sharp really moves fast, and what is grave,slowly,  but  that  the  difference  in  the  qualities  of  the  one  and  the  other

movement  is  due  to  their  respective  speeds.  There  seems  to  be  a  sort  of

parallelism between what is acute or grave to hearing and what is sharp or

blunt to touch; what is sharp as it were stabs, while what is blunt pushes, the

one producing its effect in a short, the other in a long time, so that the one is

quick, the other slow.

Let the foregoing suffice as an analysis of sound. Voice is a kind of sound

characteristic of what has soul in it; nothing that is without soul utters voice,

it being only by a metaphor that we speak of the voice of the flute or the lyre

or generally of what (being without soul) possesses the power of producing a

succession  of  notes  which  differ  in  length  and  pitch  and  timbre.  The

metaphor is based on the fact that all these differences are found also in

voice.  Many  animals  are  voiceless,  e.g.  all  non-sanuineous  animals  and

among sanguineous animals fish. This is just what we should expect, since

voice  is  a  certain  movement  of  air.  The  fish,  like  those  in  the  Achelous,

which are said to have voice, really make the sounds with their gills or some

similar organ. Voice is the sound made by an animal, and that with a special

organ. As we saw, everything that makes a sound does so by the impact of

something (a) against something else, (b) across a space, (c) filled with air;

hence it is only to be expected that no animals utter voice except those which

take in air. Once air is inbreathed, Nature uses it for two different purposes,

as the tongue is used both for tasting and for articulating; in that case of the

two  functions  tasting  is  necessary  for  the  animal’s  existence  (hence  it  is

found more widely distributed), while articulate speech is a luxury subserving

its possessor’s well-being; similarly in the former case Nature employs the

breath  both  as  an  indispensable  means  to  the  regulation  of  the  inner

temperature of the living body and also as the matter of articulate voice, in

the  interests  of  its  possessor’s  well-being.  Why  its  former  use  is

indispensable must be discussed elsewhere.

The organ of respiration is the windpipe, and the organ to which this is

related as means to end is the lungs. The latter is the part of the body by

which the temperature of land animals is raised above that of all others. But

what primarily requires the air drawn in by respiration is not only this but the

region surrounding the heart. That is why when animals breathe the air must

penetrate inwards.

  Voice then is the impact of the inbreathed air against the ‘windpipe’, and

the agent that produces the impact is the soul resident in these parts of thebody. Not every sound, as we said, made by an animal is voice (even with the

tongue  we  may  merely  make  a  sound  which  is  not  voice,  or  without  the

tongue as in coughing); what produces the impact must have soul in it and

must be accompanied by an act of imagination, for voice is a sound with a

meaning,  and  is  not  merely  the  result  of  any  impact  of  the  breath  as  in

coughing; in voice the breath in the windpipe is used as an instrument to

knock  with  against  the  walls  of  the  windpipe.  This  is  confirmed  by  our

inability to speak when we are breathing either out or in-we can only do so by

holding our breath; we make the movements with the breath so checked. It is

clear also why fish are voiceless; they have no windpipe. And they have no

windpipe because they do not breathe or take in air. Why they do not is a

question belonging to another inquiry.


9


  Smell and its object are much less easy to determine than what we have

hitherto discussed; the distinguishing characteristic of the object of smell is

less obvious than those of sound or colour. The ground of this is that our

power of smell is less discriminating and in general inferior to that of many

species of animals; men have a poor sense of smell and our apprehension of

its proper objects is inseparably bound up with and so confused by pleasure

and pain, which shows that in us the organ is inaccurate. It is probable that

there is a parallel failure in the perception of colour by animals that have hard

eyes: probably they discriminate differences of colour only by the presence or

absence of what excites fear, and that it is thus that human beings distinguish

smells. It seems that there is an analogy between smell and taste, and that the

species of tastes run parallel to those of smells-the only difference being that

our sense of taste is more discriminating than our sense of smell, because the

former is a modification of touch, which reaches in man the maximum of

discriminative accuracy. While in respect of all the other senses we fall below

many species of animals, in respect of touch we far excel all other species in

exactness of discrimination. That is why man is the most intelligent of all

animals. This is confirmed by the fact that it is to differences in the organ of

touch  and  to  nothing  else  that  the  differences  between  man  and  man  in

respect  of  natural  endowment  are  due;  men  whose  flesh  is  hard  are  ill-

endowed by nature, men whose flesh is soft, wellendowed.

As flavours may be divided into (a) sweet, (b) bitter, so with smells. Insome things the flavour and the smell have the same quality, i.e. both are

sweet or both bitter, in others they diverge. Similarly a smell, like a flavour,

may  be  pungent,  astringent,  acid,  or  succulent.  But,  as  we  said,  because

smells are much less easy to discriminate than flavours, the names of these

varieties are applied to smells only metaphorically; for example ‘sweet’ is

extended from the taste to the smell of saffron or honey, ‘pungent’ to that of

thyme, and so on.

In the same sense in which hearing has for its object both the audible and

the inaudible, sight both the visible and the invisible, smell has for its object

both the odorous and the inodorous. ‘Inodorous’ may be either (a) what has

no smell at all, or (b) what has a small or feeble smell. The same ambiguity

lurks in the word ‘tasteless’.

  Smelling, like the operation of the senses previously examined, takes place

through  a  medium,  i.e.  through  air  or  water-I  add  water,  because  water-

animals too (both sanguineous and non-sanguineous) seem to smell just as

much as land-animals; at any rate some of them make directly for their food

from a distance if it has any scent. That is why the following facts constitute

a problem for us. All animals smell in the same way, but man smells only

when he inhales; if he exhales or holds his breath, he ceases to smell, no

difference being made whether the odorous object is distant or near, or even

placed inside the nose and actually on the wall of the nostril; it is a disability

common to all the senses not to perceive what is in immediate contact with

the organ of sense, but our failure to apprehend what is odorous without the

help of inhalation is peculiar (the fact is obvious on making the experiment).

Now since bloodless animals do not breathe, they must, it might be argued,

have some novel sense not reckoned among the usual five. Our reply must be

that  this  is  impossible,  since  it  is  scent  that  is  perceived;  a  sense  that

apprehends what is odorous and what has a good or bad odour cannot be

anything but smell. Further, they are observed to be deleteriously effected by

the same strong odours as man is, e.g. bitumen, sulphur, and the like. These

animals must be able to smell without being able to breathe. The probable

explanation is that in man the organ of smell has a certain superiority over

that in all other animals just as his eyes have over those of hard-eyed animals.

Man’s eyes have in the eyelids a kind of shelter or envelope, which must be

shifted or drawn back in order that we may see, while hardeyed animals have

nothing of the kind, but at once see whatever presents itself in the transparent

medium. Similarly in certain species of animals the organ of smell is like theeye of hard-eyed animals, uncurtained, while in others which take in air it

probably has a curtain over it, which is drawn back in inhalation, owing to

the dilating of the veins or pores. That explains also why such animals cannot

smell under water; to smell they must first inhale, and that they cannot do

under water.

Smells  come  from  what  is  dry  as  flavours  from  what  is  moist.

Consequently the organ of smell is potentially dry.


10


  What can be tasted is always something that can be touched, and just for

that reason it cannot be perceived through an interposed foreign body, for

touch means the absence of any intervening body. Further, the flavoured and

tasteable body is suspended in a liquid matter, and this is tangible. Hence, if

we lived in water, we should perceive a sweet object introduced into the

water, but the water would not be the medium through which we perceived;

our perception would be due to the solution of the sweet substance in what

we imbibed, just as if it were mixed with some drink. There is no parallel

here to the perception of colour, which is due neither to any blending of

anything with anything, nor to any efflux of anything from anything. In the

case of taste, there is nothing corresponding to the medium in the case of the

senses previously discussed; but as the object of sight is colour, so the object

of taste is flavour. But nothing excites a perception of flavour without the

help of liquid; what acts upon the sense of taste must be either actually or

potentially  liquid  like  what  is  saline;  it  must  be  both  (a)  itself  easily

dissolved, and (b) capable of dissolving along with itself the tongue. Taste

apprehends both (a) what has taste and (b) what has no taste, if we mean by

(b) what has only a slight or feeble flavour or what tends to destroy the sense

of taste. In this it is exactly parallel to sight, which apprehends both what is

visible and what is invisible (for darkness is invisible and yet is discriminated

by sight; so is, in a different way, what is over brilliant), and to hearing,

which apprehends both sound and silence, of which the one is audible and the

other inaudible, and also over-loud sound. This corresponds in the case of

hearing  to  over-bright  light  in  the  case  of  sight.  As  a  faint  sound  is

‘inaudible’, so in a sense is a loud or violent sound. The word ‘invisible’ and

similar privative terms cover not only (a) what is simply without some power,

but also (b) what is adapted by nature to have it but has not it or has it only ina very low degree, as when we say that a species of swallow is ‘footless’ or

that a variety of fruit is ‘stoneless’. So too taste has as its object both what

can be tasted and the tasteless-the latter in the sense of what has little flavour

or a bad flavour or one destructive of taste. The difference between what is

tasteless and what is not seems to rest ultimately on that between what is

drinkable and what is undrinkable both are tasteable, but the latter is bad and

tends to destroy taste, while the former is the normal stimulus of taste. What

is drinkable is the common object of both touch and taste.

  Since what can be tasted is liquid, the organ for its perception cannot be

either (a) actually liquid or (b) incapable of becoming liquid. Tasting means a

being affected by what can be tasted as such; hence the organ of taste must be

liquefied, and so to start with must be non-liquid but capable of liquefaction

without loss of its distinctive nature. This is confirmed by the fact that the

tongue cannot taste either when it is too dry or when it is too moist; in the

latter case what occurs is due to a contact with the pre-existent moisture in

the tongue itself, when after a foretaste of some strong flavour we try to taste

another flavour; it is in this way that sick persons find everything they taste

bitter, viz. because, when they taste, their tongues are overflowing with bitter

moisture.

The species of flavour are, as in the case of colour, (a) simple, i.e. the two

contraries, the sweet and the bitter, (b) secondary, viz. (i) on the side of the

sweet, the succulent, (ii) on the side of the bitter, the saline, (iii) between

these come the pungent, the harsh, the astringent, and the acid; these pretty

well exhaust the varieties of flavour. It follows that what has the power of

tasting is what is potentially of that kind, and that what is tasteable is what

has the power of making it actually what it itself already is.


11


  Whatever can be said of what is tangible, can be said of touch, and vice

versa; if touch is not a single sense but a group of senses, there must be

several kinds of what is tangible. It is a problem whether touch is a single

sense or a group of senses. It is also a problem, what is the organ of touch; is

it or is it not the flesh (including what in certain animals is homologous with

flesh)? On the second view, flesh is ‘the medium’ of touch, the real organ

being situated farther inward. The problem arises because the field of each

sense is according to the accepted view determined as the range between asingle  pair  of  contraries,  white  and  black  for  sight,  acute  and  grave  for

hearing, bitter and sweet for taste; but in the field of what is tangible we find

several such pairs, hot cold, dry moist, hard soft, &c. This problem finds a

partial solution, when it is recalled that in the case of the other senses more

than one pair of contraries are to be met with, e.g. in sound not only acute and

grave but loud and soft, smooth and rough, &c.; there are similar contrasts in

the field of colour. Nevertheless we are unable clearly to detect in the case of

touch what the single subject is which underlies the contrasted qualities and

corresponds to sound in the case of hearing.

To the question whether the organ of touch lies inward or not (i.e. whether

we need look any farther than the flesh), no indication in favour of the second

answer can be drawn from the fact that if the object comes into contact with

the flesh it is at once perceived. For even under present conditions if the

experiment is made of making a web and stretching it tight over the flesh, as

soon as this web is touched the sensation is reported in the same manner as

before,  yet  it  is  clear  that  the  or  is  gan  is  not  in  this  membrane.  If  the

membrane  could  be  grown  on  to  the  flesh,  the  report  would  travel  still

quicker. The flesh plays in touch very much the same part as would be played

in the other senses by an air-envelope growing round our body; had we such

an envelope attached to us we should have supposed that it was by a single

organ that we perceived sounds, colours, and smells, and we should have

taken sight, hearing, and smell to be a single sense. But as it is, because that

through  which  the  different  movements  are  transmitted  is  not  naturally

attached to our bodies, the difference of the various sense-organs is too plain

to miss. But in the case of touch the obscurity remains.

  There must be such a naturally attached ‘medium’ as flesh, for no living

body  could  be  constructed  of  air  or  water;  it  must  be  something  solid.

Consequently it must be composed of earth along with these, which is just

what flesh and its analogue in animals which have no true flesh tend to be.

Hence of necessity the medium through which are transmitted the manifoldly

contrasted tactual qualities must be a body naturally attached to the organism.

That they are manifold is clear when we consider touching with the tongue;

we apprehend at the tongue all tangible qualities as well as flavour. Suppose

all the rest of our flesh was, like the tongue, sensitive to flavour, we should

have identified the sense of taste and the sense of touch; what saves us from

this  identification  is  the  fact  that  touch  and  taste  are  not  always  found

together in the same part of the body. The following problem might be raised.Let us assume that every body has depth, i.e. has three dimensions, and that if

two bodies have a third body between them they cannot be in contact with

one another; let us remember that what is liquid is a body and must be or

contain water, and that if two bodies touch one another under water, their

touching surfaces cannot be dry, but must have water between, viz. the water

which wets their bounding surfaces; from all this it follows that in water two

bodies cannot be in contact with one another. The same holds of two bodies

in air-air being to bodies in air precisely what water is to bodies in water-but

the facts are not so evident to our observation, because we live in air, just as

animals that live in water would not notice that the things which touch one

another in water have wet surfaces. The problem, then, is: does the perception

of all objects of sense take place in the same way, or does it not, e.g. taste and

touch requiring contact (as they are commonly thought to do), while all other

senses  perceive  over  a  distance?  The  distinction  is  unsound;  we  perceive

what  is  hard  or  soft,  as  well  as  the  objects  of  hearing,  sight,  and  smell,

through a ‘medium’, only that the latter are perceived over a greater distance

than the former; that is why the facts escape our notice. For we do perceive

everything through a medium; but in these cases the fact escapes us. Yet, to

repeat  what  we  said  before,  if  the  medium  for  touch  were  a  membrane

separating us from the object without our observing its existence, we should

be relatively to it in the same condition as we are now to air or water in which

we  are  immersed;  in  their  case  we  fancy  we  can  touch  objects,  nothing

coming in between us and them. But there remains this difference between

what can be touched and what can be seen or can sound; in the latter two

cases we perceive because the medium produces a certain effect upon us,

whereas in the perception of objects of touch we are affected not by but along

with the medium; it is as if a man were struck through his shield, where the

shock  is  not  first  given  to  the  shield  and  passed  on  to  the  man,  but  the

concussion of both is simultaneous.

In general, flesh and the tongue are related to the real organs of touch and

taste, as air and water are to those of sight, hearing, and smell. Hence in

neither the one case nor the other can there be any perception of an object if it

is placed immediately upon the organ, e.g. if a white object is placed on the

surface of the eye. This again shows that what has the power of perceiving

the tangible is seated inside. Only so would there be a complete analogy with

all the other senses. In their case if you place the object on the organ it is not

perceived, here if you place it on the flesh it is perceived; therefore flesh isnot the organ but the medium of touch.

  What can be touched are distinctive qualities of body as body; by such

differences I mean those which characterize the elements, viz, hot cold, dry

moist, of which we have spoken earlier in our treatise on the elements. The

organ for the perception of these is that of touch-that part of the body in

which  primarily  the  sense  of  touch  resides.  This  is  that  part  which  is

potentially such as its object is actually: for all sense-perception is a process

of being so affected; so that that which makes something such as it itself

actually is makes the other such because the other is already potentially such.

That is why when an object of touch is equally hot and cold or hard and soft

we cannot perceive; what we perceive must have a degree of the sensible

quality lying beyond the neutral point. This implies that the sense itself is a

‘mean’ between any two opposite qualities which determine the field of that

sense. It is to this that it owes its power of discerning the objects in that field.

What is ‘in the middle’ is fitted to discern; relatively to either extreme it can

put itself in the place of the other. As what is to perceive both white and

black must, to begin with, be actually neither but potentially either (and so

with all the other sense-organs), so the organ of touch must be neither hot nor

cold.

  Further, as in a sense sight had for its object both what was visible and

what was invisible (and there was a parallel truth about all the other senses

discussed),  so  touch  has  for  its  object  both  what  is  tangible  and  what  is

intangible. Here by ‘intangible’ is meant (a) what like air possesses some

quality of tangible things in a very slight degree and (b) what possesses it in

an excessive degree, as destructive things do.

We have now given an outline account of each of the several senses.


12


The  following  results  applying  to  any  and  every  sense  may  now  be

formulated.

(A) By a ‘sense’ is meant what has the power of receiving into itself the

sensible forms of things without the matter. This must be conceived of as

taking place in the way in which a piece of wax takes on the impress of a

signet-ring  without  the  iron  or  gold;  we  say  that  what  produces  the

impression  is  a  signet  of  bronze  or  gold,  but  its  particular  metallic

constitution makes no difference: in a similar way the sense is affected bywhat is coloured or flavoured or sounding, but it is indifferent what in each

case the substance is; what alone matters is what quality it has, i.e. in what

ratio its constituents are combined.

(B) By ‘an organ of sense’ is meant that in which ultimately such a power

is seated.

The sense and its organ are the same in fact, but their essence is not the

same. What perceives is, of course, a spatial magnitude, but we must not

admit that either the having the power to perceive or the sense itself is a

magnitude; what they are is a certain ratio or power in a magnitude. This

enables us to explain why objects of sense which possess one of two opposite

sensible qualities in a degree largely in excess of the other opposite destroy

the organs of sense; if the movement set up by an object is too strong for the

organ,  the  equipoise  of  contrary  qualities  in  the  organ,  which  just  is  its

sensory power, is disturbed; it is precisely as concord and tone are destroyed

by too violently twanging the strings of a lyre. This explains also why plants

cannot  perceive.  in  spite  of  their  having  a  portion  of  soul  in  them  and

obviously  being  affected  by  tangible  objects  themselves;  for  undoubtedly

their temperature can be lowered or raised. The explanation is that they have

no mean of contrary qualities, and so no principle in them capable of taking

on the forms of sensible objects without their matter; in the case of plants the

affection is an affection by form-and-matter together. The problem might be

raised: Can what cannot smell be said to be affected by smells or what cannot

see by colours, and so on? It might be said that a smell is just what can be

smelt, and if it produces any effect it can only be so as to make something

smell it, and it might be argued that what cannot smell cannot be affected by

smells and further that what can smell can be affected by it only in so far as it

has in it the power to smell (similarly with the proper objects of all the other

senses).  Indeed  that  this  is  so  is  made  quite  evident  as  follows.  Light  or

darkness, sounds and smells leave bodies quite unaffected; what does affect

bodies is not these but the bodies which are their vehicles, e.g. what splits the

trunk of a tree is not the sound of the thunder but the air which accompanies

thunder. Yes, but, it may be objected, bodies are affected by what is tangible

and by flavours. If not, by what are things that are without soul affected, i.e.

altered in quality? Must we not, then, admit that the objects of the other

senses also may affect them? Is not the true account this, that all bodies are

capable of being affected by smells and sounds, but that some on being acted

upon, having no boundaries of their own, disintegrate, as in the instance ofair, which does become odorous, showing that some effect is produced on it

by what is odorous? But smelling is more than such an affection by what is

odorous-what  more?  Is  not  the  answer  that,  while  the  air  owing  to  the

momentary  duration  of  the  action  upon  it  of  what  is  odorous  does  itself

become perceptible to the sense of smell, smelling is an observing of the

result produced?                            On the Soul, Book III


Translated by J. A. Smith


<

div id="book3" class="book">


1


That  there  is  no  sixth  sense  in  addition  to  the  five  enumerated-sight,

hearing,  smell,  taste,  touch-may  be  established  by  the  following

considerations:

If we have actually sensation of everything of which touch can give us

sensation (for all the qualities of the tangible qua tangible are perceived by us

through touch); and if absence of a sense necessarily involves absence of a

sense-organ; and if (1) all objects that we perceive by immediate contact with

them are perceptible by touch, which sense we actually possess, and (2) all

objects that we perceive through media, i.e. without immediate contact, are

perceptible by or through the simple elements, e.g. air and water (and this is

so arranged that (a) if more than one kind of sensible object is perceivable

through a single medium, the possessor of a sense-organ homogeneous with

that medium has the power of perceiving both kinds of objects; for example,

if the sense-organ is made of air, and air is a medium both for sound and for

colour; and that (b) if more than one medium can transmit the same kind of

sensible objects, as e.g. water as well as air can transmit colour, both being

transparent, then the possessor of either alone will be able to perceive the

kind of objects transmissible through both); and if of the simple elements two

only, air and water, go to form sense-organs (for the pupil is made of water,

the organ of hearing is made of air, and the organ of smell of one or other of

these  two,  while  fire  is  found  either  in  none  or  in  all-warmth  being  an

essential condition of all sensibility-and earth either in none or, if anywhere,

specially mingled with the components of the organ of touch; wherefore it

would remain that there can be no sense-organ formed of anything except

water  and  air);  and  if  these  sense-organs  are  actually  found  in  certain

animals;-then all the possible senses are possessed by those animals that arenot  imperfect  or  mutilated  (for  even  the  mole  is  observed  to  have  eyes

beneath its skin); so that, if there is no fifth element and no property other

than those which belong to the four elements of our world, no sense can be

wanting to such animals.

  Further, there cannot be a special sense-organ for the common sensibles

either, i.e. the objects which we perceive incidentally through this or that

special sense, e.g. movement, rest, figure, magnitude, number, unity; for all

these we perceive by movement, e.g. magnitude by movement, and therefore

also  figure  (for  figure  is  a  species  of  magnitude),  what  is  at  rest  by  the

absence of movement: number is perceived by the negation of continuity, and

by  the  special  sensibles;  for  each  sense  perceives  one  class  of  sensible

objects. So that it is clearly impossible that there should be a special sense for

any one of the common sensibles, e.g. movement; for, if that were so, our

perception of it would be exactly parallel to our present perception of what is

sweet by vision. That is so because we have a sense for each of the two

qualities, in virtue of which when they happen to meet in one sensible object

we  are  aware  of  both  contemporaneously.  If  it  were  not  like  this  our

perception of the common qualities would always be incidental, i.e. as is the

perception of Cleon’s son, where we perceive him not as Cleon’s son but as

white, and the white thing which we really perceive happens to be Cleon’s

son.

But in the case of the common sensibles there is already in us a general

sensibility which enables us to perceive them directly; there is therefore no

special sense required for their perception: if there were, our perception of

them would have been exactly like what has been above described.

The senses perceive each other’s special objects incidentally; not because

the percipient sense is this or that special sense, but because all form a unity:

this incidental perception takes place whenever sense is directed at one and

the same moment to two disparate qualities in one and the same object, e.g. to

the bitterness and the yellowness of bile, the assertion of the identity of both

cannot be the act of either of the senses; hence the illusion of sense, e.g. the

belief that if a thing is yellow it is bile.

It might be asked why we have more senses than one. Is it to prevent a

failure to apprehend the common sensibles, e.g. movement, magnitude, and

number, which go along with the special sensibles? Had we no sense but

sight, and that sense no object but white, they would have tended to escape

our notice and everything would have merged for us into an indistinguishableidentity because of the concomitance of colour and magnitude. As it is, the

fact that the common sensibles are given in the objects of more than one

sense reveals their distinction from each and all of the special sensibles.


2


  Since it is through sense that we are aware that we are seeing or hearing, it

must be either by sight that we are aware of seeing, or by some sense other

than sight. But the sense that gives us this new sensation must perceive both

sight and its object, viz. colour: so that either (1) there will be two senses

both  percipient  of  the  same  sensible  object,  or  (2)  the  sense  must  be

percipient of itself. Further, even if the sense which perceives sight were

different from sight, we must either fall into an infinite regress, or we must

somewhere assume a sense which is aware of itself. If so, we ought to do this

in the first case.

This presents a difficulty: if to perceive by sight is just to see, and what is

seen is colour (or the coloured), then if we are to see that which sees, that

which sees originally must be coloured. It is clear therefore that ‘to perceive

by sight’ has more than one meaning; for even when we are not seeing, it is

by sight that we discriminate darkness from light, though not in the same way

as  we  distinguish  one  colour  from  another.  Further,  in  a  sense  even  that

which  sees  is  coloured;  for  in  each  case  the  sense-organ  is  capable  of

receiving the sensible object without its matter. That is why even when the

sensible objects are gone the sensings and imaginings continue to exist in the

sense-organs.

The activity of the sensible object and that of the percipient sense is one

and the same activity, and yet the distinction between their being remains.

Take as illustration actual sound and actual hearing: a man may have hearing

and yet not be hearing, and that which has a sound is not always sounding.

But when that which can hear is actively hearing and which can sound is

sounding, then the actual hearing and the actual sound are merged in one

(these one might call respectively hearkening and sounding).

If it is true that the movement, both the acting and the being acted upon, is

to be found in that which is acted upon, both the sound and the hearing so far

as it is actual must be found in that which has the faculty of hearing; for it is

in  the  passive  factor  that  the  actuality  of  the  active  or  motive  factor  is

realized; that is why that which causes movement may be at rest. Now theactuality of that which can sound is just sound or sounding, and the actuality

of that which can hear is hearing or hearkening; ‘sound’ and ‘hearing’ are

both  ambiguous.  The  same  account  applies  to  the  other  senses  and  their

objects. For as the-acting-and-being-acted-upon is to be found in the passive,

not in the active factor, so also the actuality of the sensible object and that of

the sensitive subject are both realized in the latter. But while in some cases

each  aspect  of  the  total  actuality  has  a  distinct  name,  e.g.  sounding  and

hearkening, in some one or other is nameless, e.g. the actuality of sight is

called seeing, but the actuality of colour has no name: the actuality of the

faculty of taste is called tasting, but the actuality of flavour has no name.

Since the actualities of the sensible object and of the sensitive faculty are one

actuality  in  spite  of  the  difference  between  their  modes  of  being,  actual

hearing and actual sounding appear and disappear from existence at one and

the  same  moment,  and  so  actual  savour  and  actual  tasting,  &c.,  while  as

potentialities one of them may exist without the other. The earlier students of

nature were mistaken in their view that without sight there was no white or

black, without taste no savour. This statement of theirs is partly true, partly

false: ‘sense’ and ‘the sensible object’ are ambiguous terms, i.e. may denote

either potentialities or actualities: the statement is true of the latter, false of

the former. This ambiguity they wholly failed to notice.

If voice always implies a concord, and if the voice and the hearing of it are

in one sense one and the same, and if concord always implies a ratio, hearing

as well as what is heard must be a ratio. That is why the excess of either the

sharp or the flat destroys the hearing. (So also in the case of savours excess

destroys the sense of taste, and in the case of colours excessive brightness or

darkness  destroys  the  sight,  and  in  the  case  of  smell  excess  of  strength

whether in the direction of sweetness or bitterness is destructive.) This shows

that the sense is a ratio.

That is also why the objects of sense are (1) pleasant when the sensible

extremes such as acid or sweet or salt being pure and unmixed are brought

into the proper ratio; then they are pleasant: and in general what is blended is

more pleasant than the sharp or the flat alone; or, to touch, that which is

capable  of  being  either  warmed  or  chilled:  the  sense  and  the  ratio  are

identical: while (2) in excess the sensible extremes are painful or destructive.

Each sense then is relative to its particular group of sensible qualities: it is

found in a sense-organ as such and discriminates the differences which exist

within that group; e.g. sight discriminates white and black, taste sweet andbitter, and so in all cases. Since we also discriminate white from sweet, and

indeed each sensible quality from every other, with what do we perceive that

they are different? It must be by sense; for what is before us is sensible

objects. (Hence it is also obvious that the flesh cannot be the ultimate sense-

organ: if it were, the discriminating power could not do its work without

immediate contact with the object.)

  Therefore (1) discrimination between white and sweet cannot be effected

by two agencies which remain separate; both the qualities discriminated must

be present to something that is one and single. On any other supposition even

if I perceived sweet and you perceived white, the difference between them

would be apparent. What says that two things are different must be one; for

sweet is different from white. Therefore what asserts this difference must be

self-identical, and as what asserts, so also what thinks or perceives. That it is

not possible by means of two agencies which remain separate to discriminate

two  objects  which  are  separate,  is  therefore  obvious;  and  that  (it  is  not

possible to do this in separate movements of time may be seen’ if we look at

it as follows. For as what asserts the difference between the good and the bad

is one and the same, so also the time at which it asserts the one to be different

and the other to be different is not accidental to the assertion (as it is for

instance when I now assert a difference but do not assert that there is now a

difference); it asserts thus-both now and that the objects are different now;

the objects therefore must be present at one and the same moment. Both the

discriminating power and the time of its exercise must be one and undivided.

But, it may be objected, it is impossible that what is self-identical should

be moved at me and the same time with contrary movements in so far as it is

undivided, and in an undivided moment of time. For if what is sweet be the

quality perceived, it moves the sense or thought in this determinate way,

while  what  is  bitter  moves  it  in  a  contrary  way,  and  what  is  white  in  a

different  way.  Is  it  the  case  then  that  what  discriminates,  though  both

numerically one and indivisible, is at the same time divided in its being? In

one sense, it is what is divided that perceives two separate objects at once,

but in another sense it does so qua undivided; for it is divisible in its being

but spatially and numerically undivided. is not this impossible? For while it is

true that what is self-identical and undivided may be both contraries at once

potentially, it cannot be self-identical in its being-it must lose its unity by

being put into activity. It is not possible to be at once white and black, and

therefore it must also be impossible for a thing to be affected at one and thesame moment by the forms of both, assuming it to be the case that sensation

and thinking are properly so described.

The answer is that just as what is called a ‘point’ is, as being at once one

and two, properly said to be divisible, so here, that which discriminates is qua

undivided one, and active in a single moment of time, while so far forth as it

is divisible it twice over uses the same dot at one and the same time. So far

forth then as it takes the limit as two’ it discriminates two separate objects

with what in a sense is divided: while so far as it takes it as one, it does so

with what is one and occupies in its activity a single moment of time.

  About the principle in virtue of which we say that animals are percipient,

let this discussion suffice.


3


  There  are  two  distinctive  peculiarities  by  reference  to  which  we

characterize the soul (1) local movement and (2) thinking, discriminating, and

perceiving. Thinking both speculative and practical is regarded as akin to a

form of perceiving; for in the one as well as the other the soul discriminates

and is cognizant of something which is. Indeed the ancients go so far as to

identify thinking and perceiving; e.g. Empedocles says ‘For ‘tis in respect of

what is present that man’s wit is increased’, and again ‘Whence it befalls

them from time to time to think diverse thoughts’, and Homer’s phrase ‘For

suchlike is man’s mind’ means the same. They all look upon thinking as a

bodily  process  like  perceiving,  and  hold  that  like  is  known  as  well  as

perceived by like, as I explained at the beginning of our discussion. Yet they

ought  at  the  same  time  to  have  accounted  for  error  also;  for  it  is  more

intimately connected with animal existence and the soul continues longer in

the state of error than in that of truth. They cannot escape the dilemma: either

(1) whatever seems is true (and there are some who accept this) or (2) error is

contact with the unlike; for that is the opposite of the knowing of like by like.

But it is a received principle that error as well as knowledge in respect to

contraries is one and the same.

That  perceiving  and  practical  thinking  are  not  identical  is  therefore

obvious; for the former is universal in the animal world, the latter is found in

only a small division of it. Further, speculative thinking is also distinct from

perceiving-I mean that in which we find rightness and wrongness-rightness in

prudence,  knowledge,  true  opinion,  wrongness  in  their  opposites;  forperception of the special objects of sense is always free from error, and is

found in all animals, while it is possible to think falsely as well as truly, and

thought is found only where there is discourse of reason as well as sensibility.

For imagination is different from either perceiving or discursive thinking,

though it is not found without sensation, or judgement without it. That this

activity  is  not  the  same  kind  of  thinking  as  judgement  is  obvious.  For

imagining lies within our own power whenever we wish (e.g. we can call up

a picture, as in the practice of mnemonics by the use of mental images), but

in  forming  opinions  we  are  not  free:  we  cannot  escape  the  alternative  of

falsehood  or  truth.  Further,  when  we  think  something  to  be  fearful  or

threatening,  emotion  is  immediately  produced,  and  so  too  with  what  is

encouraging;  but  when  we  merely  imagine  we  remain  as  unaffected  as

persons who are looking at a painting of some dreadful or encouraging scene.

Again  within  the  field  of  judgement  itself  we  find  varieties,  knowledge,

opinion, prudence, and their opposites; of the differences between these I

must speak elsewhere.

  Thinking is different from perceiving and is held to be in part imagination,

in part judgement: we must therefore first mark off the sphere of imagination

and then speak of judgement. If then imagination is that in virtue of which an

image arises for us, excluding metaphorical uses of the term, is it a single

faculty or disposition relative to images, in virtue of which we discriminate

and are either in error or not? The faculties in virtue of which we do this are

sense, opinion, science, intelligence.

That imagination is not sense is clear from the following considerations:

Sense is either a faculty or an activity, e.g. sight or seeing: imagination takes

place  in  the  absence  of  both,  as  e.g.  in  dreams.  (Again,  sense  is  always

present, imagination not. If actual imagination and actual sensation were the

same, imagination would be found in all the brutes: this is held not to be the

case; e.g. it is not found in ants or bees or grubs. (Again, sensations are

always true, imaginations are for the most part false. (Once more, even in

ordinary speech, we do not, when sense functions precisely with regard to its

object, say that we imagine it to be a man, but rather when there is some

failure of accuracy in its exercise. And as we were saying before, visions

appear to us even when our eyes are shut. Neither is imagination any of the

things that are never in error: e.g. knowledge or intelligence; for imagination

may be false.

It remains therefore to see if it is opinion, for opinion may be either true orfalse.

But opinion involves belief (for without belief in what we opine we cannot

have an opinion), and in the brutes though we often find imagination we

never find belief. Further, every opinion is accompanied by belief, belief by

conviction, and conviction by discourse of reason: while there are some of

the brutes in which we find imagination, without discourse of reason. It is

clear then that imagination cannot, again, be (1) opinion plus sensation, or (2)

opinion mediated by sensation, or (3) a blend of opinion and sensation; this is

impossible both for these reasons and because the content of the supposed

opinion  cannot  be  different  from  that  of  the  sensation  (I  mean  that

imagination must be the blending of the perception of white with the opinion

that it is white: it could scarcely be a blend of the opinion that it is good with

the perception that it is white): to imagine is therefore (on this view) identical

with  the  thinking  of  exactly  the  same  as  what  one  in  the  strictest  sense

perceives.  But  what  we  imagine  is  sometimes  false  though  our

contemporaneous judgement about it is true; e.g. we imagine the sun to be a

foot in diameter though we are convinced that it is larger than the inhabited

part of the earth, and the following dilemma presents itself. Either (a while

the fact has not changed and the (observer has neither forgotten nor lost belief

in the true opinion which he had, that opinion has disappeared, or (b) if he

retains it then his opinion is at once true and false. A true opinion, however,

becomes false only when the fact alters without being noticed.

  Imagination  is  therefore  neither  any  one  of  the  states  enumerated,  nor

compounded out of them.

But since when one thing has been set in motion another thing may be

moved by it, and imagination is held to be a movement and to be impossible

without sensation, i.e. to occur in beings that are percipient and to have for its

content what can be perceived, and since movement may be produced by

actual sensation and that movement is necessarily similar in character to the

sensation  itself,  this  movement  must  be  (1)  necessarily  (a)  incapable  of

existing  apart  from  sensation,  (b)  incapable  of  existing  except  when  we

perceive, (such that in virtue of its possession that in which it is found may

present various phenomena both active and passive, and (such that it may be

either true or false.

The reason of the last characteristic is as follows. Perception (1) of the

special objects of sense is never in error or admits the least possible amount

of falsehood. (2) That of the concomitance of the objects concomitant withthe sensible qualities comes next: in this case certainly we may be deceived;

for while the perception that there is white before us cannot be false, the

perception that what is white is this or that may be false. (3) Third comes the

perception  of  the  universal  attributes  which  accompany  the  concomitant

objects to which the special sensibles attach (I mean e.g. of movement and

magnitude); it is in respect of these that the greatest amount of sense-illusion

is possible.

The motion which is due to the activity of sense in these three modes of its

exercise will differ from the activity of sense; (1) the first kind of derived

motion is free from error while the sensation is present; (2) and (3) the others

may be erroneous whether it is present or absent, especially when the object

of perception is far off. If then imagination presents no other features than

those enumerated and is what we have described, then imagination must be a

movement resulting from an actual exercise of a power of sense.

As  sight  is  the  most  highly  developed  sense,  the  name  Phantasia

(imagination) has been formed from Phaos (light) because it is not possible to

see without light.

And  because  imaginations  remain  in  the  organs  of  sense  and  resemble

sensations, animals in their actions are largely guided by them, some (i.e. the

brutes)  because  of  the  non-existence  in  them  of  mind,  others  (i.e.  men)

because of the temporary eclipse in them of mind by feeling or disease or

sleep.

  About imagination, what it is and why it exists, let so much suffice.


4


  Turning now to the part of the soul with which the soul knows and thinks

(whether this is separable from the others in definition only, or spatially as

well)  we  have  to  inquire  (1)  what  differentiates  this  part,  and  (2)  how

thinking can take place.

If thinking is like perceiving, it must be either a process in which the soul

is acted upon by what is capable of being thought, or a process different from

but analogous to that. The thinking part of the soul must therefore be, while

impassible,  capable  of  receiving  the  form  of  an  object;  that  is,  must  be

potentially  identical  in  character  with  its  object  without  being  the  object.

Mind must be related to what is thinkable, as sense is to what is sensible.

  Therefore, since everything is a possible object of thought, mind in order,as Anaxagoras says, to dominate, that is, to know, must be pure from all

admixture; for the co-presence of what is alien to its nature is a hindrance and

a block: it follows that it too, like the sensitive part, can have no nature of its

own, other than that of having a certain capacity. Thus that in the soul which

is called mind (by mind I mean that whereby the soul thinks and judges) is,

before  it  thinks,  not  actually  any  real  thing.  For  this  reason  it  cannot

reasonably be regarded as blended with the body: if so, it would acquire some

quality, e.g. warmth or cold, or even have an organ like the sensitive faculty:

as it is, it has none. It was a good idea to call the soul ‘the place of forms’,

though (1) this description holds only of the intellective soul, and (2) even

this is the forms only potentially, not actually.

  Observation of the sense-organs and their employment reveals a distinction

between the impassibility of the sensitive and that of the intellective faculty.

After strong stimulation of a sense we are less able to exercise it than before,

as e.g. in the case of a loud sound we cannot hear easily immediately after, or

in the case of a bright colour or a powerful odour we cannot see or smell, but

in the case of mind thought about an object that is highly intelligible renders

it more and not less able afterwards to think objects that are less intelligible:

the reason is that while the faculty of sensation is dependent upon the body,

mind is separable from it.

  Once the mind has become each set of its possible objects, as a man of

science has, when this phrase is used of one who is actually a man of science

(this  happens  when  he  is  now  able  to  exercise  the  power  on  his  own

initiative), its condition is still one of potentiality, but in a different sense

from  the  potentiality  which  preceded  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  by

learning or discovery: the mind too is then able to think itself.

  Since we can distinguish between a spatial magnitude and what it is to be

such, and between water and what it is to be water, and so in many other

cases  (though  not  in  all;  for  in  certain  cases  the  thing  and  its  form  are

identical), flesh and what it is to be flesh are discriminated either by different

faculties, or by the same faculty in two different states: for flesh necessarily

involves matter and is like what is snub-nosed, a this in a this. Now it is by

means of the sensitive faculty that we discriminate the hot and the cold, i.e.

the factors which combined in a certain ratio constitute flesh: the essential

character  of  flesh  is  apprehended  by  something  different  either  wholly

separate from the sensitive faculty or related to it as a bent line to the same

line when it has been straightened out.  Again in the case of abstract objects what is straight is analogous to what is

snub-nosed;  for  it  necessarily  implies  a  continuum  as  its  matter:  its

constitutive essence is different, if we may distinguish between straightness

and what is straight: let us take it to be two-ness. It must be apprehended,

therefore, by a different power or by the same power in a different state. To

sum up, in so far as the realities it knows are capable of being separated from

their matter, so it is also with the powers of mind.

The problem might be suggested: if thinking is a passive affection, then if

mind is simple and impassible and has nothing in common with anything

else, as Anaxagoras says, how can it come to think at all? For interaction

between  two  factors  is  held  to  require  a  precedent  community  of  nature

between the factors. Again it might be asked, is mind a possible object of

thought to itself? For if mind is thinkable per se and what is thinkable is in

kind one and the same, then either (a) mind will belong to everything, or (b)

mind will contain some element common to it with all other realities which

makes them all thinkable.

(1)  Have  not  we  already  disposed  of  the  difficulty  about  interaction

involving  a  common  element,  when  we  said  that  mind  is  in  a  sense

potentially whatever is thinkable, though actually it is nothing until it has

thought? What it thinks must be in it just as characters may be said to be on a

writingtablet on which as yet nothing actually stands written: this is exactly

what happens with mind.

  (Mind is itself thinkable in exactly the same way as its objects are. For (a)

in  the  case  of  objects  which  involve  no  matter,  what  thinks  and  what  is

thought are identical; for speculative knowledge and its object are identical.

(Why mind is not always thinking we must consider later.) (b) In the case of

those which contain matter each of the objects of thought is only potentially

present. It follows that while they will not have mind in them (for mind is a

potentiality of them only in so far as they are capable of being disengaged

from matter) mind may yet be thinkable.


5


  Since in every class of things, as in nature as a whole, we find two factors

involved, (1) a matter which is potentially all the particulars included in the

class, (2) a cause which is productive in the sense that it makes them all (the

latter  standing  to  the  former,  as  e.g.  an  art  to  its  material),  these  distinctelements must likewise be found within the soul.

And in fact mind as we have described it is what it is what it is by virtue of

becoming all things, while there is another which is what it is by virtue of

making all things: this is a sort of positive state like light; for in a sense light

makes potential colours into actual colours.

  Mind in this sense of it is separable, impassible, unmixed, since it is in its

essential  nature  activity  (for  always  the  active  is  superior  to  the  passive

factor, the originating force to the matter which it forms).

  Actual knowledge is identical with its object: in the individual, potential

knowledge  is  in  time  prior  to  actual  knowledge,  but  in  the  universe  as  a

whole it is not prior even in time. Mind is not at one time knowing and at

another not. When mind is set free from its present conditions it appears as

just what it is and nothing more: this alone is immortal and eternal (we do

not, however, remember its former activity because, while mind in this sense

is impassible, mind as passive is destructible), and without it nothing thinks.


6


The thinking then of the simple objects of thought is found in those cases

where falsehood is impossible: where the alternative of true or false applies,

there we always find a putting together of objects of thought in a quasi-unity.

As Empedocles said that ‘where heads of many a creature sprouted without

necks’ they afterwards by Love’s power were combined, so here too objects

of thought which were given separate are combined, e.g. ‘incommensurate’

and  ‘diagonal’:  if  the  combination  be  of  objects  past  or  future  the

combination of thought includes in its content the date. For falsehood always

involves a synthesis; for even if you assert that what is white is not white you

have included not white in a synthesis. It is possible also to call all these

cases division as well as combination. However that may be, there is not only

the  true  or  false  assertion  that  Cleon  is  white  but  also  the  true  or  false

assertion that he was or will he white. In each and every case that which

unifies is mind.

  Since  the  word  ‘simple’  has  two  senses,  i.e.  may  mean  either  (a)  ‘not

capable of being divided’ or (b) ‘not actually divided’, there is nothing to

prevent mind from knowing what is undivided, e.g. when it apprehends a

length (which is actually undivided) and that in an undivided time; for the

time is divided or undivided in the same manner as the line. It is not possible,then, to tell what part of the line it was apprehending in each half of the time:

the object has no actual parts until it has been divided: if in thought you think

each half separately, then by the same act you divide the time also, the half-

lines becoming as it were new wholes of length. But if you think it as a whole

consisting of these two possible parts, then also you think it in a time which

corresponds  to  both  parts  together.  (But  what  is  not  quantitatively  but

qualitatively simple is thought in a simple time and by a simple act of the

soul.)

But that which mind thinks and the time in which it thinks are in this case

divisible only incidentally and not as such. For in them too there is something

indivisible (though, it may be, not isolable) which gives unity to the time and

the whole of length; and this is found equally in every continuum whether

temporal or spatial.

  Points  and  similar  instances  of  things  that  divide,  themselves  being

indivisible, are realized in consciousness in the same manner as privations.

A similar account may be given of all other cases, e.g. how evil or black is

cognized; they are cognized, in a sense, by means of their contraries. That

which cognizes must have an element of potentiality in its being, and one of

the contraries must be in it. But if there is anything that has no contrary, then

it knows itself and is actually and possesses independent existence.

  Assertion  is  the  saying  of  something  concerning  something,  e.g.

affirmation, and is in every case either true or false: this is not always the

case with mind: the thinking of the definition in the sense of the constitutive

essence  is  never  in  error  nor  is  it  the  assertion  of  something  concerning

something, but, just as while the seeing of the special object of sight can

never  be  in  error,  the  belief  that  the  white  object  seen  is  a  man  may  be

mistaken, so too in the case of objects which are without matter.


7


  Actual knowledge is identical with its object: potential knowledge in the

individual is in time prior to actual knowledge but in the universe it has no

priority even in time; for all things that come into being arise from what

actually  is.  In  the  case  of  sense  clearly  the  sensitive  faculty  already  was

potentially what the object makes it to be actually; the faculty is not affected

or  altered.  This  must  therefore  be  a  different  kind  from  movement;  for

movement is, as we saw, an activity of what is imperfect, activity in theunqualified  sense,  i.e.  that  of  what  has  been  perfected,  is  different  from

movement.

To perceive then is like bare asserting or knowing; but when the object is

pleasant  or  painful,  the  soul  makes  a  quasi-affirmation  or  negation,  and

pursues  or  avoids  the  object.  To  feel  pleasure  or  pain  is  to  act  with  the

sensitive mean towards what is good or bad as such. Both avoidance and

appetite  when  actual  are  identical  with  this:  the  faculty  of  appetite  and

avoidance are not different, either from one another or from the faculty of

sense-perception; but their being is different.

To the thinking soul images serve as if they were contents of perception

(and when it asserts or denies them to be good or bad it avoids or pursues

them). That is why the soul never thinks without an image. The process is

like that in which the air modifies the pupil in this or that way and the pupil

transmits  the  modification  to  some  third  thing  (and  similarly  in  hearing),

while  the  ultimate  point  of  arrival  is  one,  a  single  mean,  with  different

manners of being.

  With  what  part  of  itself  the  soul  discriminates  sweet  from  hot  I  have

explained before and must now describe again as follows: That with which it

does so is a sort of unity, but in the way just mentioned, i.e. as a connecting

term.  And  the  two  faculties  it  connects,  being  one  by  analogy  and

numerically, are each to each as the qualities discerned are to one another (for

what difference does it make whether we raise the problem of discrimination

between disparates or between contraries, e.g. white and black?). Let then C

be to D as is to B: it follows alternando that C: A:: D: B. If then C and D

belong to one subject, the case will be the same with them as with and B; and

B form a single identity with different modes of being; so too will the former

pair. The same reasoning holds if be sweet and B white.

The faculty of thinking then thinks the forms in the images, and as in the

former case what is to be pursued or avoided is marked out for it, so where

there is no sensation and it is engaged upon the images it is moved to pursuit

or avoidance. E.g.. perceiving by sense that the beacon is fire, it recognizes in

virtue of the general faculty of sense that it signifies an enemy, because it

sees it moving; but sometimes by means of the images or thoughts which are

within the soul, just as if it were seeing, it calculates and deliberates what is

to come by reference to what is present; and when it makes a pronouncement,

as in the case of sensation it pronounces the object to be pleasant or painful,

in this case it avoids or persues and so generally in cases of action.That too which involves no action, i.e. that which is true or false, is in the

same province with what is good or bad: yet they differ in this, that the one

set imply and the other do not a reference to a particular person.

The so-called abstract objects the mind thinks just as, if one had thought of

the snubnosed not as snub-nosed but as hollow, one would have thought of an

actuality without the flesh in which it is embodied: it is thus that the mind

when it is thinking the objects of Mathematics thinks as separate elements

which do not exist separate. In every case the mind which is actively thinking

is the objects which it thinks. Whether it is possible for it while not existing

separate from spatial conditions to think anything that is separate, or not, we

must consider later.


8


Let us now summarize our results about soul, and repeat that the soul is in

a way all existing things; for existing things are either sensible or thinkable,

and knowledge is in a way what is knowable, and sensation is in a way what

is sensible: in what way we must inquire.

  Knowledge  and  sensation  are  divided  to  correspond  with  the  realities,

potential  knowledge  and  sensation  answering  to  potentialities,  actual

knowledge  and  sensation  to  actualities.  Within  the  soul  the  faculties  of

knowledge  and  sensation  are  potentially  these  objects,  the  one  what  is

knowable,  the  other  what  is  sensible.  They  must  be  either  the  things

themselves or their forms. The former alternative is of course impossible: it is

not the stone which is present in the soul but its form.

It follows that the soul is analogous to the hand; for as the hand is a tool of

tools, so the mind is the form of forms and sense the form of sensible things.

  Since  according  to  common  agreement  there  is  nothing  outside  and

separate in existence from sensible spatial magnitudes, the objects of thought

are in the sensible forms, viz. both the abstract objects and all the states and

affections  of  sensible  things.  Hence  (1)  no  one  can  learn  or  understand

anything in the absence of sense, and (when the mind is actively aware of

anything it is necessarily aware of it along with an image; for images are like

sensuous contents except in that they contain no matter.

  Imagination is different from assertion and denial; for what is true or false

involves a synthesis of concepts. In what will the primary concepts differ

from images? Must we not say that neither these nor even our other conceptsare images, though they necessarily involve them?


9


The soul of animals is characterized by two faculties, (a) the faculty of

discrimination which is the work of thought and sense, and (b) the faculty of

originating  local  movement.  Sense  and  mind  we  have  now  sufficiently

examined.  Let  us  next  consider  what  it  is  in  the  soul  which  originates

movement.  Is  it  a  single  part  of  the  soul  separate  either  spatially  or  in

definition? Or is it the soul as a whole? If it is a part, is that part different

from those usually distinguished or already mentioned by us, or is it one of

them? The problem at once presents itself, in what sense we are to speak of

parts of the soul, or how many we should distinguish. For in a sense there is

an infinity of parts: it is not enough to distinguish, with some thinkers, the

calculative, the passionate, and the desiderative, or with others the rational

and the irrational; for if we take the dividing lines followed by these thinkers

we shall find parts far more distinctly separated from one another than these,

namely those we have just mentioned: (1) the nutritive, which belongs both to

plants and to all animals, and (2) the sensitive, which cannot easily be classed

as either irrational or rational; further (3) the imaginative, which is, in its

being, different from all, while it is very hard to say with which of the others

it is the same or not the same, supposing we determine to posit separate parts

in the soul; and lastly (4) the appetitive, which would seem to be distinct both

in definition and in power from all hitherto enumerated.

It is absurd to break up the last-mentioned faculty: as these thinkers do, for

wish is found in the calculative part and desire and passion in the irrational;

and if the soul is tripartite appetite will be found in all three parts. Turning

our attention to the present object of discussion, let us ask what that is which

originates local movement of the animal.

The movement of growth and decay, being found in all living things, must

be attributed to the faculty of reproduction and nutrition, which is common to

all:  inspiration  and  expiration,  sleep  and  waking,  we  must  consider  later:

these  too  present  much  difficulty:  at  present  we  must  consider  local

movement, asking what it is that originates forward movement in the animal.

That it is not the nutritive faculty is obvious; for this kind of movement is

always for an end and is accompanied either by imagination or by appetite;

for no animal moves except by compulsion unless it has an impulse towardsor away from an object. Further, if it were the nutritive faculty, even plants

would  have  been  capable  of  originating  such  movement  and  would  have

possessed  the  organs  necessary  to  carry  it  out.  Similarly  it  cannot  be  the

sensitive faculty either; for there are many animals which have sensibility but

remain fast and immovable throughout their lives.

If then Nature never makes anything without a purpose and never leaves

out what is necessary (except in the case of mutilated or imperfect growths;

and that here we have neither mutilation nor imperfection may be argued

from the facts that such animals (a) can reproduce their species and (b) rise to

completeness of nature and decay to an end), it follows that, had they been

capable of originating forward movement, they would have possessed the

organs necessary for that purpose. Further, neither can the calculative faculty

or  what  is  called  ‘mind’  be  the  cause  of  such  movement;  for  mind  as

speculative never thinks what is practicable, it never says anything about an

object to be avoided or pursued, while this movement is always in something

which is avoiding or pursuing an object. No, not even when it is aware of

such an object does it at once enjoin pursuit or avoidance of it; e.g. the mind

often  thinks  of  something  terrifying  or  pleasant  without  enjoining  the

emotion of fear. It is the heart that is moved (or in the case of a pleasant

object some other part). Further, even when the mind does command and

thought  bids  us  pursue  or  avoid  something,  sometimes  no  movement  is

produced; we act in accordance with desire, as in the case of moral weakness.

And, generally, we observe that the possessor of medical knowledge is not

necessarily healing, which shows that something else is required to produce

action in accordance with knowledge; the knowledge alone is not the cause.

Lastly, appetite too is incompetent to account fully for movement; for those

who successfully resist temptation have appetite and desire and yet follow

mind and refuse to enact that for which they have appetite.


10


  These two at all events appear to be sources of movement: appetite and

mind (if one may venture to regard imagination as a kind of thinking; for

many  men  follow  their  imaginations  contrary  to  knowledge,  and  in  all

animals  other  than  man  there  is  no  thinking  or  calculation  but  only

imagination).

Both of these then are capable of originating local movement, mind andappetite:  (1)  mind,  that  is,  which  calculates  means  to  an  end,  i.e.  mind

practical (it differs from mind speculative in the character of its end); while

(2) appetite is in every form of it relative to an end: for that which is the

object of appetite is the stimulant of mind practical; and that which is last in

the process of thinking is the beginning of the action. It follows that there is a

justification for regarding these two as the sources of movement, i.e. appetite

and practical thought; for the object of appetite starts a movement and as a

result of that thought gives rise to movement, the object of appetite being it a

source  of  stimulation.  So  too  when  imagination  originates  movement,  it

necessarily involves appetite.

That which moves therefore is a single faculty and the faculty of appetite;

for if there had been two sources of movement-mind and appetite-they would

have produced movement in virtue of some common character. As it is, mind

is never found producing movement without appetite (for wish is a form of

appetite; and when movement is produced according to calculation it is also

according  to  wish),  but  appetite  can  originate  movement  contrary  to

calculation, for desire is a form of appetite. Now mind is always right, but

appetite and imagination may be either right or wrong. That is why, though in

any case it is the object of appetite which originates movement, this object

may be either the real or the apparent good. To produce movement the object

must be more than this: it must be good that can be brought into being by

action; and only what can be otherwise than as it is can thus be brought into

being. That then such a power in the soul as has been described, i.e. that

called appetite, originates movement is clear. Those who distinguish parts in

the  soul,  if  they  distinguish  and  divide  in  accordance  with  differences  of

power,  find  themselves  with  a  very  large  number  of  parts,  a  nutritive,  a

sensitive, an intellective, a deliberative, and now an appetitive part; for these

are more different from one another than the faculties of desire and passion.

  Since  appetites  run  counter  to  one  another,  which  happens  when  a

principle of reason and a desire are contrary and is possible only in beings

with a sense of time (for while mind bids us hold back because of what is

future, desire is influenced by what is just at hand: a pleasant object which is

just at hand presents itself as both pleasant and good, without condition in

either case, because of want of foresight into what is farther away in time), it

follows that while that which originates movement must be specifically one,

viz. the faculty of appetite as such (or rather farthest back of all the object of

that faculty; for it is it that itself remaining unmoved originates the movementby being apprehended in thought or imagination), the things that originate

movement are numerically many.

All  movement  involves  three  factors,  (1)  that  which  originates  the

movement, (2) that by means of which it originates it, and (3) that which is

moved. The expression ‘that which originates the movement’ is ambiguous: it

may mean either (a) something which itself is unmoved or (b) that which at

once moves and is moved. Here that which moves without itself being moved

is the realizable good, that which at once moves and is moved is the faculty

of appetite (for that which is influenced by appetite so far as it is actually so

influenced is set in movement, and appetite in the sense of actual appetite is a

kind  of  movement),  while  that  which  is  in  motion  is  the  animal.  The

instrument  which  appetite  employs  to  produce  movement  is  no  longer

psychical but bodily: hence the examination of it falls within the province of

the functions common to body and soul. To state the matter summarily at

present, that which is the instrument in the production of movement is to be

found where a beginning and an end coincide as e.g. in a ball and socket

joint; for there the convex and the concave sides are respectively an end and a

beginning (that is why while the one remains at rest, the other is moved): they

are separate in definition but not separable spatially. For everything is moved

by pushing and pulling. Hence just as in the case of a wheel, so here there

must be a point which remains at rest, and from that point the movement

must originate.

To sum up, then, and repeat what I have said, inasmuch as an animal is

capable  of  appetite  it  is  capable  of  self-movement;  it  is  not  capable  of

appetite  without  possessing  imagination;  and  all  imagination  is  either  (1)

calculative  or  (2)  sensitive.  In  the  latter  an  animals,  and  not  only  man,

partake.


11


We must consider also in the case of imperfect animals, sc. those which

have no sense but touch, what it is that in them originates movement. Can

they  have  imagination  or  not?  or  desire?  Clearly  they  have  feelings  of

pleasure and pain, and if they have these they must have desire. But how can

they  have  imagination?  Must  not  we  say  that,  as  their  movements  are

indefinite, they have imagination and desire, but indefinitely?

  Sensitive imagination, as we have said, is found in all animals, deliberativeimagination only in those that are calculative: for whether this or that shall be

enacted is already a task requiring calculation; and there must be a single

standard to measure by, for that is pursued which is greater. It follows that

what acts in this way must be able to make a unity out of several images.

This is the reason why imagination is held not to involve opinion, in that it

does  not  involve  opinion  based  on  inference,  though  opinion  involves

imagination. Hence appetite contains no deliberative element. Sometimes it

overpowers  wish  and  sets  it  in  movement:  at  times  wish  acts  thus  upon

appetite, like one sphere imparting its movement to another, or appetite acts

thus upon appetite, i.e. in the condition of moral weakness (though by nature

the higher faculty is always more authoritative and gives rise to movement).

Thus three modes of movement are possible.

The faculty of knowing is never moved but remains at rest. Since the one

premiss or judgement is universal and the other deals with the particular (for

the first tells us that such and such a kind of man should do such and such a

kind of act, and the second that this is an act of the kind meant, and I a person

of the type intended), it is the latter opinion that really originates movement,

not the universal; or rather it is both, but the one does so while it remains in a

state more like rest, while the other partakes in movement.


12


The nutritive soul then must be possessed by everything that is alive, and

every such thing is endowed with soul from its birth to its death. For what has

been born must grow, reach maturity, and decay-all of which are impossible

without nutrition. Therefore the nutritive faculty must be found in everything

that grows and decays.

But sensation need not be found in all things that live. For it is impossible

for touch to belong either (1) to those whose body is uncompounded or (2) to

those which are incapable of taking in the forms without their matter.

But animals must be endowed with sensation, since Nature does nothing in

vain. For all things that exist by Nature are means to an end, or will be

concomitants of means to an end. Every body capable of forward movement

would, if unendowed with sensation, perish and fail to reach its end, which is

the aim of Nature; for how could it obtain nutriment? Stationary living things,

it is true, have as their nutriment that from which they have arisen; but it is

not possible that a body which is not stationary but produced by generationshould have a soul and a discerning mind without also having sensation. (Nor

yet  even  if  it  were  not  produced  by  generation.  Why  should  it  not  have

sensation? Because it were better so either for the body or for the soul? But

clearly it would not be better for either: the absence of sensation will not

enable the one to think better or the other to exist better.) Therefore no body

which is not stationary has soul without sensation.

But if a body has sensation, it must be either simple or compound. And

simple it cannot be; for then it could not have touch, which is indispensable.

This is clear from what follows. An animal is a body with soul in it: every

body is tangible, i.e. perceptible by touch; hence necessarily, if an animal is

to survive, its body must have tactual sensation. All the other senses, e.g.

smell, sight, hearing, apprehend through media; but where there is immediate

contact the animal, if it has no sensation, will be unable to avoid some things

and take others, and so will find it impossible to survive. That is why taste

also is a sort of touch; it is relative to nutriment, which is just tangible body;

whereas sound, colour, and odour are innutritious, and further neither grow

nor decay. Hence it is that taste also must be a sort of touch, because it is the

sense for what is tangible and nutritious.

Both these senses, then, are indispensable to the animal, and it is clear that

without  touch  it  is  impossible  for  an  animal  to  be.  All  the  other  senses

subserve well-being and for that very reason belong not to any and every kind

of animal, but only to some, e.g. those capable of forward movement must

have  them;  for,  if  they  are  to  survive,  they  must  perceive  not  only  by

immediate contact but also at a distance from the object. This will be possible

if  they  can  perceive  through  a  medium,  the  medium  being  affected  and

moved by the perceptible object, and the animal by the medium. just as that

which produces local movement causes a change extending to a certain point,

and that which gave an impulse causes another to produce a new impulse so

that  the  movement  traverses  a  medium  the  first  mover  impelling  without

being impelled, the last moved being impelled without impelling, while the

medium (or media, for there are many) is both-so is it also in the case of

alteration, except that the agent produces produces it without the patient’s

changing its place. Thus if an object is dipped into wax, the movement goes

on until submersion has taken place, and in stone it goes no distance at all,

while in water the disturbance goes far beyond the object dipped: in air the

disturbance is propagated farthest of all, the air acting and being acted upon,

so  long  as  it  maintains  an  unbroken  unity.  That  is  why  in  the  case  ofreflection it is better, instead of saying that the sight issues from the eye and

is reflected, to say that the air, so long as it remains one, is affected by the

shape and colour. On a smooth surface the air possesses unity; hence it is that

it in turn sets the sight in motion, just as if the impression on the wax were

transmitted as far as the wax extends.


13


It is clear that the body of an animal cannot be simple, i.e. consist of one

element such as fire or air. For without touch it is impossible to have any

other sense; for every body that has soul in it must, as we have said, be

capable  of  touch.  All  the  other  elements  with  the  exception  of  earth  can

constitute  organs  of  sense,  but  all  of  them  bring  about  perception  only

through something else, viz. through the media. Touch takes place by direct

contact with its objects, whence also its name. All the other organs of sense,

no  doubt,  perceive  by  contact,  only  the  contact  is  mediate:  touch  alone

perceives by immediate contact. Consequently no animal body can consist of

these other elements.

Nor can it consist solely of earth. For touch is as it were a mean between

all tangible qualities, and its organ is capable of receiving not only all the

specific qualities which characterize earth, but also the hot and the cold and

all other tangible qualities whatsoever. That is why we have no sensation by

means  of  bones,  hair,  &c.,  because  they  consist  of  earth.  So  too  plants,

because they consist of earth, have no sensation. Without touch there can be

no other sense, and the organ of touch cannot consist of earth or of any other

single element.

It is evident, therefore, that the loss of this one sense alone must bring

about the death of an animal. For as on the one hand nothing which is not an

animal  can  have  this  sense,  so  on  the  other  it  is  the  only  one  which  is

indispensably  necessary  to  what  is  an  animal.  This  explains,  further,  the

following difference between the other senses and touch. In the case of all the

others excess of intensity in the qualities which they apprehend, i.e. excess of

intensity in colour, sound, and smell, destroys not the but only the organs of

the  sense  (except  incidentally,  as  when  the  sound  is  accompanied  by  an

impact or shock, or where through the objects of sight or of smell certain

other  things  are  set  in  motion,  which  destroy  by  contact);  flavour  also

destroys  only  in  so  far  as  it  is  at  the  same  time  tangible.  But  excess  ofintensity in tangible qualities, e.g. heat, cold, or hardness, destroys the animal

itself. As in the case of every sensible quality excess destroys the organ, so

here what is tangible destroys touch, which is the essential mark of life; for it

has been shown that without touch it is impossible for an animal to be. That

is why excess in intensity of tangible qualities destroys not merely the organ,

but the animal itself, because this is the only sense which it must have.

All the other senses are necessary to animals, as we have said, not for their

being, but for their well-being. Such, e.g. is sight, which, since it lives in air

or water, or generally in what is pellucid, it must have in order to see, and

taste because of what is pleasant or painful to it, in order that it may perceive

these qualities in its nutriment and so may desire to be set in motion, and

hearing that it may have communication made to it, and a tongue that it may

communicate with its fellows.                          On Sense and the Sensible


Translated by J. I. Beare


<

div class="chapter">


1


  Having  now  definitely  considered  the  soul,  by  itself,  and  its  several

faculties, we must next make a survey of animals and all living things, in

order  to  ascertain  what  functions  are  peculiar,  and  what  functions  are

common, to them. What has been already determined respecting the soul [sc.

by itself] must be assumed throughout. The remaining parts [sc. the attributes

of soul and body conjointly] of our subject must be now dealt with, and we

may begin with those that come first.

The  most  important  attributes  of  animals,  whether  common  to  all  or

peculiar to some, are, manifestly, attributes of soul and body in conjunction,

e.g.  sensation,  memory,  passion,  appetite  and  desire  in  general,  and,  in

addition pleasure and pain. For these may, in fact, be said to belong to all

animals. But there are, besides these, certain other attributes, of which some

are common to all living things, while others are peculiar to certain species of

animals. The most important of these may be summed up in four pairs, viz.

waking and sleeping, youth and old age, inhalation and exhalation, life and

death.  We  must  endeavour  to  arrive  at  a  scientific  conception  of  these,

determining their respective natures, and the causes of their occurrence.

But it behoves the Physical Philosopher to obtain also a clear view of the

first principles of health and disease, inasmuch as neither health nor disease

can exist in lifeless things. Indeed we may say of most physical inquirers, and

of those physicians who study their art philosophically, that while the former

complete their works with a disquisition on medicine, the latter usually base

their medical theories on principles derived from Physics.

That  all  the  attributes  above  enumerated  belong  to  soul  and  body  in

conjunction, is obvious; for they all either imply sensation as a concomitant,

or have it as their medium. Some are either affections or states of sensation,others, means of defending and safe-guarding it, while others, again, involve

its  destruction  or  negation.  Now  it  is  clear,  alike  by  reasoning  and

observation, that sensation is generated in the soul through the medium of the

body.

We  have  already,  in  our  treatise  On  the  Soul,  explained  the  nature  of

sensation  and  the  act  of  perceiving  by  sense,  and  the  reason  why  this

affection  belongs  to  animals.  Sensation  must,  indeed,  be  attributed  to  all

animals as such, for by its presence or absence we distinguish essentially

between what is and what is not an animal.

But coming now to the special senses severally, we may say that touch and

taste necessarily appertain to all animals, touch, for the reason given in On

the Soul, and taste, because of nutrition. It is by taste that one distinguishes in

food the pleasant from the unpleasant, so as to flee from the latter and pursue

the former: and savour in general is an affection of nutrient matter.

The senses which operate through external media, viz. smelling, hearing,

seeing, are found in all animals which possess the faculty of locomotion. To

all that possess them they are a means of preservation; their final cause being

that such creatures may, guided by antecedent perception, both pursue their

food, and shun things that are bad or destructive. But in animals which have

also intelligence they serve for the attainment of a higher perfection. They

bring  in  tidings  of  many  distinctive  qualities  of  things,  from  which  the

knowledge of truth, speculative and practical, is generated in the soul.

Of the two last mentioned, seeing, regarded as a supply for the primary

wants of life, and in its direct effects, is the superior sense; but for developing

intelligence, and in its indirect consequences, hearing takes the precedence.

The faculty of seeing, thanks to the fact that all bodies are coloured, brings

tidings of multitudes of distinctive qualities of all sorts; whence it is through

this  sense  especially  that  we  perceive  the  common  sensibles,  viz.  figure,

magnitude,  motion,  number:  while  hearing  announces  only  the  distinctive

qualities of sound, and, to some few animals, those also of voice. indirectly,

however, it is hearing that contributes most to the growth of intelligence. For

rational  discourse  is  a  cause  of  instruction  in  virtue  of  its  being  audible,

which it is, not directly, but indirectly; since it is composed of words, and

each word is a thought-symbol. Accordingly, of persons destitute from birth

of either sense, the blind are more intelligent than the deaf and dumb.


2Of the distinctive potency of each of the faculties of sense enough has been

said already.

But as to the nature of the sensory organs, or parts of the body in which

each of the senses is naturally implanted, inquirers now usually take as their

guide the fundamental elements of bodies. Not, however, finding it easy to

coordinate five senses with four elements, they are at a loss respecting the

fifth sense. But they hold the organ of sight to consist of fire, being prompted

to  this  view  by  a  certain  sensory  affection  of  whose  true  cause  they  are

ignorant. This is that, when the eye is pressed or moved, fire appears to flash

from it. This naturally takes place in darkness, or when the eyelids are closed,

for then, too, darkness is produced.

This theory, however, solves one question only to raise another; for, unless

on the hypothesis that a person who is in his full senses can see an object of

vision without being aware of it, the eye must on this theory see itself. But

then why does the above affection not occur also when the eye is at rest? The

true  explanation  of  this  affection,  which  will  contain  the  answer  to  our

question, and account for the current notion that the eye consists of fire, must

be  determined  in  the  following  way:  Things  which  are  smooth  have  the

natural property of shining in darkness, without, however, producing light.

Now, the part of the eye called ‘the black’, i.e. its central part, is manifestly

smooth. The phenomenon of the flash occurs only when the eye is moved,

because only then could it possibly occur that the same one object should

become  as  it  were  two.  The  rapidity  of  the  movement  has  the  effect  of

making  that  which  sees  and  that  which  is  seen  seem  different  from  one

another. Hence the phenomenon does not occur unless the motion is rapid

and takes place in darkness. For it is in the dark that that which is smooth,

e.g.  the  heads  of  certain  fishes,  and  the  sepia  of  the  cuttle-fish,  naturally

shines, and, when the movement of the eye is slow, it is impossible that that

which sees and that which is seen should appear to be simultaneously two

and one. But, in fact, the eye sees itself in the above phenomenon merely as it

does so in ordinary optical reflexion.

If  the  visual  organ  proper  really  were  fire,  which  is  the  doctrine  of

Empedocles, a doctrine taught also in the Timaeus, and if vision were the

result of light issuing from the eye as from a lantern, why should the eye not

have had the power of seeing even in the dark? It is totally idle to say, as the

Timaeus does, that the visual ray coming forth in the darkness is quenched.

What is the meaning of this ‘quenching’ of light? That which, like a fire ofcoals or an ordinary flame, is hot and dry is, indeed, quenched by the moist or

cold; but heat and dryness are evidently not attributes of light. Or if they are

attributes of it, but belong to it in a degree so slight as to be imperceptible to

us, we should have expected that in the daytime the light of the sun should be

quenched when rain falls, and that darkness should prevail in frosty weather.

Flame, for example, and ignited bodies are subject to such extinction, but

experience shows that nothing of this sort happens to the sunlight.

  Empedocles at times seems to hold that vision is to be explained as above

stated by light issuing forth from the eye, e.g. in the following passage:—

<

div class="quote">

As when one who purposes going abroad prepares a lantern,

A gleam of fire blazing through the stormy night,

Adjusting thereto, to screen it from all sorts of winds,

transparent sides,

Which scatter the breath of the winds as they blow,

While, out through them leaping, the fire,

i.e. all the more subtile part of this,

Shines along his threshold old incessant beams:

So [Divine love] embedded the round “lens”, [viz.]

the primaeval fire fenced within the membranes,

In [its own] delicate tissues;

And these fended off the deep surrounding flood,

While leaping forth the fire, i.e. all its more subtile part-.

 

  Sometimes he accounts for vision thus, but at other times he explains it by

emanations from the visible objects.

  Democritus, on the other hand, is right in his opinion that the eye is of

water; not, however, when he goes on to explain seeing as mere mirroring.

The mirroring that takes place in an eye is due to the fact that the eye is

smooth, and it really has its seat not in the eye which is seen, but in that

which sees. For the case is merely one of reflexion. But it would seem that

even in his time there was no scientific knowledge of the general subject of

the formation of images and the phenomena of reflexion. It is strange too,

that it never occurred to him to ask why, if his theory be true, the eye alone

sees, while none of the other things in which images are reflected do so.

True,  then,  the  visual  organ  proper  is  composed  of  water,  yet  visionappertains to it not because it is so composed, but because it is translucent—a

property common alike to water and to air. But water is more easily confined

and more easily condensed than air; wherefore it is that the pupil, i.e. the eye

proper,  consists  of  water.  That  it  does  so  is  proved  by  facts  of  actual

experience. The substance which flows from eyes when decomposing is seen

to  be  water,  and  this  in  undeveloped  embryos  is  remarkably  cold  and

glistening. In sanguineous animals the white of the eye is fat and oily, in

order that the moisture of the eye may be proof against freezing. Wherefore

the eye is of all parts of the body the least sensitive to cold: no one ever feels

cold in the part sheltered by the eyelids. The eyes of bloodless animals are

covered with a hard scale which gives them similar protection.

It is, to state the matter generally, an irrational notion that the eye should

see in virtue of something issuing from it; that the visual ray should extend

itself all the way to the stars, or else go out merely to a certain point, and

there  coalesce,  as  some  say,  with  rays  which  proceed  from  the  object.  It

would be better to suppose this coalescence to take place in the fundament of

the eye itself. But even this would be mere trifling. For what is meant by the

‘coalescence’ of light with light? Or how is it possible? Coalescence does not

occur between any two things taken at random. And how could the light

within the eye coalesce with that outside it? For the environing membrane

comes between them.

That  without  light  vision  is  impossible  has  been  stated  elsewhere;  but,

whether the medium between the eye and its objects is air or light, vision is

caused by a process through this medium.

  Accordingly,  that  the  inner  part  of  the  eye  consists  of  water  is  easily

intelligible, water being translucent.

Now, as vision outwardly is impossible without [extra-organic] light, so

also it is impossible inwardly [without light within the organ]. There must,

therefore, be some translucent medium within the eye, and, as this is not air,

it must be water. The soul or its perceptive part is not situated at the external

surface of the eye, but obviously somewhere within: whence the necessity of

the interior of the eye being translucent, i.e. capable of admitting light. And

that it is so is plain from actual occurrences. It is matter of experience that

soldiers wounded in battle by a sword slash on the temple, so inflicted as to

sever  the  passages  of  [i.e.  inward  from]  the  eye,  feel  a  sudden  onset  of

darkness, as if a lamp had gone out; because what is called the pupil, i.e. the

translucent, which is a sort of inner lamp, is then cut off [from its connexionwith the soul].

  Hence, if the facts be at all as here stated, it is clear that—if one should

explain the nature of the sensory organs in this way, i.e. by correlating each

of them with one of the four elements,—we must conceive that the part of the

eye  immediately  concerned  in  vision  consists  of  water,  that  the  part

immediately concerned in the perception of sound consists of air, and that the

sense of smell consists of fire. (I say the sense of smell, not the organ.) For

the  organ  of  smell  is  only  potentially  that  which  the  sense  of  smell,  as

realized, is actually; since the object of sense is what causes the actualization

of each sense, so that it (the sense) must (at the instant of actualization) be

(actually) that which before (the moment of actualization) it was potentially.

Now, odour is a smoke-like evaporation, and smoke-like evaporation arises

from fire. This also helps us to understand why the olfactory organ has its

proper seat in the environment of the brain, for cold matter is potentially hot.

In the same way must the genesis of the eye be explained. Its structure is an

offshoot from the brain, because the latter is the moistest and coldest of all

the bodily parts.

The organ of touch proper consists of earth, and the faculty of taste is a

particular form of touch. This explains why the sensory organ of both touch

and taste is closely related to the heart. For the heart as being the hottest of all

the bodily parts, is the counterpoise of the brain.

This then is the way in which the characteristics of the bodily organs of

sense must be determined.


3


Of the sensibles corresponding to each sensory organ, viz. colour, sound,

odour, savour, touch, we have treated in On the Soul in general terms, having

there determined what their function is, and what is implied in their becoming

actualized in relation to their respective organs. We must next consider what

account we are to give of any one of them; what, for example, we should say

colour is, or sound, or odour, or savour; and so also respecting [the object of]

touch. We begin with colour.

Now, each of them may be spoken of from two points of view, i.e. either as

actual or as potential. We have in On the Soul explained in what sense the

colour, or sound, regarded as actualized [for sensation] is the same as, and in

what sense it is different from, the correlative sensation, the actual seeing orhearing. The point of our present discussion is, therefore, to determine what

each sensible object must be in itself, in order to be perceived as it is in actual

consciousness.

We have already in On the Soul stated of Light that it is the colour of the

Translucent, [being so related to it] incidentally; for whenever a fiery element

is in a translucent medium presence there is Light; while the privation of it is

Darkness. But the ‘Translucent’, as we call it, is not something peculiar to air,

or  water,  or  any  other  of  the  bodies  usually  called  translucent,  but  is  a

common ‘nature’ and power, capable of no separate existence of its own, but

residing in these, and subsisting likewise in all other bodies in a greater or

less  degree.  As  the  bodies  in  which  it  subsists  must  have  some  extreme

bounding surface, so too must this. Here, then, we may say that Light is a

‘nature’ inhering in the Translucent when the latter is without determinate

boundary.  But  it  is  manifest  that,  when  the  Translucent  is  in  determinate

bodies, its bounding extreme must be something real; and that colour is just

this ‘something’ we are plainly taught by facts-colour being actually either at

the external limit, or being itself that limit, in bodies. Hence it was that the

Pythagoreans named the superficies of a body its ‘hue’, for ‘hue’, indeed, lies

at the limit of the body; but the limit of the body; is not a real thing; rather we

must suppose that the same natural substance which, externally, is the vehicle

of colour exists [as such a possible vehicle] also in the interior of the body.

Air and water, too [i.e. as well as determinately bounded bodies] are seen

to  possess  colour;  for  their  brightness  is  of  the  nature  of  colour.  But  the

colour which air or sea presents, since the body in which it resides is not

determinately bounded, is not the same when one approaches and views it

close by as it is when one regards it from a distance; whereas in determinate

bodies  the  colour  presented  is  definitely  fixed,  unless,  indeed,  when  the

atmospheric environment causes it to change. Hence it is clear that that in

them which is susceptible of colour is in both cases the same. It is therefore

the Translucent, according to the degree to which it subsists in bodies (and it

does so in all more or less), that causes them to partake of colour. But since

the colour is at the extremity of the body, it must be at the extremity of the

Translucent in the body. Whence it follows that we may define colour as the

limit  of  the  Translucent  in  determinately  bounded  body.  For  whether  we

consider  the  special  class  of  bodies  called  translucent,  as  water  and  such

others, or determinate bodies, which appear to possess a fixed colour of their

own, it is at the exterior bounding surface that all alike exhibit their colour.Now, that which when present in air produces light may be present also in

the Translucent which pervades determinate bodies; or again, it may not be

present, but there may be a privation of it. Accordingly, as in the case of air

the one condition is light, the other darkness, in the same way the colours

White and Black are generated in determinate bodies.

We must now treat of the other colours, reviewing the several hypotheses

invented to explain their genesis.

(1) It is conceivable that the White and the Black should be juxtaposed in

quantities so minute that [a particle of] either separately would be invisible,

though the joint product [of two particles, a black and a white] would be

visible; and that they should thus have the other colours for resultants. Their

product could, at all events, appear neither white nor black; and, as it must

have some colour, and can have neither of these, this colour must be of a

mixed  character—in  fact,  a  species  of  colour  different  from  either.  Such,

then, is a possible way of conceiving the existence of a plurality of colours

besides the White and Black; and we may suppose that [of this ‘plurality’]

many are the result of a [numerical] ratio; for the blacks and whites may be

juxtaposed in the ratio of 3 to 2 or of 3 to 4, or in ratios expressible by other

numbers;  while  some  may  be  juxtaposed  according  to  no  numerically

expressible ratio, but according to some relation of excess or defect in which

the blacks and whites involved would be incommensurable quantities; and,

accordingly,  we  may  regard  all  these  colours  [viz.  all  those  based  on

numerical  ratios]  as  analogous  to  the  sounds  that  enter  into  music,  and

suppose that those involving simple numerical ratios, like the concords in

music, may be those generally regarded as most agreeable; as, for example,

purple, crimson, and some few such colours, their fewness being due to the

same causes which render the concords few. The other compound colours

may be those which are not based on numbers. Or it may be that, while all

colours whatever [except black and white] are based on numbers, some are

regular  in  this  respect,  others  irregular;  and  that  the  latter  [though  now

supposed to be all based on numbers], whenever they are not pure, owe this

character to a corresponding impurity in [the arrangement of] their numerical

ratios.  This  then  is  one  conceivable  hypothesis  to  explain  the  genesis  of

intermediate colours.

(2)  Another  is  that  the  Black  and  White  appear  the  one  through  the

medium  of  the  other,  giving  an  effect  like  that  sometimes  produced  by

painters overlaying a less vivid upon a more vivid colour, as when they desireto represent an object appearing under water or enveloped in a haze, and like

that produced by the sun, which in itself appears white, but takes a crimson

hue when beheld through a fog or a cloud of smoke. On this hypothesis, too,

a variety of colours may be conceived to arise in the same way as that already

described; for between those at the surface and those underneath a definite

ratio  might  sometimes  exist;  in  other  cases  they  might  stand  in  no

determinate ratio. To [introduce a theory of colour which would set all these

hypotheses aside, and] say with the ancients that colours are emanations, and

that the visibility of objects is due to such a cause, is absurd. For they must,

in any case, explain sense-perception through Touch; so that it were better to

say at once that visual perception is due to a process set up by the perceived

object in the medium between this object and the sensory organ; due, that is,

to contact [with the medium affected,] not to emanations.

If we accept the hypothesis of juxtaposition, we must assume not only

invisible magnitude, but also imperceptible time, in order that the succession

in the arrival of the stimulatory movements may be unperceived, and that the

compound colour seen may appear to be one, owing to its successive parts

seeming to present themselves at once. On the hypothesis of superposition,

however, no such assumption is needful: the stimulatory process produced in

the  medium  by  the  upper  colour,  when  this  is  itself  unaffected,  will  be

different in kind from that produced by it when affected by the underlying

colour. Hence it presents itself as a different colour, i.e. as one which is

neither white nor black. So that, if it is impossible to suppose any magnitude

to be invisible, and we must assume that there is some distance from which

every magnitude is visible, this superposition theory, too [i.e. as well as No. 3

infra], might pass as a real theory of colour-mixture. Indeed, in the previous

case also there is no reason why, to persons at a distance from the juxtaposed

blacks and whites, some one colour should not appear to present itself as a

blend of both. [But it would not be so on a nearer view], for it will be shown,

in  a  discussion  to  be  undertaken  later  on,  that  there  is  no  magnitude

absolutely invisible.

(3)  There  is  a  mixture  of  bodies,  however,  not  merely  such  as  some

suppose, i.e. by juxtaposition of their minimal parts, which, owing to [the

weakness of our] sense, are imperceptible by us, but a mixture by which they

[i.e.  the  ‘matter’  of  which  they  consist]  are  wholly  blent  together  by

interpenetration, as we have described it in the treatise on Mixture, where we

dealt with this subject generally in its most comprehensive aspect. For, on thesupposition we are criticizing, the only totals capable of being mixed are

those which are divisible into minimal parts, [e.g. genera into individuals] as

men, horses, or the [various kinds of] seeds. For of mankind as a whole the

individual man is such a least part; of horses [as an aggregate] the individual

horse. Hence by the juxtaposition of these we obtain a mixed total, consisting

[like a troop of cavalry] of both together; but we do not say that by such a

process any individual man has been mixed with any individual horse. Not in

this way, but by complete interpenetration [of their matter], must we conceive

those things to be mixed which are not divisible into minima; and it is in the

case of these that natural mixture exhibits itself in its most perfect form. We

have explained already in our discourse ‘On Mixture’ how such mixture is

possible. This being the true nature of mixture, it is plain that when bodies

are mixed their colours also are necessarily mixed at the same time; and [it is

no  less  plain]  that  this  is  the  real  cause  determining  the  existence  of  a

plurality of colours—not superposition or juxtaposition. For when bodies are

thus mixed, their resultant colour presents itself as one and the same at all

distances alike; not varying as it is seen nearer or farther away.

  Colours will thus, too [as well as on the former hypotheses], be many in

number on account of the fact that the ingredients may be combined with one

another in a multitude of ratios; some will be based on determinate numerical

ratios, while others again will have as their basis a relation of quantitative

excess or defect not expressible in integers. And all else that was said in

reference to the colours, considered as juxtaposed or superposed, may be said

of them likewise when regarded as mixed in the way just described.

Why colours, as well as savours and sounds, consist of species determinate

[in themselves] and not infinite [in number] is a question which we shall

discuss hereafter.


4


We have now explained what colour is, and the reason why there are many

colours; while before, in our work On the Soul, we explained the nature of

sound and voice. We have next to speak of Odour and Savour, both of which

are almost the same physical affection, although they each have their being in

different things. Savours, as a class, display their nature more clearly to us

than Odours, the cause of which is that the olfactory sense of man is inferior

in acuteness to that of the lower animals, and is, when compared with ourother  senses,  the  least  perfect  of  Man’s  sense  of  Touch,  on  the  contrary,

excels that of all other animals in fineness, and Taste is a modification of

Touch.

Now the natural substance water per se tends to be tasteless. But [since

without water tasting is impossible] either (a) we must suppose that water

contains in itself [uniformly diffused through it] the various kinds of savour,

already formed, though in amounts so small as to be imperceptible, which is

the  doctrine  of  Empedocles;  or  (b)  the  water  must  be  a  sort  of  matter,

qualified, as it were, to produce germs of savours of all kinds, so that all

kinds of savour are generated from the water, though different kinds from its

different  parts,  or  else  (c)  the  water  is  in  itself  quite  undifferentiated  in

respect of savour [whether developed or undeveloped], but some agent, such

for example as one might conceive Heat or the Sun to be, is the efficient

cause of savour.

(a) Of these three hypotheses, the falsity of that held by Empedocles is

only too evident. For we see that when pericarpal fruits are plucked [from the

tree] and exposed in the sun, or subjected to the action of fire, their sapid

juices are changed by the heat, which shows that their qualities are not due to

their drawing anything from the water in the ground, but to a change which

they  undergo  within  the  pericarp  itself;  and  we  see,  moreover,  that  these

juices, when extracted and allowed to lie, instead of sweet become by lapse

of time harsh or bitter, or acquire savours of any and every sort; and that,

again, by the process of boiling or fermentation they are made to assume

almost all kinds of new savours.

(b) It is likewise impossible that water should be a material qualified to

generate all kinds of Savour germs [so that different savours should arise out

of different parts of the water]; for we see different kinds of taste generated

from the same water, having it as their nutriment.

(C) It remains, therefore, to suppose that the water is changed by passively

receiving some affection from an external agent. Now, it is manifest that

water does not contract the quality of sapidity from the agency of Heat alone.

For water is of all liquids the thinnest, thinner even than oil itself, though oil,

owing to its viscosity, is more ductile than water, the latter being uncohesive

in its particles; whence water is more difficult than oil to hold in the hand

without spilling. But since perfectly pure water does not, when subjected to

the action of Heat, show any tendency to acquire consistency, we must infer

that some other agency than heat is the cause of sapidity. For all savours [i.e.sapid liquors] exhibit a comparative consistency. Heat is, however, a coagent

in the matter.

Now the sapid juices found in pericarpal fruits evidently exist also in the

earth.  Hence  many  of  the  old  natural  philosophers  assert  that  water  has

qualities  like  those  of  the  earth  through  which  it  flows,  a  fact  especially

manifest in the case of saline springs, for salt is a form of earth. Hence also

when liquids are filtered through ashes, a bitter substance, the taste they yield

is bitter. There are many wells, too, of which some are bitter, others acid,

while others exhibit other tastes of all kinds.

As was to be anticipated, therefore, it is in the vegetable kingdom that

tastes occur in richest variety. For, like all things else, the Moist, by nature’s

law, is affected only by its contrary; and this contrary is the Dry. Thus we see

why the Moist is affected by Fire, which as a natural substance, is dry. Heat

is, however, the essential property of Fire, as Dryness is of Earth, according

to  what  has  been  said  in  our  treatise  on  the  elements.  Fire  and  Earth,

therefore, taken absolutely as such, have no natural power to affect, or be

affected by, one another; nor have any other pair of substances. Any two

things can affect, or be affected by, one another only so far as contrariety to

the other resides in either of them.

As, therefore, persons washing Colours or Savours in a liquid cause the

water in which they wash to acquire such a quality [as that of the colour or

savour], so nature, too, by washing the Dry and Earthy in the Moist, and by

filtering the latter, that is, moving it on by the agency of heat through the dry

and earthy, imparts to it a certain quality. This affection, wrought by the

aforesaid Dry in the Moist, capable of transforming the sense of Taste from

potentiality  to  actuality,  is  Savour.  Savour  brings  into  actual  exercise  the

perceptive faculty which pre-existed only in potency. The activity of sense-

perception in general is analogous, not to the process of acquiring knowledge,

but to that of exercising knowledge already acquired.

That Savours, either as a quality or as the privation of a quality, belong not

to every form of the Dry but to the Nutrient, we shall see by considering that

neither the Dry without the Moist, nor the Moist without the Dry, is nutrient.

For no single element, but only composite substance, constitutes nutriment

for animals. Now, among the perceptible elements of the food which animals

assimilate, the tangible are the efficient causes of growth and decay; it is qua

hot or cold that the food assimilated causes these; for the heat or cold is the

direct  cause  of  growth  or  decay.  It  is  qua  gustable,  however,  that  theassimilated food supplies nutrition. For all organisms are nourished by the

Sweet [i.e. the ‘gustable’ proper], either by itself or in combination with other

savours.  Of  this  we  must  speak  with  more  precise  detail  in  our  work  on

Generation: for the present we need touch upon it only so far as our subject

here requires. Heat causes growth, and fits the food-stuff for alimentation; it

attracts [into the organic system] that which is light [viz. the sweet], while the

salt and bitter it rejects because of their heaviness. In fact, whatever effects

external heat produces in external bodies, the same are produced by their

internal  heat  in  animal  and  vegetable  organisms.  Hence  it  is  [i.e.  by  the

agency of heat as described] that nourishment is effected by the sweet. The

other  savours  are  introduced  into  and  blended  in  food  [naturally]  on  a

principle analogous to that on which the saline or the acid is used artificially,

i.e. for seasoning. These latter are used because they counteract the tendency

of the sweet to be too nutrient, and to float on the stomach.

As the intermediate colours arise from the mixture of white and black, so

the intermediate savours arise from the Sweet and Bitter; and these savours,

too, severally involve either a definite ratio, or else an indefinite relation of

degree, between their components, either having certain integral numbers at

the basis of their mixture, and, consequently, of their stimulative effect, or

else  being  mixed  in  proportions  not  arithmetically  expressible.  The  tastes

which  give  pleasure  in  their  combination  are  those  which  have  their

components joined in a definite ratio.

The sweet taste alone is Rich, [therefore the latter may be regarded as a

variety of the former], while [so far as both imply privation of the Sweet] the

Saline is fairly identical with the Bitter. Between the extremes of sweet and

bitter come the Harsh, the Pungent, the Astringent, and the Acid. Savours and

Colours, it will be observed, contain respectively about the same number of

species. For there are seven species of each, if, as is reasonable, we regard

Dun [or Grey] as a variety of Black (for the alternative is that Yellow should

be classed with White, as Rich with Sweet); while [the irreducible colours,

viz.] Crimson, Violet, leek-Green, and deep Blue, come between White and

Black, and from these all others are derived by mixture.

  Again, as Black is a privation of White in the Translucent, so Saline or

Bitter is a privation of Sweet in the Nutrient Moist. This explains why the ash

of all burnt things is bitter; for the potable [sc. the sweet] moisture has been

exuded from them.

  Democritus  and  most  of  the  natural  philosophers  who  treat  of  sense-perception proceed quite irrationally, for they represent all objects of sense as

objects of Touch. Yet, if this is really so, it clearly follows that each of the

other senses is a mode of Touch; but one can see at a glance that this is

impossible.

  Again, they treat the percepts common to all senses as proper to one. For

[the  qualities  by  which  they  explain  taste  viz.]  Magnitude  and  Figure,

Roughness  and  Smoothness,  and,  moreover,  the  Sharpness  and  Bluntness

found in solid bodies, are percepts common to all the senses, or if not to all,

at least to Sight and Touch. This explains why it is that the senses are liable

to  err  regarding  them,  while  no  such  error  arises  respecting  their  proper

sensibles; e.g. the sense of Seeing is not deceived as to Colour, nor is that of

Hearing as to Sound.

On  the  other  hand,  they  reduce  the  proper  to  common  sensibles,  as

Democritus does with White and Black; for he asserts that the latter is [a

mode of the] rough, and the former [a mode of the] smooth, while he reduces

Savours to the atomic figures. Yet surely no one sense, or, if any, the sense of

Sight rather than any other, can discern the common sensibles. But if we

suppose that the sense of Taste is better able to do so, then—since to discern

the smallest objects in each kind is what marks the acutest sense-Taste should

have been the sense which best perceived the common sensibles generally,

and showed the most perfect power of discerning figures in general.

  Again,  all  the  sensibles  involve  contrariety;  e.g.  in  Colour  White  is

contrary to Black, and in Savours Bitter is contrary to Sweet; but no one

figure  is  reckoned  as  contrary  to  any  other  figure.  Else,  to  which  of  the

possible  polygonal  figures  [to  which  Democritus  reduces  Bitter]  is  the

spherical figure [to which he reduces Sweet] contrary?

  Again, since figures are infinite in number, savours also should be infinite;

[the  possible  rejoinder—‘that  they  are  so,  only  that  some  are  not

perceived’—cannot be sustained] for why should one savour be perceived,

and another not?

This completes our discussion of the object of Taste, i.e. Savour; for the

other affections of Savours are examined in their proper place in connection

with the natural history of Plants.


5


Our  conception  of  the  nature  of  Odours  must  be  analogous  to  that  ofSavours; inasmuch as the Sapid Dry effects in air and water alike, but in a

different province of sense, precisely what the Dry effects in the Moist of

water only. We customarily predicate Translucency of both air and water in

common; but it is not qua translucent that either is a vehicle of odour, but qua

possessed  of  a  power  of  washing  or  rinsing  [and  so  imbibing]  the  Sapid

Dryness.

For the object of Smell exists not in air only: it also exists in water. This is

proved  by  the  case  of  fishes  and  testacea,  which  are  seen  to  possess  the

faculty of smell, although water contains no air (for whenever air is generated

within water it rises to the surface), and these creatures do not respire. Hence,

if one were to assume that air and water are both moist, it would follow that

Odour is the natural substance consisting of the Sapid Dry diffused in the

Moist, and whatever is of this kind would be an object of Smell.

That the property of odorousness is based upon the Sapid may be seen by

comparing the things which possess with those which do not possess odour.

The elements, viz. Fire, Air, Earth, Water, are inodorous, because both the

dry  and  the  moist  among  them  are  without  sapidity,  unless  some  added

ingredient  produces  it.  This  explains  why  sea-water  possesses  odour,  for

[unlike ‘elemental’ water] it contains savour and dryness. Salt, too, is more

odorous than natron, as the oil which exudes from the former proves, for

natron is allied to [’elemental’] earth more nearly than salt. Again, a stone is

inodorous,  just  because  it  is  tasteless,  while,  on  the  contrary,  wood  is

odorous, because it is sapid. The kinds of wood, too, which contain more

[’elemental’] water are less odorous than others. Moreover, to take the case of

metals, gold is inodorous because it is without taste, but bronze and iron are

odorous; and when the [sapid] moisture has been burnt out of them, their slag

is, in all cases, less odorous the metals [than the metals themselves]. Silver

and tin are more odorous than the one class of metals, less so than the other,

inasmuch as they are water [to a greater degree than the former, to a less

degree than the latter].

  Some writers look upon Fumid exhalation, which is a compound of Earth

and Air, as the essence of Odour. [Indeed all are inclined to rush to this

theory of Odour.] Heraclitus implied his adherence to it when he declared

that if all existing things were turned into Smoke, the nose would be the

organ to discern them with. All writers incline to refer odour to this cause [sc.

exhalation of some sort], but some regard it as aqueous, others as fumid,

exhalation; while others, again, hold it to be either. Aqueous exhalation ismerely a form of moisture, but fumid exhalation is, as already remarked,

composed of Air and Earth. The former when condensed turns into water; the

latter, in a particular species of earth. Now, it is unlikely that odour is either

of  these.  For  vaporous  exhalation  consists  of  mere  water  [which,  being

tasteless, is inodorous]; and fumid exhalation cannot occur in water at all,

though, as has been before stated, aquatic creatures also have the sense of

smell.

  Again,  the  exhalation  theory  of  odour  is  analogous  to  the  theory  of

emanations. If, therefore, the latter is untenable, so, too, is the former.

It  is  clearly  conceivable  that  the  Moist,  whether  in  air  (for  air,  too,  is

essentially  moist)  or  in  water,  should  imbibe  the  influence  of,  and  have

effects wrought in it by, the Sapid Dryness. Moreover, if the Dry produces in

moist media, i.e. water and air, an effect as of something washed out in them,

it  is  manifest  that  odours  must  be  something  analogous  to  savours.  Nay,

indeed, this analogy is, in some instances, a fact [registered in language]; for

odours as well as savours are spoken of as pungent, sweet, harsh, astringent

rich [=’savoury’]; and one might regard fetid smells as analogous to bitter

tastes; which explains why the former are offensive to inhalation as the latter

are to deglutition. It is clear, therefore, that Odour is in both water and air

what  Savour  is  in  water  alone.  This  explains  why  coldness  and  freezing

render Savours dull, and abolish odours altogether; for cooling and freezing

tend to annul the kinetic heat which helps to fabricate sapidity.

  There are two species of the Odorous. For the statement of certain writers

that the odorous is not divisible into species is false; it is so divisible. We

must  here  define  the  sense  in  which  these  species  are  to  be  admitted  or

denied.

One class of odours, then, is that which runs parallel, as has been observed,

to  savours:  to  odours  of  this  class  their  pleasantness  or  unpleasantness

belongs  incidentally.  For  owing  to  the  fact  that  Savours  are  qualities  of

nutrient matter, the odours connected with these [e.g. those of a certain food]

are agreeable as long as animals have an appetite for the food, but they are

not agreeable to them when sated and no longer in want of it; nor are they

agreeable, either, to those animals that do not like the food itself which yields

the odours. Hence, as we observed, these odours are pleasant or unpleasant

incidentally,  and  the  same  reasoning  explains  why  it  is  that  they  are

perceptible to all animals in common.

The  other  class  of  odours  consists  of  those  agreeable  in  their  essentialnature, e.g. those of flowers. For these do not in any degree stimulate animals

to food, nor do they contribute in any way to appetite; their effect upon it, if

any, is rather the opposite. For the verse of Strattis ridiculing Euripides

<

div class="quote">

Use not perfumery to flavour soup,


contains a truth.

 

  Those who nowadays introduce such flavours into beverages deforce our

sense of pleasure by habituating us to them, until, from two distinct kinds of

sensations combined, pleasure arises as it might from one simple kind.

Of  this  species  of  odour  man  alone  is  sensible;  the  other,  viz.  that

correlated with Tastes, is, as has been said before, perceptible also to the

lower  animals.  And  odours  of  the  latter  sort,  since  their  pleasureableness

depends upon taste, are divided into as many species as there are different

tastes; but we cannot go on to say this of the former kind of odour, since its

nature is agreeable or disagreeable per se. The reason why the perception of

such odours is peculiar to man is found in the characteristic state of man’s

brain. For his brain is naturally cold, and the blood which it contains in its

vessels  is  thin  and  pure  but  easily  cooled  (whence  it  happens  that  the

exhalation arising from food, being cooled by the coldness of this region,

produces unhealthy rheums); therefore it is that odours of such a species have

been generated for human beings, as a safeguard to health. This is their sole

function, and that they perform it is evident. For food, whether dry or moist,

though sweet to taste, is often unwholesome; whereas the odour arising from

what is fragrant, that odour which is pleasant in its own right, is, so to say,

always beneficial to persons in any state of bodily health whatever.

For this reason, too, the perception of odour [in general] effected through

respiration,  not  in  all  animals,  but  in  man  and  certain  other  sanguineous

animals,  e.g.  quadrupeds,  and  all  that  participate  freely  in  the  natural

substance air; because when odours, on account of the lightness of the heat in

them, mount to the brain, the health of this region is thereby promoted. For

odour,  as  a  power,  is  naturally  heat-giving.  Thus  Nature  has  employed

respiration for two purposes: primarily for the relief thereby brought to the

thorax,  secondarily  for  the  inhalation  of  odour.  For  while  an  animal  is

inhaling,—odour  moves  in  through  its  nostrils,  as  it  were  ‘from  a  side-entrance.’

But the perception of the second class of odours above described [does not

belong to all animal, but] is confined to human beings, because man’s brain

is, in proportion to his whole bulk, larger and moister than the brain of any

other animal. This is the reason of the further fact that man alone, so to speak,

among animals perceives and takes pleasure in the odours of flowers and

such  things.  For  the  heat  and  stimulation  set  up  by  these  odours  are

commensurate  with  the  excess  of  moisture  and  coldness  in  his  cerebral

region. On all the other animals which have lungs, Nature has bestowed their

due perception of one of the two kinds of odour [i.e. that connected with

nutrition]  through  the  act  of  respiration,  guarding  against  the  needless

creation of two organs of sense; for in the fact that they respire the other

animals  have  already  sufficient  provision  for  their  perception  of  the  one

species of odour only, as human beings have for their perception of both.

But that creatures which do not respire have the olfactory sense is evident.

For fishes, and all insects as a class, have, thanks to the species of odour

correlated with nutrition, a keen olfactory sense of their proper food from a

distance, even when they are very far away from it; such is the case with

bees, and also with the class of small ants, which some denominate knipes.

Among marine animals, too, the murex and many other similar animals have

an acute perception of their food by its odour.

It is not equally certain what the organ is whereby they so perceive. This

question,  of  the  organ  whereby  they  perceive  odour,  may  well  cause  a

difficulty,  if  we  assume  that  smelling  takes  place  in  animals  only  while

respiring (for that this is the fact is manifest in all the animals which do

respire), whereas none of those just mentioned respires, and yet they have the

sense of smell—unless, indeed, they have some other sense not included in

the ordinary five. This supposition is, however, impossible. For any sense

which perceives odour is a sense of smell, and this they do perceive, though

probably not in the same way as creatures which respire, but when the latter

are respiring the current of breath removes something that is laid like a lid

upon  the  organ  proper  (which  explains  why  they  do  not  perceive  odours

when not respiring); while in creatures which do not respire this is always

off: just as some animals have eyelids on their eyes, and when these are not

raised  they  cannot  see,  whereas  hard-eyed  animals  have  no  lids,  and

consequently do not need, besides eyes, an agency to raise the lids, but see

straightway [without intermission] from the actual moment at which it is firstpossible for them to do so [i.e. from the moment when an object first comes

within their field of vision].

  Consistently with what has been said above, not one of the lower animals

shows repugnance to the odour of things which are essentially ill-smelling,

unless one of the latter is positively pernicious. They are destroyed, however,

by these things, just as human beings are; i.e. as human beings get headaches

from,  and  are  often  asphyxiated  by,  the  fumes  of  charcoal,  so  the  lower

animals  perish  from  the  strong  fumes  of  brimstone  and  bituminous

substances; and it is owing to experience of such effects that they shun these.

For the disagreeable odour in itself they care nothing whatever (though the

odours of many plants are essentially disagreeable), unless, indeed, it has

some effect upon the taste of their food.

The senses making up an odd number, and an odd number having always a

middle unit, the sense of smell occupies in itself as it were a middle position

between the tactual senses, i.e. Touch and Taste, and those which perceive

through a medium, i.e. Sight and Hearing. Hence the object of smell, too, is

an affection of nutrient substances (which fall within the class of Tangibles),

and  is  also  an  affection  of  the  audible  and  the  visible;  whence  it  is  that

creatures have the sense of smell both in air and water. Accordingly, the

object  of  smell  is  something  common  to  both  of  these  provinces,  i.e.  it

appertains  both  to  the  tangible  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  to  the

audible and translucent. Hence the propriety of the figure by which it has

been described by us as an immersion or washing of dryness in the Moist and

Fluid. Such then must be our account of the sense in which one is or is not

entitled to speak of the odorous as having species.

The  theory  held  by  certain  of  the  Pythagoreans,  that  some  animals  are

nourished by odours alone, is unsound. For, in the first place, we see that

food must be composite, since the bodies nourished by it are not simple. This

explains why waste matter is secreted from food, either within the organisms,

or, as in plants, outside them. But since even water by itself alone, that is,

when unmixed, will not suffice for food—for anything which is to form a

consistency  must  be  corporeal-,  it  is  still  much  less  conceivable  that  air

should be so corporealized [and thus fitted to be food]. But, besides this, we

see  that  all  animals  have  a  receptacle  for  food,  from  which,  when  it  has

entered, the body absorbs it. Now, the organ which perceives odour is in the

head, and odour enters with the inhalation of the breath; so that it goes to the

respiratory  region.  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  odour,  qua  odour,  does  notcontribute to nutrition; that, however, it is serviceable to health is equally

plain,  as  well  by  immediate  perception  as  from  the  arguments  above

employed; so that odour is in relation to general health what savour is in the

province of nutrition and in relation to the bodies nourished.

This then must conclude our discussion of the several organs of sense-

perception.


6


One  might  ask:  if  every  body  is  infinitely  divisible,  are  its  sensible

qualities—Colour, Savour, Odour, Sound, Weight, Cold or Heat, [Heaviness

or]  Lightness,  Hardness  or  Softness-also  infinitely  divisible?  Or,  is  this

impossible?

[One might well ask this question], because each of them is productive of

sense-perception, since, in fact, all derive their name [of ‘sensible qualities’]

from the very circumstance of their being able to stimulate this. Hence, [if

this is so] both our perception of them should likewise be divisible to infinity,

and every part of a body [however small] should be a perceptible magnitude.

For it is impossible, e.g. to see a thing which is white but not of a certain

magnitude.

  Since if it were not so, [if its sensible qualities were not divisible, pari

passu with body], we might conceive a body existing but having no colour, or

weight,  or  any  such  quality;  accordingly  not  perceptible  at  all.  For  these

qualities  are  the  objects  of  sense-perception.  On  this  supposition,  every

perceptible object should be regarded as composed not of perceptible [but of

imperceptible] parts. Yet it must [be really composed of perceptible parts],

since  assuredly  it  does  not  consist  of  mathematical  [and  therefore  purely

abstract  and  non-sensible]  quantities.  Again,  by  what  faculty  should  we

discern  and  cognize  these  [hypothetical  real  things  without  sensible

qualities]? Is it by Reason? But they are not objects of Reason; nor does

reason apprehend objects in space, except when it acts in conjunction with

sense-perception.  At  the  same  time,  if  this  be  the  case  [that  there  are

magnitudes, physically real, but without sensible quality], it seems to tell in

favour  of  the  atomistic  hypothesis;  for  thus,  indeed,  [by  accepting  this

hypothesis], the question [with which this chapter begins] might be solved

[negatively]. But it is impossible [to accept this hypothesis]. Our views on the

subject of atoms are to be found in our treatise on Movement.The solution of these questions will bring with it also the answer to the

question why the species of Colour, Taste, Sound, and other sensible qualities

are  limited.  For  in  all  classes  of  things  lying  between  extremes  the

intermediates must be limited. But contraries are extremes, and every object

of sense-perception involves contrariety: e.g. in Colour, White x Black; in

Savour, Sweet x Bitter, and in all the other sensibles also the contraries are

extremes. Now, that which is continuous is divisible into an infinite number

of unequal parts, but into a finite number of equal parts, while that which is

not per se continuous is divisible into species which are finite in number.

Since  then,  the  several  sensible  qualities  of  things  are  to  be  reckoned  as

species, while continuity always subsists in these, we must take account of

the  difference  between  the  Potential  and  the  Actual.  It  is  owing  to  this

difference that we do not [actually] see its ten-thousandth part in a grain of

millet, although sight has embraced the whole grain within its scope; and it is

owing to this, too, that the sound contained in a quarter-tone escapes notice,

and yet one hears the whole strain, inasmuch as it is a continuum; but the

interval between the extreme sounds [that bound the quarter-tone] escapes the

ear [being only potentially audible, not actually]. So, in the case of other

objects of sense, extremely small constituents are unnoticed; because they are

only potentially not actually [perceptible e.g.] visible, unless when they have

been parted from the wholes. So the footlength too exists potentially in the

two-foot length, but actually only when it has been separated from the whole.

But objective increments so small as those above might well, if separated

from their totals, [instead of achieving ‘actual’ exisistence] be dissolved in

their environments, like a drop of sapid moisture poured out into the sea. But

even if this were not so [sc. with the objective magnitude], still, since the

[subjective] of sense-perception is not perceptible in itself, nor capable of

separate  existence  (since  it  exists  only  potentially  in  the  more  distinctly

perceivable  whole  of  sense-perception),  so  neither  will  it  be  possible  to

perceive [actually] its correlatively small object [sc. its quantum of pathema

or sensible quality] when separated from the object-total. But yet this [small

object] is to be considered as perceptible: for it is both potentially so already

[i.e. even when alone], and destined to be actually so when it has become part

of an aggregate. Thus, therefore, we have shown that some magnitudes and

their sensible qualities escape notice, and the reason why they do so, as well

as the manner in which they are still perceptible or not perceptible in such

cases.  Accordingly  then  when  these  [minutely  subdivided]  sensibles  haveonce again become aggregated in a whole in such a manner, relatively to one

another, as to be perceptible actually, and not merely because they are in the

whole, but even apart from it, it follows necessarily [from what has been

already  stated]  that  their  sensible  qualities,  whether  colours  or  tastes  or

sounds, are limited in number.

One might ask:—do the objects of sense-perception, or the movements

proceeding from them ([since movements there are,] in whichever of the two

ways [viz. by emanations or by stimulatory kinesis] sense-perception takes

place),  when  these  are  actualized  for  perception,  always  arrive  first  at  a

spatial  middle  point  [between  the  sense-organ  and  its  object],  as  Odour

evidently does, and also Sound? For he who is nearer [to the odorous object]

perceives the Odour sooner [than who is farther away], and the Sound of a

stroke reaches us some time after it has been struck. Is it thus also with an

object seen, and with Light? Empedocles, for example, says that the Light

from the Sun arrives first in the intervening space before it comes to the eye,

or reaches the Earth. This might plausibly seem to be the case. For whatever

is moved [in space], is moved from one place to another; hence there must be

a corresponding interval of time also in which it is moved from the one place

to the other. But any given time is divisible into parts; so that we should

assume a time when the sun’s ray was not as yet seen, but was still travelling

in the middle space.

Now, even if it be true that the acts of ‘hearing’ and ‘having heard’, and,

generally,  those  of  ‘perceiving’  and  ‘having  perceived’,  form  co-

instantaneous wholes, in other words, that acts of sense-perception do not

involve a process of becoming, but have their being none the less without

involving such a process; yet, just as, [in the case of sound], though the stroke

which causes the Sound has been already struck, the Sound is not yet at the

ear (and that this last is a fact is further proved by the transformation which

the  letters  [viz.  the  consonants  as  heard]  undergo  [in  the  case  of  words

spoken  from  a  distance],  implying  that  the  local  movement  [involved  in

Sound] takes place in the space between [us and the speaker]; for the reason

why [persons addressed from a distance] do not succeed in catching the sense

of what is said is evidently that the air [sound wave] in moving towards them

has its form changed) [granting this, then, the question arises]: is the same

also true in the case of Colour and Light? For certainly it is not true that the

beholder  sees,  and  the  object  is  seen,  in  virtue  of  some  merely  abstract

relationship between them, such as that between equals. For if it were so,there would be no need [as there is] that either [the beholder or the thing

beheld]  should  occupy  some  particular  place;  since  to  the  equalization  of

things their being near to, or far from, one another makes no difference.

Now this [travelling through successive positions in the medium] may with

good reason take place as regards Sound and Odour, for these, like [their

media] Air and Water, are continuous, but the movement of both is divided

into parts. This too is the ground of the fact that the object which the person

first in order of proximity hears or smells is the same as that which each

subsequent person perceives, while yet it is not the same.

  Some, indeed, raise a question also on these very points; they declare it

impossible that one person should hear, or see, or smell, the same object as

another,  urging  the  impossibility  of  several  persons  in  different  places

hearing or smelling [the same object], for the one same thing would [thus] be

divided from itself. The answer is that, in perceiving the object which first set

up the motion—e.g. a bell, or frankincense, or fire—all perceive an object

numerically  one  and  the  same;  while,  of  course,  in  the  special  object

perceived  they  perceive  an  object  numerically  different  for  each,  though

specifically the same for all; and this, accordingly, explains how it is that

many persons together see, or smell, or hear [the same object]. These things

[the odour or sound proper] are not bodies, but an affection or process of

some kind (otherwise this [viz. simultaneous perception of the one object by

many] would not have been, as it is, a fact of experience) though, on the other

hand, they each imply a body [as their cause].

But [though sound and odour may travel,] with regard to Light the case is

different.  For  Light  has  its  raison  d’etre  in  the  being  [not  becoming]  of

something,  but  it  is  not  a  movement.  And  in  general,  even  in  qualitative

change the case is different from what it is in local movement [both being

different species of kinesis]. Local movements, of course, arrive first at a

point midway before reaching their goal (and Sound, it is currently believed,

is a movement of something locally moved), but we cannot go on to assert

this  [arrival  at  a  point  midway]  like  manner  of  things  which  undergo

qualitative change. For this kind of change may conceivably take place in a

thing all at once, without one half of it being changed before the other; e.g. it

is conceivable that water should be frozen simultaneously in every part. But

still, for all that, if the body which is heated or frozen is extensive, each part

of  it  successively  is  affected  by  the  part  contiguous,  while  the  part  first

changed in quality is so changed by the cause itself which originates thechange,  and  thus  the  change  throughout  the  whole  need  not  take  place

coinstantaneously and all at once. Tasting would have been as smelling now

is,  if  we  lived  in  a  liquid  medium,  and  perceived  [the  sapid  object]  at  a

distance, before touching it.

  Naturally, then, the parts of media between a sensory organ and its object

are not all affected at once—except in the case of Light [illumination] for the

reason above stated, and also in the case of seeing, for the same reason; for

Light is an efficient cause of seeing.


7


  Another question respecting sense-perception is as follows: assuming, as is

natural, that of two [simultaneous] sensory stimuli the stronger always tends

to extrude the weaker [from consciousness], is it conceivable or not that one

should  be  able  to  discern  two  objects  coinstantaneously  in  the  same

individual time? The above assumption explains why persons do not perceive

what is brought before their eyes, if they are at the time deep in thought, or in

a  fright,  or  listening  to  some  loud  noise.  This  assumption,  then,  must  be

made, and also the following: that it is easier to discern each object of sense

when in its simple form than when an ingredient in a mixture; easier, for

example, to discern wine when neat than when blended, and so also honey,

and [in other provinces] a colour, or to discern the nete by itself alone, than

[when  sounded  with  the  hypate]  in  the  octave;  the  reason  being  that

component  elements  tend  to  efface  [the  distinctive  characteristics  of]  one

another. Such is the effect [on one another] of all ingredients of which, when

compounded, some one thing is formed.

If, then, the greater stimulus tends to expel the less, it necessarily follows

that,  when  they  concur,  this  greater  should  itself  too  be  less  distinctly

perceptible  than  if  it  were  alone,  since  the  less  by  blending  with  it  has

removed some of its individuality, according to our assumption that simple

objects are in all cases more distinctly perceptible.

Now,  if  the  two  stimuli  are  equal  but  heterogeneous,  no  perception  of

either will ensue; they will alike efface one another’s characteristics. But in

such a case the perception of either stimulus in its simple form is impossible.

Hence either there will then be no sense-perception at all, or there will be a

perception compounded of both and differing from either. The latter is what

actually seems to result from ingredients blended together, whatever may bethe compound in which they are so mixed.

  Since, then, from some concurrent [sensory stimuli] a resultant object is

produced, while from others no such resultant is produced, and of the latter

sort are those things which belong to different sense provinces (for only those

things  are  capable  of  mixture  whose  extremes  are  contraries,  and  no  one

compound can be formed from, e.g. White and Sharp, except indirectly, i.e.

not as a concord is formed of Sharp and Grave); there follows logically the

impossibility of discerning such concurrent stimuli coinstantaneously. For we

must suppose that the stimuli, when equal, tend alike to efface one another,

since no one [form of stimulus] results from them; while, if they are unequal,

the stronger alone is distinctly perceptible.

  Again, the soul would be more likely to perceive coinstantaneously, with

one and the same sensory act, two things in the same sensory province, such

as the Grave and the Sharp in sound; for the sensory stimulation in this one

province is more likely to be unitemporal than that involving two different

provinces, as Sight and Hearing. But it is impossible to perceive two objects

coinstantaneously  in  the  same  sensory  act  unless  they  have  been  mixed,

[when, however, they are no longer two], for their amalgamation involves

their becoming one, and the sensory act related to one object is itself one, and

such act, when one, is, of course, coinstantaneous with itself. Hence, when

things are mixed we of necessity perceive them coinstantaneously: for we

perceive them by a perception actually one. For an object numerically one

means  that  which  is  perceived  by  a  perception  actually  one,  whereas  an

object  specifically  one  means  that  which  is  perceived  by  a  sensory  act

potentially one [i.e. by an energeia of the same sensuous faculty]. If then the

actualized perception is one, it will declare its data to be one object; they

must, therefore, have been mixed. Accordingly, when they have not been

mixed, the actualized perceptions which perceive them will be two; but [if so,

their perception must be successive not coinstantaneous, for] in one and the

same faculty the perception actualized at any single moment is necessarily

one, only one stimulation or exertion of a single faculty being possible at a

single instant, and in the case supposed here the faculty is one. It follows,

therefore, that we cannot conceive the possibility of perceiving two distinct

objects coinstantaneously with one and the same sense.

But if it be thus impossible to perceive coinstantaneously two objects in

the same province of sense if they are really two, manifestly it is still less

conceivable  that  we  should  perceive  coinstantaneously  objects  in  twodifferent sensory provinces, as White and Sweet. For it appears that when the

Soul predicates numerical unity it does so in virtue of nothing else than such

coinstantaneous perception [of one object, in one instant, by one energeia]:

while it predicates specific unity in virtue of [the unity of] the discriminating

faculty of sense together with [the unity of] the mode in which this operates.

What I mean, for example, is this; the same sense no doubt discerns White

and Black, [which are hence generically one] though specifically different

from one another, and so, too, a faculty of sense self-identical, but different

from the former, discerns Sweet and Bitter; but while both these faculties

differ from one another [and each from itself] in their modes of discerning

either of their respective contraries, yet in perceiving the co-ordinates in each

province they proceed in manners analogous to one another; for instance, as

Taste perceives Sweet, so Sight perceives White; and as the latter perceives

Black, so the former perceives Bitter.

  Again,  if  the  stimuli  of  sense  derived  from  Contraries  are  themselves

Contrary, and if Contraries cannot be conceived as subsisting together in the

same individual subject, and if Contraries, e.g. Sweet and Bitter, come under

one and the same sense-faculty, we must conclude that it is impossible to

discern them coinstantaneously. It is likewise clearly impossible so to discern

such homogeneous sensibles as are not [indeed] Contrary, [but are yet of

different  species].  For  these  are,  [in  the  sphere  of  colour,  for  instance],

classed some with White, others with Black, and so it is, likewise, in the

other  provinces  of  sense;  for  example,  of  savours,  some  are  classed  with

Sweet,  and  others  with  Bitter.  Nor  can  one  discern  the  components  in

compounds coinstantaneously (for these are ratios of Contraries, as e.g. the

Octave or the Fifth); unless, indeed, on condition of perceiving them as one.

For thus, and not otherwise, the ratios of the extreme sounds are compounded

into one ratio: since we should have together the ratio, on the one hand, of

Many to Few or of Odd to Even, on the other, that of Few to Many or of

Even to Odd [and these, to be perceived together, must be unified].

If,  then,  the  sensibles  denominated  co-ordinates  though  in  different

provinces  of  sense  (e.g.  I  call  Sweet  and  White  co-ordinates  though  in

different provinces) stand yet more aloof, and differ more, from one another

than do any sensibles in the same province; while Sweet differs from White

even more than Black does from White, it is still less conceivable that one

should discern them [viz. sensibles in different sensory provinces whether co-

ordinates  or  not]  coinstantaneously  than  sensibles  which  are  in  the  sameprovince. Therefore, if coinstantaneous perception of the latter be impossible,

that of the former is a fortiori impossible.

  Some of the writers who treat of concords assert that the sounds combined

in these do not reach us simultaneously, but only appear to do so, their real

successiveness being unnoticed whenever the time it involves is [so small as

to be] imperceptible. Is this true or not? One might perhaps, following this

up, go so far as to say that even the current opinion that one sees and hears

coinstantaneously is due merely to the fact that the intervals of time [between

the really successive perceptions of sight and hearing] escape observation.

But this can scarcely be true, nor is it conceivable that any portion of time

should  be  [absolutely]  imperceptible,  or  that  any  should  be  absolutely

unnoticeable; the truth being that it is possible to perceive every instant of

time. [This is so]; because, if it is inconceivable that a person should, while

perceiving  himself  or  aught  else  in  a  continuous  time,  be  at  any  instant

unaware of his own existence; while, obviously, the assumption, that there is

in  the  time-continuum  a  time  so  small  as  to  be  absolutely  imperceptible,

carries the implication that a person would, during such time, be unaware of

his own existence, as well as of his seeing and perceiving; [this assumption

must be false].

  Again,  if  there  is  any  magnitude,  whether  time  or  thing,  absolutely

imperceptible owing to its smallness, it follows that there would not be either

a thing which one perceives, or a time in which one perceives it, unless in the

sense that in some part of the given time he sees some part of the given thing.

For  [let  there  be  a  line  ab,  divided  into  two  parts  at  g,  and  let  this  line

represent a whole object and a corresponding whole time. Now,] if one sees

the whole line, and perceives it during a time which forms one and the same

continuum, only in the sense that he does so in some portion of this time, let

us suppose the part gb, representing a time in which by supposition he was

perceiving nothing, cut off from the whole. Well, then, he perceives in a

certain part [viz. in the remainder] of the time, or perceives a part [viz. the

remainder] of the line, after the fashion in which one sees the whole earth by

seeing some given part of it, or walks in a year by walking in some given part

of the year. But [by hypothesis] in the part bg he perceives nothing: therefore,

in fact, he is said to perceive the whole object and during the whole time

simply because he perceives [some part of the object] in some part of the time

ab.  But  the  same  argument  holds  also  in  the  case  of  ag  [the  remainder,

regarded in its turn as a whole]; for it will be found [on this theory of vacanttimes and imperceptible magnitudes] that one always perceives only in some

part  of  a  given  whole  time,  and  perceives  only  some  part  of  a  whole

magnitude, and that it is impossible to perceive any [really] whole [object in a

really  whole  time;  a  conclusion  which  is  absurd,  as  it  would  logically

annihilate the perception of both Objects and Time].

  Therefore we must conclude that all magnitudes are perceptible, but their

actual  dimensions  do  not  present  themselves  immediately  in  their

presentation as objects. One sees the sun, or a four-cubit rod at a distance, as

a  magnitude,  but  their  exact  dimensions  are  not  given  in  their  visual

presentation: nay, at times an object of sight appears indivisible, but [vision

like  other  special  senses,  is  fallible  respecting  ‘common  sensibles’,  e.g.

magnitude, and] nothing that one sees is really indivisible. The reason of this

has been previously explained. It is clear then, from the above arguments,

that no portion of time is imperceptible.

But we must here return to the question proposed above for discussion,

whether  it  is  possible  or  impossible  to  perceive  several  objects

coinstantaneously;  by  ‘coinstantaneously’  I  mean  perceiving  the  several

objects in a time one and indivisible relatively to one another, i.e. indivisible

in a sense consistent with its being all a continuum.

First, then, is it conceivable that one should perceive the different things

coinstantaneously, but each with a different part of the Soul? Or [must we

object] that, in the first place, to begin with the objects of one and the same

sense, e.g. Sight, if we assume it [the Soul qua exercising Sight] to perceive

one colour with one part, and another colour with a different part, it will have

a plurality of parts the same in species, [as they must be,] since the objects

which it thus perceives fall within the same genus?

  Should any one [to illustrate how the Soul might have in it two different

parts specifically identical, each directed to a set of aistheta the same in genus

with that to which the other is directed] urge that, as there are two eyes, so

there may be in the Soul something analogous, [the reply is] that of the eyes,

doubtless,  some  one  organ  is  formed,  and  hence  their  actualization  in

perception is one; but if this is so in the Soul, then, in so far as what is formed

of both [i.e. of any two specifically identical parts as assumed] is one, the true

perceiving  subject  also  will  be  one,  [and  the  contradictory  of  the  above

hypothesis  (of  different  parts  of  Soul  remaining  engaged  in  simultaneous

perception with one sense) is what emerges from the analogy]; while if the

two parts of Soul remain separate, the analogy of the eyes will fail, [for ofthese some one is really formed].

  Furthermore, [on the supposition of the need of different parts of Soul, co-

operating in each sense, to discern different objects coinstantaneously], the

senses will be each at the same time one and many, as if we should say that

they were each a set of diverse sciences; for neither will an ‘activity’ exist

without its proper faculty, nor without activity will there be sensation.

But if the Soul does not, in the way suggested [i.e. with different parts of

itself acting simultaneously], perceive in one and the same individual time

sensibles of the same sense, a fortiori it is not thus that it perceives sensibles

of different senses. For it is, as already stated, more conceivable that it should

perceive a plurality of the former together in this way than a plurality of

heterogeneous objects.

If then, as is the fact, the Soul with one part perceives Sweet, with another,

White, either that which results from these is some one part, or else there is

no such one resultant. But there must be such an one, inasmuch as the general

faculty  of  sense-perception  is  one.  What  one  object,  then,  does  that  one

faculty [when perceiving an object, e.g. as both White and Sweet] perceive?

[None];  for  assuredly  no  one  object  arises  by  composition  of  these

[heterogeneous  objects,  such  as  White  and  Sweet].  We  must  conclude,

therefore, that there is, as has been stated before, some one faculty in the soul

with  which  the  latter  perceives  all  its  percepts,  though  it  perceives  each

different genus of sensibles through a different organ.

May we not, then, conceive this faculty which perceives White and Sweet

to  be  one  qua  indivisible  [sc.  qua  combining  its  different  simultaneous

objects] in its actualization, but different, when it has become divisible [sc.

qua distinguishing its different simultaneous objects] in its actualization?

Or is what occurs in the case of the perceiving Soul conceivably analogous

to what holds true in that of the things themselves? For the same numerically

one  thing  is  white  and  sweet,  and  has  many  other  qualities,  [while  its

numerical  oneness  is  not  thereby  prejudiced]  if  the  fact  is  not  that  the

qualities are really separable in the object from one another, but that the being

of  each  quality  is  different  [from  that  of  every  other].  In  the  same  way

therefore we must assume also, in the case of the Soul, that the faculty of

perception in general is in itself numerically one and the same, but different

[differentiated] in its being; different, that is to say, in genus as regards some

of its objects, in species as regards others. Hence too, we may conclude that

one  can  perceive  [numerically  different  objects]  coinstantaneously  with  afaculty  which  is  numerically  one  and  the  same,  but  not  the  same  in  its

relationship [sc. according as the objects to which it is directed are not the

same].

That every sensible object is a magnitude, and that nothing which it is

possible to perceive is indivisible, may be thus shown. The distance whence

an object could not be seen is indeterminate, but that whence it is visible is

determinate. We may say the same of the objects of Smelling and Hearing,

and of all sensibles not discerned by actual contact. Now, there is, in the

interval of distance, some extreme place, the last from which the object is

invisible, and the first from which it is visible. This place, beyond which if

the object be one cannot perceive it, while if the object be on the hither side

one must perceive it, is, I presume, itself necessarily indivisible. Therefore, if

any sensible object be indivisible, such object, if set in the said extreme place

whence imperceptibility ends and perceptibility begins, will have to be both

visible and invisible their objects, whether regarded in general or at the same

time; but this is impossible.

This concludes our survey of the characteristics of the organs of Sense-

perception and their objects, whether regarded in general or in relation to

each organ. Of the remaining subjects, we must first consider that of memory

and remembering.                      On Memory and Reminiscence


Translated by J. I. Beare


<

div id="chapter1" class="chapter" title="On Memory and Reminiscence">


1


We  have,  in  the  next  place,  to  treat  of  Memory  and  Remembering,

considering  its  nature,  its  cause,  and  the  part  of  the  soul  to  which  this

experience, as well as that of Recollecting, belongs. For the persons who

possess a retentive memory are not identical with those who excel in power

of recollection; indeed, as a rule, slow people have a good memory, whereas

those who are quick-witted and clever are better at recollecting.

We must first form a true conception of these objects of memory, a point

on  which  mistakes  are  often  made.  Now  to  remember  the  future  is  not

possible, but this is an object of opinion or expectation (and indeed there

might be actually a science of expectation, like that of divination, in which

some believe); nor is there memory of the present, but only sense-perception.

For by the latter we know not the future, nor the past, but the present only.

But memory relates to the past. No one would say that he remembers the

present, when it is present, e.g. a given white object at the moment when he

sees  it;  nor  would  one  say  that  he  remembers  an  object  of  scientific

contemplation at the moment when he is actually contemplating it, and has it

full before his mind;-of the former he would say only that he perceives it, of

the latter only that he knows it. But when one has scientific knowledge, or

perception, apart from the actualizations of the faculty concerned, he thus

‘remembers’ (that the angles of a triangle are together equal to two right

angles); as to the former, that he learned it, or thought it out for himself, as to

the latter, that he heard, or saw, it, or had some such sensible experience of it.

For whenever one exercises the faculty of remembering, he must say within

himself, ‘I formerly heard (or otherwise perceived) this,’ or ‘I formerly had

this thought’.

  Memory is, therefore, neither Perception nor Conception, but a state oraffection of one of these, conditioned by lapse of time. As already observed,

there is no such thing as memory of the present while present, for the present

is object only of perception, and the future, of expectation, but the object of

memory  is  the  past.  All  memory,  therefore,  implies  a  time  elapsed;

consequently  only  those  animals  which  perceive  time  remember,  and  the

organ whereby they perceive time is also that whereby they remember.

The subject of ‘presentation’ has been already considered in our work On

the Soul. Without a presentation intellectual activity is impossible. For there

is in such activity an incidental affection identical with one also incidental in

geometrical demonstrations. For in the latter case, though we do not for the

purpose of the proof make any use of the fact that the quantity in the triangle

(for example, which we have drawn) is determinate, we nevertheless draw it

determinate in quantity. So likewise when one exerts the intellect (e.g. on the

subject of first principles), although the object may not be quantitative, one

envisages it as quantitative, though he thinks it in abstraction from quantity;

while, on the other hand, if the object of the intellect is essentially of the class

of things that are quantitative, but indeterminate, one envisages it as if it had

determinate quantity, though subsequently, in thinking it, he abstracts from

its  determinateness.  Why  we  cannot  exercise  the  intellect  on  any  object

absolutely apart from the continuous, or apply it even to non-temporal things

unless in connexion with time, is another question. Now, one must cognize

magnitude and motion by means of the same faculty by which one cognizes

time (i.e. by that which is also the faculty of memory), and the presentation

(involved in such cognition) is an affection of the sensus communis; whence

this follows, viz. that the cognition of these objects (magnitude, motion time)

is  effected  by  the  (said  sensus  communis,  i.e.  the)  primary  faculty  of

perception.  Accordingly,  memory  (not  merely  of  sensible,  but)  even  of

intellectual objects involves a presentation: hence we may conclude that it

belongs to the faculty of intelligence only incidentally, while directly and

essentially it belongs to the primary faculty of sense-perception.

  Hence not only human beings and the beings which possess opinion or

intelligence, but also certain other animals, possess memory. If memory were

a function of (pure) intellect, it would not have been as it is an attribute of

many  of  the  lower  animals,  but  probably,  in  that  case,  no  mortal  beings

would have had memory; since, even as the case stands, it is not an attribute

of  them  all,  just  because  all  have  not  the  faculty  of  perceiving  time.

Whenever  one  actually  remembers  having  seen  or  heard,  or  learned,something,  he  includes  in  this  act  (as  we  have  already  observed)  the

consciousness of ‘formerly’; and the distinction of ‘former’ and ‘latter’ is a

distinction in time.

  Accordingly if asked, of which among the parts of the soul memory is a

function, we reply: manifestly of that part to which ‘presentation’ appertains;

and all objects capable of being presented (viz. aistheta) are immediately and

properly  objects  of  memory,  while  those  (viz.  noeta)  which  necessarily

involve (but only involve) presentation are objects of memory incidentally.

One  might  ask  how  it  is  possible  that  though  the  affection  (the

presentation)  alone  is  present,  and  the  (related)  fact  absent,  the  latter-that

which is not present-is remembered. (The question arises), because it is clear

that we must conceive that which is generated through sense-perception in

the  sentient  soul,  and  in  the  part  of  the  body  which  is  its  seat-viz.  that

affection  the  state  whereof  we  call  memory-to  be  some  such  thing  as  a

picture. The process of movement (sensory stimulation) involved the act of

perception stamps in, as it were, a sort of impression of the percept, just as

persons do who make an impression with a seal. This explains why, in those

who  are  strongly  moved  owing  to  passion,  or  time  of  life,  no  mnemonic

impression  is  formed;  just  as  no  impression  would  be  formed  if  the

movement of the seal were to impinge on running water; while there are

others in whom, owing to the receiving surface being frayed, as happens to

(the stucco on) old (chamber) walls, or owing to the hardness of the receiving

surface, the requisite impression is not implanted at all. Hence both very

young and very old persons are defective in memory; they are in a state of

flux, the former because of their growth, the latter, owing to their decay. In

like manner, also, both those who are too quick and those who are too slow

have bad memories. The former are too soft, the latter too hard (in the texture

of their receiving organs), so that in the case of the former the presented

image (though imprinted) does not remain in the soul, while on the latter it is

not imprinted at all.

But then, if this truly describes what happens in the genesis of memory,

(the question stated above arises:) when one remembers, is it this impressed

affection that he remembers, or is it the objective thing from which this was

derived? If the former, it would follow that we remember nothing which is

absent; if the latter, how is it possible that, though perceiving directly only

the impression, we remember that absent thing which we do not perceive?

Granted  that  there  is  in  us  something  like  an  impression  or  picture,  whyshould the perception of the mere impression be memory of something else,

instead  of  being  related  to  this  impression  alone?  For  when  one  actually

remembers,  this  impression  is  what  he  contemplates,  and  this  is  what  he

perceives. How then does he remember what is not present? One might as

well suppose it possible also to see or hear that which is not present. In reply,

we suggest that this very thing is quite conceivable, nay, actually occurs in

experience. A picture painted on a panel is at once a picture and a likeness:

that is, while one and the same, it is both of these, although the ‘being’ of

both is not the same, and one may contemplate it either as a picture, or as a

likeness.  Just  in  the  same  way  we  have  to  conceive  that  the  mnemonic

presentation within us is something which by itself is merely an object of

contemplation, while, in-relation to something else, it is also a presentation of

that other thing. In so far as it is regarded in itself, it is only an object of

contemplation,  or  a  presentation;  but  when  considered  as  relative  to

something  else,  e.g.  as  its  likeness,  it  is  also  a  mnemonic  token.  Hence,

whenever  the  residual  sensory  process  implied  by  it  is  actualized  in

consciousness, if the soul perceives this in so far as it is something absolute,

it appears to occur as a mere thought or presentation; but if the soul perceives

it  qua  related  to  something  else,  then,-just  as  when  one  contemplates  the

painting  in  the  picture  as  being  a  likeness,  and  without  having  (at  the

moment) seen the actual Koriskos, contemplates it as a likeness of Koriskos,

and  in  that  case  the  experience  involved  in  this  contemplation  of  it  (as

relative) is different from what one has when he contemplates it simply as a

painted figure-(so in the case of memory we have the analogous difference

for), of the objects in the soul, the one (the unrelated object) presents itself

simply as a thought, but the other (the related object) just because, as in the

painting, it is a likeness, presents itself as a mnemonic token.

We can now understand why it is that sometimes, when we have such

processes, based on some former act of perception, occurring in the soul, we

do  not  know  whether  this  really  implies  our  having  had  perceptions

corresponding to them, and we doubt whether the case is or is not one of

memory. But occasionally it happens that (while thus doubting) we get a

sudden idea and recollect that we heard or saw something formerly. This

(occurrence of the ‘sudden idea’) happens whenever, from contemplating a

mental object as absolute, one changes his point of view, and regards it as

relative to something else.

The opposite (sc. to the case of those who at first do not recognize theirphantasms as mnemonic) also occurs, as happened in the cases of Antipheron

of  Oreus  and  others  suffering  from  mental  derangement;  for  they  were

accustomed  to  speak  of  their  mere  phantasms  as  facts  of  their  past

experience,  and  as  if  remembering  them.  This  takes  place  whenever  one

contemplates what is not a likeness as if it were a likeness.

  Mnemonic  exercises  aim  at  preserving  one’s  memory  of  something  by

repeatedly reminding him of it; which implies nothing else (on the learner’s

part)  than  the  frequent  contemplation  of  something  (viz.  the  ‘mnemonic’,

whatever it may be) as a likeness, and not as out of relation.

As regards the question, therefore, what memory or remembering is, it has

now been shown that it is the state of a presentation, related as a likeness to

that of which it is a presentation; and as to the question of which of the

faculties within us memory is a function, (it has been shown) that it is a

function  of  the  primary  faculty  of  sense-perception,  i.e.  of  that  faculty

whereby we perceive time.

<

div id="section2" class="section" title="2">


2


Next comes the subject of Recollection, in dealing with which we must

assume  as  fundamental  the  truths  elicited  above  in  our  introductory

discussions. For recollection is not the ‘recovery’ or ‘acquisition’ of memory;

since at the instant when one at first learns (a fact of science) or experiences

(a  particular  fact  of  sense),  he  does  not  thereby  ‘recover’  a  memory,

inasmuch as none has preceded, nor does he acquire one ab initio. It is only at

the instant when the aforesaid state or affection (of the aisthesis or upolepsis)

is implanted in the soul that memory exists, and therefore memory is not

itself  implanted  concurrently  with  the  continuous  implantation  of  the

(original) sensory experience.

  Further:  at  the  very  individual  and  concluding  instant  when  first  (the

sensory experience or scientific knowledge) has been completely implanted,

there is then already established in the person affected the (sensory) affection,

or  the  scientific  knowledge  (if  one  ought  to  apply  the  term  ‘scientific

knowledge’ to the (mnemonic) state or affection; and indeed one may well

remember,  in  the  ‘incidental’  sense,  some  of  the  things  (i.e.  ta  katholou)

which are properly objects of scientific knowledge); but to remember, strictlyand properly speaking, is an activity which will not be immanent until the

original experience has undergone lapse of time. For one remembers now

what one saw or otherwise experienced formerly; the moment of the original

experience and the moment of the memory of it are never identical.

  Again, (even when time has elapsed, and one can be said really to have

acquired  memory,  this  is  not  necessarily  recollection,  for  firstly)  it  is

obviously possible, without any present act of recollection, to remember as a

continued  consequence  of  the  original  perception  or  other  experience;

whereas when (after an interval of obliviscence) one recovers some scientific

knowledge  which  he  had  before,  or  some  perception,  or  some  other

experience, the state of which we above declared to be memory, it is then,

and then only, that this recovery may amount to a recollection of any of the

things  aforesaid.  But,  (though  as  observed  above,  remembering  does  not

necessarily  imply  recollecting),  recollecting  always  implies  remembering,

and actualized memory follows (upon the successful act of recollecting).

But secondly, even the assertion that recollection is the reinstatement in

consciousness  of  something  which  was  there  before  but  had  disappeared

requires qualification. This assertion may be true, but it may also be false; for

the same person may twice learn (from some teacher), or twice discover (i.e.

excogitate), the same fact. Accordingly, the act of recollecting ought (in its

definition) to be distinguished from these acts; i.e. recollecting must imply in

those who recollect the presence of some spring over and above that from

which they originally learn.

Acts of recollection, as they occur in experience, are due to the fact that

one movement has by nature another that succeeds it in regular order.

If this order be necessary, whenever a subject experiences the former of

two movements thus connected, it will (invariably) experience the latter; if,

however, the order be not necessary, but customary, only in the majority of

cases will the subject experience the latter of the two movements. But it is a

fact that there are some movements, by a single experience of which persons

take the impress of custom more deeply than they do by experiencing others

many times; hence upon seeing some things but once we remember them

better than others which we may have been frequently.

  Whenever therefore, we are recollecting, we are experiencing certain of the

antecedent  movements  until  finally  we  experience  the  one  after  which

customarily comes that which we seek. This explains why we hunt up the

series (of kineseis) having started in thought either from a present intuition orsome other, and from something either similar, or contrary, to what we seek,

or else from that which is contiguous with it. Such is the empirical ground of

the process of recollection; for the mnemonic movements involved in these

starting-points  are  in  some  cases  identical,  in  others,  again,  simultaneous,

with those of the idea we seek, while in others they comprise a portion of

them,  so  that  the  remnant  which  one  experienced  after  that  portion  (and

which still requires to be excited in memory) is comparatively small.

  Thus, then, it is that persons seek to recollect, and thus, too, it is that they

recollect even without the effort of seeking to do so, viz. when the movement

implied in recollection has supervened on some other which is its condition.

For, as a rule, it is when antecedent movements of the classes here described

have first been excited, that the particular movement implied in recollection

follows. We need not examine a series of which the beginning and end lie far

apart, in order to see how (by recollection) we remember; one in which they

lie near one another will serve equally well. For it is clear that the method is

in each case the same, that is, one hunts up the objective series, without any

previous search or previous recollection. For (there is, besides the natural

order, viz. the order of the pralmata, or events of the primary experience, also

a customary order, and) by the effect of custom the mnemonic movements

tend to succeed one another in a certain order. Accordingly, therefore, when

one  wishes  to  recollect,  this  is  what  he  will  do:  he  will  try  to  obtain  a

beginning  of  movement  whose  sequel  shall  be  the  movement  which  he

desires  to  reawaken.  This  explains  why  attempts  at  recollection  succeed

soonest and best when they start from a beginning (of some objective series).

For, in order of succession, the mnemonic movements are to one another as

the  objective  facts  (from  which  they  are  derived).  Accordingly,  things

arranged in a fixed order, like the successive demonstrations in geometry, are

easy  to  remember  (or  recollect)  while  badly  arranged  subjects  are

remembered with difficulty.

  Recollecting  differs  also  in  this  respect  from  relearning,  that  one  who

recollects will be able, somehow, to move, solely by his own effort, to the

term next after the starting-point. When one cannot do this of himself, but

only  by  external  assistance,  he  no  longer  remembers  (i.e.  he  has  totally

forgotten, and therefore of course cannot recollect). It often happens that,

though a person cannot recollect at the moment, yet by seeking he can do so,

and discovers what he seeks. This he succeeds in doing by setting up many

movements, until finally he excites one of a kind which will have for itssequel  the  fact  he  wishes  to  recollect.  For  remembering  (which  is  the

condicio sine qua non of recollecting) is the existence, potentially, in the

mind of a movement capable of stimulating it to the desired movement, and

this,  as  has  been  said,  in  such  a  way  that  the  person  should  be  moved

(prompted  to  recollection)  from  within  himself,  i.e.  in  consequence  of

movements wholly contained within himself.

But  one  must  get  hold  of  a  starting-point.  This  explains  why  it  is  that

persons are supposed to recollect sometimes by starting from mnemonic loci.

The cause is that they pass swiftly in thought from one point to another, e.g.

from milk to white, from white to mist, and thence to moist, from which one

remembers Autumn (the ‘season of mists’), if this be the season he is trying

to recollect.

It seems true in general that the middle point also among all things is a

good mnemonic starting-point from which to reach any of them. For if one

does not recollect before, he will do so when he has come to this, or, if not,

nothing can help him; as, e.g. if one were to have in mind the numerical

series denoted by the symbols A, B, G, D, E, Z, I, H, O. For, if he does not

remember what he wants at E, then at E he remembers O; because from E

movement in either direction is possible, to D or to Z. But, if it is not for one

of these that he is searching, he will remember (what he is searching for)

when he has come to G if he is searching for H or I. But if (it is) not (for H or

I that he is searching, but for one of the terms that remain), he will remember

by going to A, and so in all cases (in which one starts from a middle point).

The  cause  of  one’s  sometimes  recollecting  and  sometimes  not,  though

starting  from  the  same  point,  is,  that  from  the  same  starting-point  a

movement can be made in several directions, as, for instance, from G to I or

to D. If, then, the mind has not (when starting from E) moved in an old path

(i.e. one in which it moved first having the objective experience, and that,

therefore, in which un-’ethized’ phusis would have it again move), it tends to

move to the more customary; for (the mind having, by chance or otherwise,

missed moving in the ‘old’ way) Custom now assumes the role of Nature.

Hence the rapidity with which we recollect what we frequently think about.

For  as  regular  sequence  of  events  is  in  accordance  with  nature,  so,  too,

regular  sequence  is  observed  in  the  actualization  of  kinesis  (in

consciousness),  and  here  frequency  tends  to  produce  (the  regularity  of)

nature. And since in the realm of nature occurrences take place which are

even  contrary  to  nature,  or  fortuitous,  the  same  happens  a  fortiori  in  thesphere swayed by custom, since in this sphere natural law is not similarly

established. Hence it is that (from the same starting-point) the mind receives

an impulse to move sometimes in the required direction, and at other times

otherwise,  (doing  the  latter)  particularly  when  something  else  somehow

deflects the mind from the right direction and attracts it to itself. This last

consideration explains too how it happens that, when we want to remember a

name, we remember one somewhat like it, indeed, but blunder in reference to

(i.e. in pronouncing) the one we intended.

  Thus, then, recollection takes place.

But the point of capital importance is that (for the purpose of recollection)

one should cognize, determinately or indeterminately, the time-relation (of

that  which  he  wishes  to  recollect).  There  is,-let  it  be  taken  as  a  fact,-

something by which one distinguishes a greater and a smaller time; and it is

reasonable to think that one does this in a way analogous to that in which one

discerns  (spacial)  magnitudes.  For  it  is  not  by  the  mind’s  reaching  out

towards them, as some say a visual ray from the eye does (in seeing), that one

thinks of large things at a distance in space (for even if they are not there, one

may  similarly  think  them);  but  one  does  so  by  a  proportionate  mental

movement. For there are in the mind the like figures and movements (i.e.

‘like’ to those of objects and events). Therefore, when one thinks the greater

objects, in what will his thinking those differ from his thinking the smaller?

(In  nothing,)  because  all  the  internal  though  smaller  are  as  it  were

proportional  to  the  external.  Now,  as  we  may  assume  within  a  person

something proportional to the forms (of distant magnitudes), so, too, we may

doubtless  assume  also  something  else  proportional  to  their  distances.  As,

therefore, if one has (psychically) the movement in AB, BE, he constructs in

thought  (i.e.  knows  objectively)  GD,  since  AG  and  GD  bear  equal  ratios

respectively (to AB and BE), (so he who recollects also proceeds). Why then

does he construct GD rather than ZH? Is it not because as AG is to AB, so is

O  to  I?  These  movements  therefore  (sc.  in  AB,  BE,  and  in  O:I)  he  has

simultaneously. But if he wishes to construct to thought ZH, he has in mind

BE in like manner as before (when constructing GD), but now, instead of (the

movements of the ratio) O:I, he has in mind (those of the ratio K:L; for

K:L::ZA:BA. (See diagram.)

When,  therefore,  the  ‘movement’  corresponding  to  the  object  and  that

corresponding  to  its  time  concur,  then  one  actually  remembers.  If  one

supposes (himself to move in these different but concurrent ways) withoutreally doing so, he supposes himself to remember.

For one may be mistaken, and think that he remembers when he really

does not. But it is not possible, conversely, that when one actually remembers

he  should  not  suppose  himself  to  remember,  but  should  remember

unconsciously. For remembering, as we have conceived it, essentially implies

consciousness  of  itself.  If,  however,  the  movement  corresponding  to  the

objective fact takes place without that corresponding to the time, or, if the

latter takes place without the former, one does not remember.

The  movement  answering  to  the  time  is  of  two  kinds.  Sometimes  in

remembering a fact one has no determinate time-notion of it, no such notion

as that e.g. he did something or other on the day before yesterday; while in

other cases he has a determinate notion-of the time. Still, even though one

does  not  remember  with  actual  determination  of  the  time,  he  genuinely

remembers,  none  the  less.  Persons  are  wont  to  say  that  they  remember

(something), but yet do not know when (it occurred, as happens) whenever

they  do  not  know  determinately  the  exact  length  of  time  implied  in  the

‘when’.

It has been already stated that those who have a good memory are not

identical with those who are quick at recollecting. But the act of recollecting

differs from that of remembering, not only chronologically, but also in this,

that many also of the other animals (as well as man) have memory, but, of all

that we are acquainted with, none, we venture to say, except man, shares in

the faculty of recollection. The cause of this is that recollection is, as it were a

mode of inference. For he who endeavours to recollect infers that he formerly

saw, or heard, or had some such experience, and the process (by which he

succeeds  in  recollecting)  is,  as  it  were,  a  sort  of  investigation.  But  to

investigate in this way belongs naturally to those animals alone which are

also endowed with the faculty of deliberation; (which proves what was said

above), for deliberation is a form of inference.

That the affection is corporeal, i.e. that recollection is a searching for an

‘image’ in a corporeal substrate, is proved by the fact that in some persons,

when,  despite  the  most  strenuous  application  of  thought,  they  have  been

unable to recollect, it (viz. the anamnesis = the effort at recollection) excites a

feeling  of  discomfort,  which,  even  though  they  abandon  the  effort  at

recollection,  persists  in  them  none  the  less;  and  especially  in  persons  of

melancholic  temperament.  For  these  are  most  powerfully  moved  by

presentations.  The  reason  why  the  effort  of  recollection  is  not  under  thecontrol of their will is that, as those who throw a stone cannot stop it at their

will when thrown, so he who tries to recollect and ‘hunts’ (after an idea) sets

up a process in a material part, (that) in which resides the affection. Those

who have moisture around that part which is the centre of sense-perception

suffer most discomfort of this kind. For when once the moisture has been set

in motion it is not easily brought to rest, until the idea which was sought for

has again presented itself, and thus the movement has found a straight course.

For a similar reason bursts of anger or fits of terror, when once they have

excited  such  motions,  are  not  at  once  allayed,  even  though  the  angry  or

terrified persons (by efforts of will) set up counter motions, but the passions

continue to move them on, in the same direction as at first, in opposition to

such counter motions. The affection resembles also that in the case of words,

tunes, or sayings, whenever one of them has become inveterate on the lips.

People  give  them  up  and  resolve  to  avoid  them;  yet  again  they  find

themselves humming the forbidden air, or using the prohibited word. Those

whose upper parts are abnormally large, as. is the case with dwarfs, have

abnormally weak memory, as compared with their opposites, because of the

great  weight  which  they  have  resting  upon  the  organ  of  perception,  and

because their mnemonic movements are, from the very first, not able to keep

true to a course, but are dispersed, and because, in the effort at recollection,

these movements do not easily find a direct onward path. Infants and very old

persons have bad memories, owing to the amount of movement going on

within them; for the latter are in process of rapid decay, the former in process

of  vigorous  growth;  and  we  may  add  that  children,  until  considerably

advanced in years, are dwarf-like in their bodily structure. Such then is our

theory as regards memory and remembering their nature, and the particular

organ of the soul by which animals remember; also as regards recollection, its

formal definition, and the manner and causes-of its performance.                        On Sleep and Sleeplessness


Translated by J. I. Beare


<

div class="chapter">


1


  With regard to sleep and waking, we must consider what they are: whether

they are peculiar to soul or to body, or common to both; and if common, to

what part of soul or body they appertain: further, from what cause it arises

that they are attributes of animals, and whether all animals share in them

both, or some partake of the one only, others of the other only, or some

partake of neither and some of both.

  Further,  in  addition  to  these  questions,  we  must  also  inquire  what  the

dream is, and from what cause sleepers sometimes dream, and sometimes do

not; or whether the truth is that sleepers always dream but do not always

remember (their dream); and if this occurs, what its explanation is.

  Again, [we must inquire] whether it is possible or not to foresee the future

(in dreams), and if it be possible, in what manner; further, whether, supposing

it possible, it extends only to things to be accomplished by the agency of

Man, or to those also of which the cause lies in supra-human agency, and

which result from the workings of Nature, or of Spontaneity.

First, then, this much is clear, that waking and sleep appertain to the same

part of an animal, inasmuch as they are opposites, and sleep is evidently a

privation of waking. For contraries, in natural as well as in all other matters,

are  seen  always  to  present  themselves  in  the  same  subject,  and  to  be

affections  of  the  same:  examples  are-health  and  sickness,  beauty  and

ugliness, strength and weakness, sight and blindness, hearing and deafness.

This is also clear from the following considerations. The criterion by which

we know the waking person to be awake is identical with that by which we

know the sleeper to be asleep; for we assume that one who is exercising

sense-perception is awake, and that every one who is awake perceives either

some external movement or else some movement in his own consciousness.If waking, then, consists in nothing else than the exercise of sense-perception,

the inference is clear, that the organ, in virtue of which animals perceive, is

that  by  which  they  wake,  when  they  are  awake,  or  sleep,  when  they  are

awake, or sleep, when they are asleep.

But since the exercise of sense-perception does not belong to soul or body

exclusively, then (since the subject of actuality is in every case identical with

that  of  potentiality,  and  what  is  called  sense-perception,  as  actuality,  is  a

movement of the soul through the body) it is clear that its affection is not an

affection of soul exclusively, and that a soulless body has not the potentiality

of perception. [Thus sleep and waking are not attributes of pure intelligence,

on the one hand, or of inanimate bodies, on the other.]

Now, whereas we have already elsewhere distinguished what are called the

parts of the soul, and whereas the nutrient is, in all living bodies, capable of

existing without the other parts, while none of the others can exist without the

nutrient; it is clear that sleep and waking are not affections of such living

things as partake only of growth and decay, e.g. not of plants, because these

have not the faculty of sense-perception, whether or not this be capable of

separate existence; in its potentiality, indeed, and in its relationships, it is

separable.

  Likewise it is clear that [of those which either sleep or wake] there is no

animal which is always awake or always asleep, but that both these affections

belong [alternately] to the same animals. For if there be an animal not endued

with sense-perception, it is impossible that this should either sleep or wake;

since both these are affections of the activity of the primary faculty of sense-

perception. But it is equally impossible also that either of these two affections

should perpetually attach itself to the same animal, e.g. that some species of

animal should be always asleep or always awake, without intermission; for

all organs which have a natural function must lose power when they work

beyond the natural time-limit of their working period; for instance, the eyes

[must lose power] from [too long continued] seeing, and must give it up; and

so it is with the hand and every other member which has a function. Now, if

sense-perception is the function of a special organ, this also, if it continues

perceiving beyond the appointed time-limit of its continuous working period,

will lose its power, and will do its work no longer. Accordingly, if the waking

period is determined by this fact, that in it sense-perception is free; if in the

case of some contraries one of the two must be present, while in the case of

others this is not necessary; if waking is the contrary of sleeping, and one ofthese two must be present to every animal: it must follow that the state of

sleeping is necessary. Finally, if such affection is Sleep, and this is a state of

powerlessness arising from excess of waking, and excess of waking is in its

origin  sometimes  morbid,  sometimes  not,  so  that  the  powerlessness  or

dissolution of activity will be so or not; it is inevitable that every creature

which wakes must also be capable of sleeping, since it is impossible that it

should continue actualizing its powers perpetually.

So, also, it is impossible for any animal to continue always sleeping. For

sleep  is  an  affection  of  the  organ  of  sense-perception—a  sort  of  tie  or

inhibition of function imposed on it, so that every creature that sleeps must

needs have the organ of sense-perception. Now, that alone which is capable

of sense-perception in actuality has the faculty of sense-perception; but to

realize this faculty, in the proper and unqualified sense, is impossible while

one  is  asleep.  All  sleep,  therefore,  must  be  susceptible  of  awakening.

Accordingly, almost all other animals are clearly observed to partake in sleep,

whether they are aquatic, aerial, or terrestrial, since fishes of all kinds, and

molluscs, as well as all others which have eyes, have been seen sleeping.

‘Hard-eyed’ creatures and insects manifestly assume the posture of sleep; but

the sleep of all such creatures is of brief duration, so that often it might well

baffle one’s observation to decide whether they sleep or not. Of testaceous

animals, on the contrary, no direct sensible evidence is as yet forthcoming to

determine whether they sleep, but if the above reasoning be convincing to

any one, he who follows it will admit this [viz. that they do so.]

That,  therefore,  all  animals  sleep  may  be  gathered  from  these

considerations.  For  an  animal  is  defined  as  such  by  its  possessing  sense-

perception; and we assert that sleep is, in a certain way, an inhibition of

function,  or,  as  it  were,  a  tie,  imposed  on  sense-perception,  while  its

loosening or remission constitutes the being awake. But no plant can partake

in  either  of  these  affections,  for  without  sense-perception  there  is  neither

sleeping  nor  waking.  But  creatures  which  have  sense-perception  have

likewise the feeling of pain and pleasure, while those which have these have

appetite as well; but plants have none of these affections. A mark of this is

that the nutrient part does its own work better when (the animal) is asleep

than when it is awake. Nutrition and growth are then especially promoted, a

fact which implies that creatures do not need sense-perception to assist these

processes.2


We must now proceed to inquire into the cause why one sleeps and wakes,

and into the particular nature of the sense-perception, or sense-perceptions, if

there be several, on which these affections depend. Since, then, some animals

possess all the modes of sense-perception, and some not all, not, for example,

sight,  while  all  possess  touch  and  taste,  except  such  animals  as  are

imperfectly developed, a class of which we have already treated in our work

on the soul; and since an animal when asleep is unable to exercise, in the

simple sense any particular sensory faculty whatever, it follows that in the

state called sleep the same affection must extend to all the special senses;

because, if it attaches itself to one of them but not to another, then an animal

while asleep may perceive with the latter; but this is impossible.

Now,  since  every  sense  has  something  peculiar,  and  also  something

common;  peculiar,  as,  e.g.  seeing  is  to  the  sense  of  sight,  hearing  to  the

auditory  sense,  and  so  on  with  the  other  senses  severally;  while  all  are

accompanied by a common power, in virtue whereof a person perceives that

he sees or hears (for, assuredly, it is not by the special sense of sight that one

sees that he sees; and it is not by mere taste, or sight, or both together that one

discerns, and has the faculty of discerning, that sweet things are different

from white things, but by a faculty connected in common with all the organs

of sense; for there is one sensory function, and the controlling sensory faculty

is one, though differing as a faculty of perception in relation to each genus of

sensibles, e.g. sound or colour); and since this [common sensory activity]

subsists in association chiefly with the faculty of touch (for this can exist

apart from all the other organs of sense, but none of them can exist apart from

it-a  subject  of  which  we  have  treated  in  our  speculations  concerning  the

Soul); it is therefore evident that waking and sleeping are an affection of this

[common and controlling organ of sense-perception]. This explains why they

belong to all animals, for touch [with which this common organ is chiefly

connected], alone, [is common] to all [animals].

For  if  sleeping  were  caused  by  the  special  senses  having  each  and  all

undergone some affection, it would be strange that these senses, for which it

is  neither  necessary  nor  in  a  manner  possible  to  realize  their  powers

simultaneously,  should  necessarily  all  go  idle  and  become  motionless

simultaneously. For the contrary experience, viz. that they should not go to

rest altogether, would have been more reasonably anticipated. But, accordingto the explanation just given, all is quite clear regarding those also. For, when

the sense organ which controls all the others, and to which all the others are

tributary,  has  been  in  some  way  affected,  that  these  others  should  be  all

affected  at  the  same  time  is  inevitable,  whereas,  if  one  of  the  tributaries

becomes powerless, that the controlling organ should also become powerless

need in no wise follow.

It is indeed evident from many considerations that sleep does not consist in

the mere fact that the special senses do not function or that one does not

employ them; and that it does not consist merely in an inability to exercise

the  sense-perceptions;  for  such  is  what  happens  in  cases  of  swooning.  A

swoon means just such impotence of perception, and certain other cases of

unconsciousness  also  are  of  this  nature.  Moreover,  persons  who  have  the

bloodvessels  in  the  neck  compressed  become  insensible.  But  sleep

supervenes  when  such  incapacity  of  exercise  has  neither  arisen  in  some

casual organ of sense, nor from some chance cause, but when, as has been

just  stated,  it  has  its  seat  in  the  primary  organ  with  which  one  perceives

objects in general. For when this has become powerless all the other sensory

organs also must lack power to perceive; but when one of them has become

powerless, it is not necessary for this also to lose its power.

We  must  next  state  the  cause  to  which  it  is  due,  and  its  quality  as  an

affection. Now, since there are several types of cause (for we assign equally

the ‘final’, the ‘efficient’, the ‘material’, and the ‘formal’ as causes), in the

first place, then, as we assert that Nature operates for the sake of an end, and

that this end is a good; and that to every creature which is endowed by nature

with the power to move, but cannot with pleasure to itself move always and

continuously,  rest  is  necessary  and  beneficial;  and  since,  taught  by

experience, men apply to sleep this metaphorical term, calling it a ‘rest’ [from

the strain of movement implied in sense-perception]: we conclude that its end

is  the  conservation  of  animals.  But  the  waking  state  is  for  an  animal  its

highest end, since the exercise of sense-perception or of thought is the highest

end for all beings to which either of these appertains; inasmuch as these are

best, and the highest end is what is best: whence it follows that sleep belongs

of necessity to each animal. I use the term ‘necessity’ in its conditional sense,

meaning that if an animal is to exist and have its own proper nature, it must

have certain endowments; and, if these are to belong to it, certain others

likewise must belong to it [as their condition.]

The  next  question  to  be  discussed  is  that  of  the  kind  of  movement  oraction, taking place within their bodies, from which the affection of waking

or sleeping arises in animals. Now, we must assume that the causes of this

affection in all other animals are identical with, or analogous to, those which

operate in sanguineous animals; and that the causes operating in sanguineous

animals generally are identical with those operating in man. Hence we must

consider  the  entire  subject  in  the  light  of  these  instances  [afforded  by

sanguineous  animals,  especially  man].  Now,  it  has  been  definitely  settled

already in another work that sense-perception in animals originates ill the

same  part  of  the  organism  in  which  movement  originates.  This  locus  of

origination  is  one  of  three  determinate  loci,  viz.  that  which  lies  midway

between the head and the abdomen. This is sanguineous animals is the region

of the heart; for all sanguineous animals have a heart; and from this it is that

both motion and the controlling sense-perception originate. Now, as regards

movement, it is obvious that that of breathing and of the cooling process

generally takes its rise there; and it is with a view to the conservation of the

[due amount of] heat in this part that nature has formed as she has both the

animals which respire, and those which cool themselves by moisture. Of this

[cooling process] per se we shall treat hereafter. In bloodless animals, and

insects, and such as do not respire, the ‘connatural spirit’ is seen alternately

puffed up and subsiding in the part which is in them analogous [to the region

of  the  heart  in  sanguineous  animals].  This  is  clearly  observable  in  the

holoptera [insects with undivided wings] as wasps and bees; also in flies and

such creatures. And since to move anything, or do anything, is impossible

without strength, and holding the breath produces strength-in creatures which

inhale, the holding of that breath which comes from without, but, in creatures

which do not respire, of that which is connatural (which explains why winged

insects  of  the  class  holoptera,  when  they  move,  are  perceived  to  make  a

humming noise, due to the friction of the connatural spirit colliding with the

diaphragm); and since movement is, in every animal, attended with some

sense-perception, either internal or external, in the primary organ of sense,

[we conclude] accordingly that if sleeping and waking are affections of this

organ, the place in which, or the organ in which, sleep and waking originate,

is self-evident [being that in which movement and sense-perception originate,

viz. the heart].

  Some persons move in their sleep, and perform many acts like waking acts,

but not without a phantasm or an exercise of sense-perception; for a dream is

in a certain way a sense-impression. But of them we have to speak later on.Why  it  is  that  persons  when  aroused  remember  their  dreams,  but  do  not

remember these acts which are like waking acts, has been already explained

in the work ‘Of Problems’.


3


The point for consideration next in order to the preceding is:-What are the

processes  in  which  the  affection  of  waking  and  sleeping  originates,  and

whence do they arise? Now, since it is when it has sense-perception that an

animal must first take food and receive growth, and in all cases food in its

ultimate form is, in sanguineous animals, the natural substance blood, or, in

bloodless animals, that which is analogous to this; and since the veins are the

place of the blood, while the origin of these is the heart-an assertion which is

proved by anatomy-it is manifest that, when the external nutriment enters the

parts fitted for its reception, the evaporation arising from it enters into the

veins, and there, undergoing a change, is converted into blood, and makes its

way to their source [the heart]. We have treated of all this when discussing

the subject of nutrition, but must here recapitulate what was there said, in

order that we may obtain a scientific view of the beginnings of the process,

and  come  to  know  what  exactly  happens  to  the  primary  organ  of  sense-

perception to account for the occurrence of waking and sleep. For sleep, as

has been shown, is not any given impotence of the perceptive faculty; for

unconsciousness, a certain form of asphyxia, and swooning, all produce such

impotence. Moreover it is an established fact that some persons in a profound

trance have still had the imaginative faculty in play. This last point, indeed,

gives rise to a difficulty; for if it is conceivable that one who had swooned

should in this state fall asleep, the phantasm also which then presented itself

to his mind might be regarded as a dream. Persons, too, who have fallen into

a deep trance, and have come to be regarded as dead, say many things while

in this condition. The same view, however, is to be taken of all these cases,

[i.e. that they are not cases of sleeping or dreaming].

As  we  observed  above,  sleep  is  not  co-extensive  with  any  and  every

impotence of the perceptive faculty, but this affection is one which arises

from  the  evaporation  attendant  upon  the  process  of  nutrition.  The  matter

evaporated must be driven onwards to a certain point, then turn back, and

change its current to and fro, like a tide-race in a narrow strait. Now, in every

animal the hot naturally tends to move [and carry other things] upwards, butwhen it has reached the parts above [becoming cool], it turns back again, and

moves  downwards  in  a  mass.  This  explains  why  fits  of  drowsiness  are

especially apt to come on after meals; for the matter, both the liquid and the

corporeal, which is borne upwards in a mass, is then of considerable quantity.

When, therefore, this comes to a stand it weighs a person down and causes

him to nod, but when it has actually sunk downwards, and by its return has

repulsed the hot, sleep comes on, and the animal so affected is presently

asleep. A confirmation of this appears from considering the things which

induce  sleep;  they  all,  whether  potable  or  edible,  for  instance  poppy,

mandragora,  wine,  darnel,  produce  a  heaviness  in  the  head;  and  persons

borne down [by sleepiness] and nodding [drowsily] all seem affected in this

way, i.e. they are unable to lift up the head or the eye-lids. And it is after

meals especially that sleep comes on like this, for the evaporation from the

foods  eaten  is  then  copious.  It  also  follows  certain  forms  of  fatigue;  for

fatigue operates as a solvent, and the dissolved matter acts, if not cold, like

food  prior  to  digestion.  Moreover,  some  kinds  of  illness  have  this  same

effect; those arising from moist and hot secretions, as happens with fever-

patients and in cases of lethargy. Extreme youth also has this effect; infants,

for example, sleep a great deal, because of the food being all borne upwards-a

mark whereof appears in the disproportionately large size of the upper parts

compared with the lower during infancy, which is due to the fact that growth

predominates in the direction of the former. Hence also they are subject to

epileptic seizures; for sleep is like epilepsy, and, in a sense, actually is a

seizure of this sort. Accordingly, the beginning of this malady takes place

with many during sleep, and their subsequent habitual seizures occur in sleep,

not in waking hours. For when the spirit [evaporation] moves upwards in a

volume,  on  its  return  downwards  it  distends  the  veins,  and  forcibly

compresses the passage through which respiration is effected. This explains

why  wines  are  not  good  for  infants  or  for  wet  nurses  (for  it  makes  no

difference, doubtless, whether the infants themselves, or their nurses, drink

them), but such persons should drink them [if at all] diluted with water and in

small quantity. For wine is spirituous, and of all wines the dark more so than

any other. The upper parts, in infants, are so filled with nutriment that within

five months [after birth] they do not even turn the neck [sc. to raise the head];

for in them, as in persons deeply intoxicated, there is ever a large quantity of

moisture ascending. It is reasonable, too, to think that this affection is the

cause  of  the  embryo’s  remaining  at  rest  in  the  womb  at  first.  Also,  as  ageneral rule, persons whose veins are inconspicuous, as well as those who are

dwarf-like, or have abnormally large heads, are addicted to sleep. For in the

former the veins are narrow, so that it is not easy for the moisture to flow

down through them; while in the case of dwarfs and those whose heads are

abnormally large, the impetus of the evaporation upwards is excessive. Those

[on the contrary] whose veins are large are, thanks to the easy flow through

the veins, not addicted to sleep, unless, indeed, they labour under some other

affection  which  counteracts  [this  easy  flow].  Nor  are  the  ‘atrabilious’

addicted to sleep, for in them the inward region is cooled so that the quantity

of  evaporation  in  their  case  is  not  great.  For  this  reason  they  have  large

appetites,  though  spare  and  lean;  for  their  bodily  condition  is  as  if  they

derived  no  benefit  from  what  they  eat.  The  dark  bile,  too,  being  itself

naturally cold, cools also the nutrient tract, and the other parts wheresoever

such secretion is potentially present [i.e. tends to be formed].

  Hence  it  is  plain  from  what  has  been  said  that  sleep  is  a  sort  of

concentration, or natural recoil, of the hot matter inwards [towards its centre],

due to the cause above mentioned. Hence restless movement is a marked

feature in the case of a person when drowsy. But where it [the heat in the

upper and outer parts] begins to fail, he grows cool, and owing to this cooling

process  his  eye-lids  droop.  Accordingly  [in  sleep]  the  upper  and  outward

parts are cool, but the inward and lower, i.e. the parts at the feet and in the

interior of the body, are hot.

Yet one might found a difficulty on the facts that sleep is most oppressive

in its onset after meals, and that wine, and other such things, though they

possess heating properties, are productive of sleep, for it is not probable that

sleep should be a process of cooling while the things that cause sleeping are

themselves hot. Is the explanation of this, then, to be found in the fact that, as

the  stomach  when  empty  is  hot,  while  replenishment  cools  it  by  the

movement it occasions, so the passages and tracts in the head are cooled as

the ‘evaporation’ ascends thither? Or, as those who have hot water poured on

them feel a sudden shiver of cold, just so in the case before us, may it be that,

when  the  hot  substance  ascends,  the  cold  rallying  to  meet  it  cools  [the

aforesaid parts] deprives their native heat of all its power, and compels it to

retire?  Moreover,  when  much  food  is  taken,  which  [i.e.  the  nutrient

evaporation from which] the hot substance carries upwards, this latter, like a

fire when fresh logs are laid upon it, is itself cooled, until the food has been

digested.  For, as has been observed elsewhere, sleep comes on when the corporeal

element [in the ‘evaporation’] conveyed upwards by the hot, along the veins,

to the head. But when that which has been thus carried up can no longer

ascend, but is too great in quantity [to do so], it forces the hot back again and

flows downwards. Hence it is that men sink down [as they do in sleep] when

the heat which tends to keep them erect (man alone, among animals, being

naturally  erect)  is  withdrawn;  and  this,  when  it  befalls  them,  causes

unconsciousness, and afterwards phantasy.

Or  are  the  solutions  thus  proposed  barely  conceivable  accounts  of  the

refrigeration which takes place, while, as a matter of fact, the region of the

brain is, as stated elsewhere, the main determinant of the matter? For the

brain, or in creatures without a brain that which corresponds to it, is of all

parts of the body the coolest. Therefore, as moisture turned into vapour by the

sun’s  heat  is,  when  it  has  ascended  to  the  upper  regions,  cooled  by  the

coldness of the latter, and becoming condensed, is carried downwards, and

turned into water once more; just so the excrementitious evaporation, when

carried up by the heat to the region of the brain, is condensed into a ‘phlegm’

(which explains why catarrhs are seen to proceed from the head); while that

evaporation which is nutrient and not unwholesome, becoming condensed,

descends and cools the hot. The tenuity or narrowness of the veins about the

brain itself contributes to its being kept cool, and to its not readily admitting

the evaporation. This, then, is a sufficient explanation of the cooling which

takes place, despite the fact that the evaporation is exceedingly hot.

A person awakes from sleep when digestion is completed: when the heat,

which had been previously forced together in large quantity within a small

compass from out the surrounding part, has once more prevailed, and when a

separation has been effected between the more corporeal and the purer blood.

The finest and purest blood is that contained in the head, while the thickest

and most turbid is that in the lower parts. The source of all the blood is, as

has been stated both here and elsewhere, the heart. Now of the chambers in

the heart the central communicates with each of the two others. Each of the

latter again acts as receiver from each, respectively, of the two vessels, called

the  ‘great’  and  the  ‘aorta’.  It  is  in  the  central  chamber  that  the  [above-

mentioned] separation takes place. To go into these matters in detail would,

however,  be  more  properly  the  business  of  a  different  treatise  from  the

present. Owing to the fact that the blood formed after the assimilation of food

is especially in need of separation, sleep [then especially] occurs [and lasts]until the purest part of this blood has been separated off into the upper parts

of the body, and the most turbid into the lower parts. When this has taken

place  animals  awake  from  sleep,  being  released  from  the  heaviness

consequent on taking food. We have now stated the cause of sleeping, viz.

that  it  consists  in  the  recoil  by  the  corporeal  element,  upborne  by  the

connatural heat, in a mass upon the primary sense-organ; we have also stated

what sleep is, having shown that it is a seizure of the primary sense-organ,

rendering  it  unable  to  actualize  its  powers;  arising  of  necessity  (for  it  is

impossible for an animal to exist if the conditions which render it an animal

be  not  fulfilled),  i.e.  for  the  sake  of  its  conservation;  since  remission  of

movement tends to the conservation of animals.                                    On Dreams


Translated by J. I. Beare


<

div id="chapter1" class="chapter">


1


We must, in the next place, investigate the subject of the dream, and first

inquire to which of the faculties of the soul it presents itself, i.e. whether the

affection is one which pertains to the faculty of intelligence or to that of

sense-perception;  for  these  are  the  only  faculties  within  us  by  which  we

acquire knowledge.

If, then, the exercise of the faculty of sight is actual seeing, that of the

auditory  faculty,  hearing,  and,  in  general  that  of  the  faculty  of  sense-

perception,  perceiving;  and  if  there  are  some  perceptions  common  to  the

senses, such as figure, magnitude, motion, &c., while there are others, as

colour,  sound,  taste,  peculiar  [each  to  its  own  sense];  and  further,  if  all

creatures,  when  the  eyes  are  closed  in  sleep,  are  unable  to  see,  and  the

analogous statement is true of the other senses, so that manifestly we perceive

nothing when asleep; we may conclude that it is not by sense-perception we

perceive a dream.

But neither is it by opinion that we do so. For [in dreams] we not only

assert, e.g. that some object approaching is a man or a horse [which would be

an exercise of opinion], but that the object is white or beautiful, points on

which opinion without sense-perception asserts nothing either truly or falsely.

It is, however, a fact that the soul makes such assertions in sleep. We seem to

see equally well that the approaching figure is a man, and that it is white. [In

dreams],  too,  we  think  something  else,  over  and  above  the  dream

presentation, just as we do in waking moments when we perceive something;

for we often also reason about that which we perceive. So, too, in sleep we

sometimes have thoughts other than the mere phantasms immediately before

our minds. This would be manifest to any one who should attend and try,

immediately on arising from sleep, to remember [his dreaming experience].There are cases of persons who have seen such dreams, those, for example,

who  believe  themselves  to  be  mentally  arranging  a  given  list  of  subjects

according to the mnemonic rule. They frequently find themselves engaged in

something  else  besides  the  dream,  viz.  in  setting  a  phantasm  which  they

envisage  into  its  mnemonic  position.  Hence  it  is  plain  that  not  every

‘phantasm’  in  sleep  is  a  mere  dream-image,  and  that  the  further  thinking

which we perform then is due to an exercise of the faculty of opinion.

So much at least is plain on all these points, viz. that the faculty by which,

in  waking  hours,  we  are  subject  to  illusion  when  affected  by  disease,  is

identical with that which produces illusory effects in sleep. So, even when

persons are in excellent health, and know the facts of the case perfectly well,

the sun, nevertheless, appears to them to be only a foot wide. Now, whether

the presentative faculty of the soul be identical with, or different from, the

faculty of sense-perception, in either case the illusion does not occur without

our actually seeing or [otherwise] perceiving something. Even to see wrongly

or to hear wrongly can happen only to one who sees or hears something real,

though not exactly what he supposes. But we have assumed that in sleep one

neither sees, nor hears, nor exercises any sense whatever. Perhaps we may

regard it as true that the dreamer sees nothing, yet as false that his faculty of

sense-perception is unaffected, the fact being that the sense of seeing and the

other senses may possibly be then in a certain way affected, while each of

these affections, as duly as when he is awake, gives its impulse in a certain

manner to his [primary] faculty of sense, though not in precisely the same

manner as when he is awake. Sometimes, too, opinion says [to dreamers] just

as to those who are awake, that the object seen is an illusion; at other times it

is inhibited, and becomes a mere follower of the phantasm.

It is plain therefore that this affection, which we name ‘dreaming’, is no

mere exercise of opinion or intelligence, but yet is not an affection of the

faculty of perception in the simple sense. If it were the latter it would be

possible [when asleep] to hear and see in the simple sense.

How then, and in what manner, it takes place, is what we have to examine.

Let us assume, what is indeed clear enough, that the affection [of dreaming]

pertains to sense-perception as surely as sleep itself does. For sleep does not

pertain to one organ in animals and dreaming to another; both pertain to the

same organ.

But since we have, in our work On the Soul, treated of presentation, and

the faculty of presentation is identical with that of sense-perception, thoughthe essential notion of a faculty of presentation is different from that of a

faculty of sense-perception; and since presentation is the movement set up by

a  sensory  faculty  when  actually  discharging  its  function,  while  a  dream

appears to be a presentation (for a presentation which occurs in sleep-whether

simply or in some particular way-is what we call a dream): it manifestly

follows that dreaming is an activity of the faculty of sense-perception, but

belongs to this faculty qua presentative.

<

div id="section2" class="section" title="2">


2


We can best obtain a scientific view of the nature of the dream and the

manner in which it originates by regarding it in the light of the circumstances

attending  sleep.  The  objects  of  sense-perception  corresponding  to  each

sensory organ produce sense-perception in us, and the affection due to their

operation is present in the organs of sense not only when the perceptions are

actualized, but even when they have departed.

  What happens in these cases may be compared with what happens in the

case of projectiles moving in space. For in the case of these the movement

continues even when that which set up the movement is no longer in contact

[with the things that are moved]. For that which set them in motion moves a

certain portion of air, and this, in turn, being moved excites motion in another

portion; and so, accordingly, it is in this way that [the bodies], whether in air

or in liquids, continue moving, until they come to a standstill.

This we must likewise assume to happen in the case of qualitative change;

for that part which [for example] has been heated by something hot, heats [in

turn]  the  part  next  to  it,  and  this  propagates  the  affection  continuously

onwards until the process has come round to its oint of origination. This must

also happen in the organ wherein the exercise of sense-perception takes place,

since  sense-perception,  as  realized  in  actual  perceiving,  is  a  mode  of

qualitative change. This explains why the affection continues in the sensory

organs, both in their deeper and in their more superficial parts, not merely

while they are actually engaged in perceiving, but even after they have ceased

to do so. That they do this, indeed, is obvious in cases where we continue for

some time engaged in a particular form of perception, for then, when we shift

the  scene  of  our  perceptive  activity,  the  previous  affection  remains;  forinstance, when we have turned our gaze from sunlight into darkness. For the

result of this is that one sees nothing, owing to the excited by the light still

subsisting in our eyes. Also, when we have looked steadily for a long while at

one colour, e.g. at white or green, that to which we next transfer our gaze

appears to be of the same colour. Again if, after having looked at the sun or

some other brilliant object, we close the eyes, then, if we watch carefully, it

appears in a right line with the direction of vision (whatever this may be), at

first in its own colour; then it changes to crimson, next to purple, until it

becomes  black  and  disappears.  And  also  when  persons  turn  away  from

looking at objects in motion, e.g. rivers, and especially those which flow very

rapidly, they find that the visual stimulations still present themselves, for the

things really at rest are then seen moving: persons become very deaf after

hearing loud noises, and after smelling very strong odours their power of

smelling  is  impaired;  and  similarly  in  other  cases.  These  phenomena

manifestly take place in the way above described.

That the sensory organs are acutely sensitive to even a slight qualitative

difference [in their objects] is shown by what happens in the case of mirrors;

a  subject  to  which,  even  taking  it  independently,  one  might  devote  close

consideration and inquiry. At the same time it becomes plain from them that

as the eye [in seeing] is affected [by the object seen], so also it produces a

certain effect upon it. If a woman chances during her menstrual period to

look into a highly polished mirror, the surface of it will grow cloudy with a

blood-coloured haze. It is very hard to remove this stain from a new mirror,

but easier to remove from an older mirror. As we have said before, the cause

of this lies in the fact that in the act of sight there occurs not only a passion in

the sense organ acted on by the polished surface, but the organ, as an agent,

also produces an action, as is proper to a brilliant object. For sight is the

property of an organ possessing brilliance and colour. The eyes, therefore,

have their proper action as have other parts of the body. Because it is natural

to the eye to be filled with blood-vessels, a woman’s eyes, during the period

of  menstrual  flux  and  inflammation,  will  undergo  a  change,  although  her

husband will not note this since his seed is of the same nature as that of his

wife.  The  surrounding  atmosphere,  through  which  operates  the  action  of

sight, and which surrounds the mirror also, will undergo a change of the same

sort that occurred shortly before in the woman’s eyes, and hence the surface

of the mirror is likewise affected. And as in the case of a garment, the cleaner

it is the more quickly it is soiled, so the same holds true in the case of themirror.  For  anything  that  is  clean  will  show  quite  clearly  a  stain  that  it

chances to receive, and the cleanest object shows up even the slightest stain.

A bronze mirror, because of its shininess, is especially sensitive to any sort of

contact (the movement of the surrounding air acts upon it like a rubbing or

pressing or wiping); on that account, therefore, what is clean will show up

clearly the slightest touch on its surface. It is hard to cleanse smudges off new

mirrors because the stain penetrates deeply and is suffused to all parts; it

penetrates deeply because the mirror is not a dense medium, and is suffused

widely because of the smoothness of the object. On the other hand, in the

case  of  old  mirrors,  stains  do  not  remain  because  they  do  not  penetrate

deeply, but only smudge the surface.

  From this therefore it is plain that stimulatory motion is set up even by

slight differences, and that sense-perception is quick to respond to it; and

further  that  the  organ  which  perceives  colour  is  not  only  affected  by  its

object, but also reacts upon it. Further evidence to the same point is afforded

by what takes place in wines, and in the manufacture of unguents. For both

oil, when prepared, and wine become rapidly infected by the odours of the

things near them; they not only acquire the odours of the things thrown into

or mixed with them, but also those of the things which are placed, or which

grow, near the vessels containing them.

In order to answer our original question, let us now, therefore, assume one

proposition,  which  is  clear  from  what  precedes,  viz.  that  even  when  the

external  object  of  perception  has  departed,  the  impressions  it  has  made

persist,  and  are  themselves  objects  of  perception:  and  [let  us  assume],

besides,  that  we  are  easily  deceived  respecting  the  operations  of  sense-

perception when we are excited by emotions, and different persons according

to their different emotions; for example, the coward when excited by fear, the

amorous person by amorous desire; so that, with but little resemblance to go

upon, the former thinks he sees his foes approaching, the latter, that he sees

the object of his desire; and the more deeply one is under the influence of the

emotion,  the  less  similarity  is  required  to  give  rise  to  these  illusory

impressions. Thus too, both in fits of anger, and also in all states of appetite,

all men become easily deceived, and more so the more their emotions are

excited.  This  is  the  reason  too  why  persons  in  the  delirium  of  fever

sometimes think they see animals on their chamber walls, an illusion arising

from  the  faint  resemblance  to  animals  of  the  markings  thereon  when  put

together  in  patterns;  and  this  sometimes  corresponds  with  the  emotionalstates of the sufferers, in such a way that, if the latter be not very ill, they

know well enough that it is an illusion; but if the illness is more severe they

actually move according to the appearances. The cause of these occurrences

is  that  the  faculty  in  virtue  of  which  the  controlling  sense  judges  is  not

identical with that in virtue of which presentations come before the mind. A

proof of this is, that the sun presents itself as only a foot in diameter, though

often something else gainsays the presentation. Again, when the fingers are

crossed, the one object [placed between them] is felt [by the touch] as two;

but yet we deny that it is two; for sight is more authoritative than touch. Yet,

if touch stood alone, we should actually have pronounced the one object to be

two. The ground of such false judgements is that any appearances whatever

present themselves, not only when its object stimulates a sense, but also when

the sense by itself alone is stimulated, provided only it be stimulated in the

same manner as it is by the object. For example, to persons sailing past the

land  seems  to  move,  when  it  is  really  the  eye  that  is  being  moved  by

something else [the moving ship.]

<

div id="section3" class="section" title="3">


3


  From  this  it  is  manifest  that  the  stimulatory  movements  based  upon

sensory impressions, whether the latter are derived from external objects or

from causes within the body, present themselves not only when persons are

awake, but also then, when this affection which is called sleep has come upon

them, with even greater impressiveness. For by day, while the senses and the

intellect are working together, they (i.e. such movements) are extruded from

consciousness or obscured, just as a smaller is beside a larger fire, or as small

beside great pains or pleasures, though, as soon as the latter have ceased,

even those which are trifling emerge into notice. But by night [i.e. in sleep]

owing  to  the  inaction  of  the  particular  senses,  and  their  powerlessness  to

realize themselves, which arises from the reflux of the hot from the exterior

parts to the interior, they [i.e. the above ‘movements’] are borne in to the

head  quarters  of  sense-perception,  and  there  display  themselves  as  the

disturbance (of waking life) subsides. We must suppose that, like the little

eddies which are being ever formed in rivers, so the sensory movements are

each a continuous process, often remaining like what they were when firststarted, but often, too, broken into other forms by collisions with obstacles.

This [last mentioned point], moreover, gives the reason why no dreams occur

in sleep immediately after meals, or to sleepers who are extremely young, e.g.

to infants. The internal movement in such cases is excessive, owing to the

heat generated from the food. Hence, just as in a liquid, if one vehemently

disturbs it, sometimes no reflected image appears, while at other times one

appears, indeed, but utterly distorted, so as to seem quite unlike its original;

while, when once the motion has ceased, the reflected images are clear and

plain;  in  the  same  manner  during  sleep  the  phantasms,  or  residuary

movements,  which  are  based  upon  the  sensory  impressions,  become

sometimes quite obliterated by the above described motion when too violent;

while at other times the sights are indeed seen, but confused and weird, and

the dreams [which then appear] are unhealthy, like those of persons who are

atrabilious,  or  feverish,  or  intoxicated  with  wine.  For  all  such  affections,

being  spirituous,  cause  much  commotion  and  disturbance.  In  sanguineous

animals,  in  proportion  as  the  blood  becomes  calm,  and  as  its  purer  are

separated from its less pure elements, the fact that the movement, based on

impressions derived from each of the organs of sense, is preserved in its

integrity, renders the dreams healthy, causes a [clear] image to present itself,

and makes the dreamer think, owing to the effects borne in from the organ of

sight, that he actually sees, and owing to those which come from the organ of

hearing, that he really hears; and so on with those also which proceed from

the other sensory organs. For it is owing to the fact that the movement which

reaches the primary organ of sense comes from them, that one even when

awake believes himself to see, or hear, or otherwise perceive; just as it is

from a belief that the organ of sight is being stimulated, though in reality not

so stimulated, that we sometimes erroneously declare ourselves to see, or

that, from the fact that touch announces two movements, we think that the

one object is two. For, as a rule, the governing sense affirms the report of

each  particular  sense,  unless  another  particular  sense,  more  authoritative,

makes a contradictory report. In every case an appearance presents itself, but

what appears does not in every case seem real, unless when the deciding

faculty is inhibited, or does not move with its proper motion. Moreover, as

we  said  that  different  men  are  subject  to  illusions,  each  according  to  the

different emotion present in him, so it is that the sleeper, owing to sleep, and

to the movements then going on in his sensory organs, as well as to the other

facts  of  the  sensory  process,  [is  liable  to  illusion],  so  that  the  dreampresentation, though but little like it, appears as some actual given thing. For

when one is asleep, in proportion as most of the blood sinks inwards to its

fountain [the heart], the internal [sensory] movements, some potential, others

actual accompany it inwards. They are so related [in general] that, if anything

move the blood, some one sensory movement will emerge from it, while if

this perishes another will take its place; while to one another also they are

related in the same way as the artificial frogs in water which severally rise [in

fixed succesion] to the surface in the order in which the salt [which keeps

them  down]  becomes  dissolved.  The  residuary  movements  are  like  these:

they are within the soul potentially, but actualize themselves only when the

impediment to their doing so has been relaxed; and according as they are thus

set  free,  they  begin  to  move  in  the  blood  which  remains  in  the  sensory

organs, and which is now but scanty, while they possess verisimilitude after

the  manner  of  cloud-shapes,  which  in  their  rapid  metamorphoses  one

compares now to human beings and a moment afterwards to centaurs. Each

of them is however, as has been said, the remnant of a sensory impression

taken when sense was actualizing itself; and when this, the true impression,

has departed, its remnant is still immanent, and it is correct to say of it, that

though not actually Koriskos, it is like Koriskos. For when the person was

actually perceiving, his controlling and judging sensory faculty did not call it

Koriskos,  but,  prompted  by  this  [impression],  called  the  genuine  person

yonder Koriskos. Accordingly, this sensory impulse, which, when actually

perceiving, it [the controlling faculty] describes (unless completely inhibited

by the blood), it now [in dreams] when quasi-perceiving, receives from the

movements persisting in the sense-organs, and mistakes it-an impulse that is

merely  like  the  true  [objective]  impression-for  the  true  impression  itself,

while  the  effect  of  sleep  is  so  great  that  it  causes  this  mistake  to  pass

unnoticed. Accordingly, just as if a finger be inserted beneath the eyeball

without being observed, one object will not only present two visual images,

but will create an opinion of its being two objects; while if it [the finger] be

observed, the presentation will be the same, but the same opinion will not be

formed of it; exactly so it is in states of sleep: if the sleeper perceives that he

is asleep, and is conscious of the sleeping state during which the perception

comes  before  his  mind,  it  presents  itself  still,  but  something  within  him

speaks  to  this  effect:  ‘the  image  of  Koriskos  presents  itself,  but  the  real

Koriskos is not present’; for often, when one is asleep, there is something in

consciousness which declares that what then presents itself is but a dream. If,however,  he  is  not  aware  of  being  asleep,  there  is  nothing  which  will

contradict the testimony of the bare presentation.

That  what  we  here  urge  is  true,  i.e.  that  there  are  such  presentative

movements  in  the  sensory  organs,  any  one  may  convince  himself,  if  he

attends to and tries to remember the affections we experience when sinking

into slumber or when being awakened. He will sometimes, in the moment of

awakening, surprise the images which present themselves to him in sleep, and

find that they are really but movements lurking in the organs of sense. And

indeed some very young persons, if it is dark, though looking with wide open

eyes, see multitudes of phantom figures moving before them, so that they

often cover up their heads in terror.

  From all this, then, the conclusion to be drawn is, that the dream is a sort of

presentation,  and,  more  particularly,  one  which  occurs  in  sleep;  since  the

phantoms just mentioned are not dreams, nor is any other a dream which

presents itself when the sense-perceptions are in a state of freedom. Nor is

every presentation which occurs in sleep necessarily a dream. For in the first

place,  some  persons  [when  asleep]  actually,  in  a  certain  way,  perceive

sounds, light, savour, and contact; feebly, however, and, as it were, remotely.

For there have been cases in which persons while asleep, but with the eyes

partly open, saw faintly in their sleep (as they supposed) the light of a lamp,

and afterwards, on being awakened, straightway recognized it as the actual

light of a real lamp; while, in other cases, persons who faintly heard the

crowing of cocks or the barking of dogs identified these clearly with the real

sounds as soon as they awoke. Some persons, too, return answers to questions

put to them in sleep. For it is quite possible that, of waking or sleeping, while

the one is present in the ordinary sense, the other also should be present in a

certain way. But none of these occurrences should be called a dream. Nor

should the true thoughts, as distinct from the mere presentations, which occur

in sleep [be called dreams]. The dream proper is a presentation based on the

movement of sense impressions, when such presentation occurs during sleep,

taking sleep in the strict sense of the term.

  There  are  cases  of  persons  who  in  their  whole  lives  have  never  had  a

dream,  while  others  dream  when  considerably  advanced  in  years,  having

never  dreamed  before.  The  cause  of  their  not  having  dreams  appears

somewhat like that which operates in the case of infants, and [that which

operates] immediately after meals. It is intelligible enough that no dream-

presentation should occur to persons whose natural constitution is such that inthem  copious  evaporation  is  borne  upwards,  which,  when  borne  back

downwards, causes a large quantity of motion. But it is not surprising that, as

age  advances,  a  dream  should  at  length  appear  to  them.  Indeed,  it  is

inevitable  that,  as  a  change  is  wrought  in  them  in  proportion  to  age  or

emotional experience, this reversal [from non-dreaming to dreaming] should

occur also.                        On Prophesying by Dreams


Translated by J. I. Beare


<

div class="body">


1


As to the divination which takes place in sleep, and is said to be based on

dreams, we cannot lightly either dismiss it with contempt or give it implicit

confidence. The fact that all persons, or many, suppose dreams to possess a

special significance, tends to inspire us with belief in it [such divination], as

founded on the testimony of experience; and indeed that divination in dreams

should, as regards some subjects, be genuine, is not incredible, for it has a

show of reason; from which one might form a like opinion also respecting all

other dreams. Yet the fact of our seeing no probable cause to account for such

divination  tends  to  inspire  us  with  distrust.  For,  in  addition  to  its  further

unreasonableness, it is absurd to combine the idea that the sender of such

dreams should be God with the fact that those to whom he sends them are not

the  best  and  wisest,  but  merely  commonplace  persons.  If,  however,  we

abstract from the causality of God, none of the other causes assigned appears

probable. For that certain persons should have foresight in dreams concerning

things destined to take place at the Pillars of Hercules, or on the banks of the

Borysthenes, seems to be something to discover the explanation of which

surpasses the wit of man. Well then, the dreams in question must be regarded

either as causes, or as tokens, of the events, or else as coincidences; either as

all, or some, of these, or as one only. I use the word ‘cause’ in the sense in

which the moon is [the cause] of an eclipse of the sun, or in which fatigue is

[a cause] of fever; ‘token’ [in the sense in which] the entrance of a star [into

the shadow] is a token of the eclipse, or [in which] roughness of the tongue

[is  a  token]  of  fever;  while  by  ‘coincidence’  I  mean,  for  example,  the

occurrence of an eclipse of the sun while some one is taking a walk; for the

walking is neither a token nor a cause of the eclipse, nor the eclipse [a cause

or  token]  of  the  walking.  For  this  reason  no  coincidence  takes  placeaccording to a universal or general rule. Are we then to say that some dreams

are causes, others tokens, e.g. of events taking place in the bodily organism?

At all events, even scientific physicians tell us that one should pay diligent

attention to dreams, and to hold this view is reasonable also for those who are

not  practitioners,  but  speculative  philosophers.  For  the  movements  which

occur in the daytime [within the body] are, unless very great and violent, lost

sight of in contrast with the waking movements, which are more impressive.

In  sleep  the  opposite  takes  place,  for  then  even  trifling  movements  seem

considerable. This is plain in what often happens during sleep; for example,

dreamers fancy that they are affected by thunder and lightning, when in fact

there are only faint ringings in their ears; or that they are enjoying honey or

other sweet savours, when only a tiny drop of phlegm is flowing down [the

oesophagus]; or that they are walking through fire, and feeling intense heat,

when there is only a slight warmth affecting certain parts of the body. When

they are awakened, these things appear to them in this their true character.

But since the beginnings of all events are small, so, it is clear, are those also

of the diseases or other affections about to occur in our bodies. In conclusion,

it is manifest that these beginnings must be more evident in sleeping than in

waking moments.

  Nay, indeed, it is not improbable that some of the presentations which

come before the mind in sleep may even be causes of the actions cognate to

each of them. For as when we are about to act [in waking hours], or are

engaged in any course of action, or have already performed certain actions,

we often find ourselves concerned with these actions, or performing them, in

a vivid dream; the cause whereof is that the dream-movement has had a way

paved for it from the original movements set up in the daytime; exactly so,

but conversely, it must happen that the movements set up first in sleep should

also prove to be starting-points of actions to be performed in the daytime,

since the recurrence by day of the thought of these actions also has had its

way paved for it in the images before the mind at night. Thus then it is quite

conceivable that some dreams may be tokens and causes [of future events].

  Most  [so-called  prophetic]  dreams  are,  however,  to  be  classed  as  mere

coincidences,  especially  all  such  as  are  extravagant,  and  those  in  the

fulfilment of which the dreamers have no initiative, such as in the case of a

sea-fight, or of things taking place far away. As regards these it is natural that

the fact should stand as it does whenever a person, on mentioning something,

finds the very thing mentioned come to pass. Why, indeed, should this nothappen also in sleep? The probability is, rather, that many such things should

happen. As, then, one’s mentioning a particular person is neither token nor

cause  of  this  person’s  presenting  himself,  so,  in  the  parallel  instance,  the

dream is, to him who has seen it, neither token nor cause of its [so-called]

fulfilment, but a mere coincidence. Hence the fact that many dreams have no

‘fulfilment’,  for  coincidence  do  not  occur  according  to  any  universal  or

general law.

<

div id="section2" class="section" title="2">


2


On the whole, forasmuch as certain of the lower animals also dream, it

may be concluded that dreams are not sent by God, nor are they designed for

this purpose [to reveal the future]. They have a divine aspect, however, for

Nature [their cause] is divinely planned, though not itself divine. A special

proof [of their not being sent by God] is this: the power of foreseeing the

future and of having vivid dreams is found in persons of inferior type, which

implies that God does not send their dreams; but merely that all those whose

physical temperament is, as it were, garrulous and excitable, see sights of all

descriptions; for, inasmuch as they experience many movements of every

kind, they just chance to have visions resembling objective facts, their luck in

these matters being merely like that of persons who play at even and odd. For

the principle which is expressed in the gambler’s maxim: ‘If you make many

throws your luck must change,’ holds in their case also.

That many dreams have no fulfilment is not strange, for it is so too with

many  bodily  toms  and  weather-signs,  e.g.  those  of  train  or  wind.  For  if

another movement occurs more influential than that from which, while [the

event to which it pointed was] still future, the given token was derived, the

event [to which such token pointed] does not take place. So, of the things

which  ought  to  be  accomplished  by  human  agency,  many,  though  well-

planned are by the operation of other principles more powerful [than man’s

agency] brought to nought. For, speaking generally, that which was about to

happen is not in every case what now is happening, nor is that which shall

hereafter he identical with that which is now going to be. Still, however, we

must hold that the beginnings from which, as we said, no consummation

follows, are real beginnings, and these constitute natural tokens of certainevents, even though the events do not come to pass.

As for [prophetic] dreams which involve not such beginnings [sc. of future

events] as we have here described, but such as are extravagant in times, or

places,  or  magnitudes;  or  those  involving  beginnings  which  are  not

extravagant in any of these respects, while yet the persons who see the dream

hold not in their own hands the beginnings [of the event to which it points]:

unless the foresight which such dreams give is the result of pure coincidence,

the  following  would  be  a  better  explanation  of  it  than  that  proposed  by

Democritus, who alleges ‘images’ and ‘emanations’ as its cause. As, when

something has caused motion in water or air, this [the portion of water or air],

and, though the cause has ceased to operate, such motion propagates itself to

a certain point, though there the prime movement is not present; just so it

may  well  be  that  a  movement  and  a  consequent  sense-perception  should

reach  sleeping  souls  from  the  objects  from  which  Democritus  represents

‘images’ and ‘emanations’ coming; that such movements, in whatever way

they arrive, should be more perceptible at night [than by day], because when

proceeding thus in the daytime they are more liable to dissolution (since at

night the air is less disturbed, there being then less wind); and that they shall

be perceived within the body owing to sleep, since persons are more sensitive

even to slight sensory movements when asleep than when awake. It is these

movements  then  that  cause  ‘presentations’,  as  a  result  of  which  sleepers

foresee the future even relatively to such events as those referred to above.

These considerations also explain why this experience befalls commonplace

persons and not the most intelligent. For it would have regularly occurred

both in the daytime and to the wise had it been God who sent it; but, as we

have  explained  the  matter,  it  is  quite  natural  that  commonplace  persons

should be those who have foresight [in dreams]. For the mind of such persons

is not given to thinking, but, as it were, derelict, or totally vacant, and, when

once set moving, is borne passively on in the direction taken by that which

moves  it.  With  regard  to  the  fact  that  some  persons  who  are  liable  to

derangement have this foresight, its explanation is that their normal mental

movements do not impede [the alien movements], but are beaten off by the

latter. Therefore it is that they have an especially keen perception of the alien

movements.

That  certain  persons  in  particular  should  have  vivid  dreams,  e.g.  that

familiar friends should thus have foresight in a special degree respecting one

another,  is  due  to  the  fact  that  such  friends  are  most  solicitous  on  oneanother’s behalf. For as acquaintances in particular recognize and perceive

one another a long way off, so also they do as regards the sensory movements

respecting  one  another;  for  sensory  movements  which  refer  to  persons

familiarly known are themselves more familiar. Atrabilious persons, owing to

their impetuosity, are, when they, as it were, shoot from a distance, expert at

hitting; while, owing to their mutability, the series of movements deploys

quickly  before  their  minds.  For  even  as  the  insane  recite,  or  con  over  in

thought, the poems of Philaegides, e.g. the Aphrodite, whose parts succeed in

order of similitude, just so do they [the ‘atrabilious’] go on and on stringing

sensory movements together. Moreover, owing to their aforesaid impetuosity,

one movement within them is not liable to be knocked out of its course by

some other movement.

The  most  skilful  interpreter  of  dreams  is  he  who  has  the  faculty  of

observing resemblances. Any one may interpret dreams which are vivid and

plain. But, speaking of ‘resemblances’, I mean that dream presentations are

analogous to the forms reflected in water, as indeed we have already stated.

In the latter case, if the motion in the water be great, the reflexion has no

resemblance  to  its  original,  nor  do  the  forms  resemble  the  real  objects.

Skilful, indeed, would he be in interpreting such reflexions who could rapidly

discern, and at a glance comprehend, the scattered and distorted fragments of

such forms, so as to perceive that one of them represents a man, or a horse,

Or anything whatever. Accordingly, in the other case also, in a similar way,

some such thing as this [blurred image] is all that a dream amounts to; for the

internal movement effaces the clearness of the dream.

The questions, therefore, which we proposed as to the nature of sleep and

the  dream,  and  the  cause  to  which  each  of  them  is  due,  and  also  as  to

divination as a result of dreams, in every form of it, have now been discussed.                On Longevity and the Shortness of Life


Translated by G. R. T. Ross


<

div class="body">


1


The reasons for some animals being long-lived and others short-lived, and,

in a word, causes of the length and brevity of life call for investigation.

The necessary beginning to our inquiry is a statement of the difficulties

about  these  points.  For  it  is  not  clear  whether  in  animals  and  plants

universally it is a single or diverse cause that makes some to be long-lived,

others short-lived. Plants too have in some cases a long life, while in others it

lasts but for a year.

  Further,  in  a  natural  structure  are  longevity  and  a  sound  constitution

coincident, or is shortness of life independent of unhealthiness? Perhaps in

the case of certain maladies a diseased state of the body and shortness of life

are  interchangeable,  while  in  the  case  of  others  ill-health  is  perfectly

compatible with long life.

Of sleep and waking we have already treated; about life and death we shall

speak later on, and likewise about health and disease, in so far as it belongs to

the  science  of  nature  to  do  so.  But  at  present  we  have  to  investigate  the

causes of some creatures being long-lived, and others short-lived. We find

this distinction affecting not only entire genera opposed as wholes to one

another, but applying also to contrasted sets of individuals within the same

species. As an instance of the difference applying to the genus I give man and

horse (for mankind has a longer life than the horse), while within the species

there is the difference between man and man; for of men also some are long-

lived, others short-lived, differing from each other in respect of the different

regions in which they dwell. Races inhabiting warm countries have longer

life, those living in a cold climate live a shorter time. Likewise there are

similar differences among individuals occupying the same locality.

<div id="section2" class="section" title="2">


2


In order to find premisses for our argument, we must answer the question,

What is that which, in natural objects, makes them easily destroyed, or the

reverse? Since fire and water, and whatsoever is akin thereto, do not possess

identical powers they are reciprocal causes of generation and decay. Hence it

is natural to infer that everything else arising from them and composed of

them should share in the same nature, in all cases where things are not, like a

house, a composite unity formed by the synthesis of many things.

In other matters a different account must be given; for in many things their

mode of dissolution is something peculiar to themselves, e.g. in knowledge

and health and disease. These pass away even though the medium in which

they are found is not destroyed but continues to exist; for example, take the

termination of ignorance, which is recollection or learning, while knowledge

passes away into forgetfulness, or error. But accidentally the disintegration of

a natural object is accompanied by the destruction of the non-physical reality;

for, when the animal dies, the health or knowledge resident in it passes away

too. Hence from these considerations we may draw a conclusion about the

soul too; for, if the inherence of soul in body is not a matter of nature but like

that of knowledge in the soul, there would be another mode of dissolution

pertaining to it besides that which occurs when the body is destroyed. But

since evidently it does not admit of this dual dissolution, the soul must stand

in a different case in respect of its union with the body.

<

div id="section3" class="section" title="3">


3


  Perhaps one might reasonably raise the question whether there is any place

where what is corruptible becomes incorruptible, as fire does in the upper

regions where it meets with no opposite. Opposites destroy each other, and

hence accidentally, by their destruction, whatsoever is attributed to them is

destroyed.  But  no  opposite  in  a  real  substance  is  accidentally  destroyed,

because real substance is not predicated of any subject. Hence a thing whichhas no opposite, or which is situated where it has no opposite, cannot be

destroyed. For what will that be which can destroy it, if destruction comes

only through contraries, but no contrary to it exists either absolutely or in the

particular place where it is? But perhaps this is in one sense true, in another

sense not true, for it is impossible that anything containing matter should not

have in any sense an opposite. Heat and straightness can be present in every

part of a thing, but it is impossible that the thing should be nothing but hot or

white or straight; for, if that were so, attributes would have an independent

existence. Hence if, in all cases, whenever the active and the passive exist

together, the one acts and the other is acted on, it is impossible that no change

should occur. Further, this is so if a waste product is an opposite, and waste

must always be produced; for opposition is always the source of change, and

refuse  is  what  remains  of  the  previous  opposite.  But,  after  expelling

everything of a nature actually opposed, would an object in this case also be

imperishable? No, it would be destroyed by the environment.

If then that is so, what we have said sufficiently accounts for the change;

but, if not, we must assume that something of actually opposite character is in

the changing object, and refuse is produced.

  Hence accidentally a lesser flame is consumed by a greater one, for the

nutriment, to wit the smoke, which the former takes a long period to expend,

is used up by the big flame quickly.

  Hence [too] all things are at all times in a state of transition and are coming

into being and passing away. The environment acts on them either favourably

or  antagonistically,  and,  owing  to  this,  things  that  change  their  situation

become more or less enduring than their nature warrants, but never are they

eternal when they contain contrary qualities; for their matter is an immediate

source  of  contrariety,  so  that  if  it  involves  locality  they  show  change  of

situation, if quantity, increase and diminution, while if it involves qualitative

affection we find alteration of character.

<

div id="section4" class="section" title="4">


4


We find that a superior immunity from decay attaches neither to the largest

animals (the horse has shorter life than man) nor to those that are small (for

most insects live but for a year). Nor are plants as a whole less liable to perishthan animals (many plants are annuals), nor have sanguineous animals the

pre-eminence (for the bee is longer-lived than certain sanguineous animals).

Neither is it the bloodless animals that live longest (for molluscs live only a

year, though bloodless), nor terrestrial organisms (there are both plants and

terrestrial animals of which a single year is the period), nor the occupants of

the sea (for there we find the crustaceans and the molluscs, which are short-

lived).

  Speaking generally, the longest-lived things occur among the plants, e.g.

the date-palm. Next in order we find them among the sanguineous animals

rather  than  among  the  bloodless,  and  among  those  with  feet  rather  than

among the denizens of the water. Hence, taking these two characters together,

the longest-lived animals fall among sanguineous animals which have feet,

e.g. man and elephant. As a matter of fact also it is a general rule that the

larger  live  longer  than  the  smaller,  for  the  other  long-lived  animals  too

happen to be of a large size, as are also those I have mentioned.

<

div id="section5" class="section" title="5">


5


The following considerations may enable us to understand the reasons for

all these facts. We must remember that an animal is by nature humid and

warm, and to live is to be of such a constitution, while old age is dry and

cold,  and  so  is  a  corpse.  This  is  plain  to  observation.  But  the  material

constituting the bodies of all things consists of the following-the hot and the

cold, the dry and the moist. Hence when they age they must become dry, and

therefore the fluid in them requires to be not easily dried up. Thus we explain

why fat things are not liable to decay. The reason is that they contain air; now

air relatively to the other elements is fire, and fire never becomes corrupted.

  Again the humid element in animals must not be small in quantity, for a

small quantity is easily dried up. This is why both plants and animals that are

large are, as a general rule, longer-lived than the rest, as was said before; it is

to be expected that the larger should contain more moisture. But it is not

merely this that makes them longer lived; for the cause is twofold, to wit, the

quality as well as the quantity of the fluid. Hence the moisture must be not

only great in amount but also warm, in order to be neither easily congealed

nor easily dried up.It is for this reason also that man lives longer than some animals which are

larger; for animals live longer though there is a deficiency in the amount of

their moisture, if the ratio of its qualitative superiority exceeds that of its

quantitative deficiency.

In  some  creatures  the  warm  element  is  their  fatty  substance,  which

prevents  at  once  desiccation  and  congelation;  but  in  others  it  assumes  a

different flavour. Further, that which is designed to be not easily destroyed

should  not  yield  waste  products.  Anything  of  such  a  nature  causes  death

either by disease or naturally, for the potency of the waste product works

adversely and destroys now the entire constitution, now a particular member.

This is why salacious animals and those abounding in seed age quickly; the

seed is a residue, and further, by being lost, it produces dryness. Hence the

mule lives longer than either the horse or the ass from which it sprang, and

females live longer than males if the males are salacious. Accordingly cock-

sparrows have a shorter life than the females. Again males subject to great

toil are short-lived and age more quickly owing to the labour; toil produces

dryness and old age is dry. But by natural constitution and as a general rule

males live longer than females, and the reason is that the male is an animal

with more warmth than the female.

The same kind of animals are longer-lived in warm than in cold climates

for the same reason, on account of which they are of larger size. The size of

animals  of  cold  constitution  illustrates  this  particularly  well,  and  hence

snakes and lizards and scaly reptiles are of great size in warm localities, as

also are testacea in the Red Sea: the warm humidity there is the cause equally

of their augmented size and of their life. But in cold countries the humidity in

animals  is  more  of  a  watery  nature,  and  hence  is  readily  congealed.

Consequently it happens that animals with little or no blood are in northerly

regions either entirely absent (both the land animals with feet and the water

creatures whose home is the sea) or, when they do occur, they are smaller and

have shorter life; for the frost prevents growth.

Both plants and animals perish if not fed, for in that case they consume

themselves; just as a large flame consumes and burns up a small one by using

up  its  nutriment,  so  the  natural  warmth  which  is  the  primary  cause  of

digestion consumes the material in which it is located.

  Water  animals  have  a  shorter  life  than  terrestrial  creatures,  not  strictly

because they are humid, but because they are watery, and watery moisture is

easily destroyed, since it is cold and readily congealed. For the same reasonbloodless animals perish readily unless protected by great size, for there is

neither fatness nor sweetness about them. In animals fat is sweet, and hence

bees are longer-lived than other animals of larger size.

<

div id="section6" class="section" title="6">


6


It is amongst the plants that we find the longest life-more than among the

animals, for, in the first place, they are less watery and hence less easily

frozen. Further they have an oiliness and a viscosity which makes them retain

their moisture in a form not easily dried up, even though they are dry and

earthy.

But we must discover the reason why trees are of an enduring constitution,

for it is peculiar to them and is not found in any animals except the insects.

  Plants continually renew themselves and hence last for a long time. New

shoots continually come and the others grow old, and with the roots the same

thing happens. But both processes do not occur together. Rather it happens

that at one time the trunk and the branches alone die and new ones grow up

beside them, and it is only when this has taken place that the fresh roots

spring from the surviving part. Thus it continues, one part dying and the other

growing, and hence also it lives a long time.

  There is a similarity, as has been already said, between plants and insects,

for they live, though divided, and two or more may be derived from a single

one. Insects, however, though managing to live, are not able to do so long, for

they  do  not  possess  organs;  nor  can  the  principle  resident  in  each  of  the

separated parts create organs. In the case of a plant, however, it can do so;

every part of a plant contains potentially both root and stem. Hence it is from

this source that issues that continued growth when one part is renewed and

the other grows old; it is practically a case of longevity. The taking of slips

furnishes a similar instance, for we might say that, in a way, when we take a

slip the same thing happens; the shoot cut off is part of the plant. Thus in

taking slips this perpetuation of life occurs though their connexion with the

plant is severed, but in the former case it is the continuity that is operative.

The reason is that the life principle potentially belonging to them is present in

every part.

  Identical  phenomena  are  found  both  in  plants  and  in  animals.  For  inanimals the males are, in general, the longer-lived. They have their upper

parts larger than the lower (the male is more of the dwarf type of build than

the female), and it is in the upper part that warmth resides, in the lower cold.

In plants also those with great heads are longer-lived, and such are those that

are not annual but of the tree-type, for the roots are the head and upper part of

a plant, and among the annuals growth occurs in the direction of their lower

parts and the fruit.

  These  matters  however  will  be  specially  investigated  in  the  work  On

Plants. But this is our account of the reasons for the duration of life and for

short life in animals. It remains for us to discuss youth and age, and life and

death.  To  come  to  a  definite  understanding  about  these  matters  would

complete our course of study on animals.      On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration


Translated by G. R. T. Ross


<

div class="chapter">


1


We must now treat of youth and old age and life and death. We must

probably also at the same time state the causes of respiration as well, since in

some cases living and the reverse depend on this.

We have elsewhere given a precise account of the soul, and while it is clear

that its essential reality cannot be corporeal, yet manifestly it must exist in

some bodily part which must be one of those possessing control over the

members. Let us for the present set aside the other divisions or faculties of

the soul (whichever of the two be the correct name). But as to being what is

called an animal and a living thing, we find that in all beings endowed with

both characteristics (viz. being an animal and being alive) there must be a

single identical part in virtue of which they live and are called animals; for an

animal qua animal cannot avoid being alive. But a thing need not, though

alive,  be  animal,  for  plants  live  without  having  sensation,  and  it  is  by

sensation that we distinguish animal from what is not animal.

This organ, then, must be numerically one and the same and yet possess

multiple and disparate aspects, for being animal and living are not identical.

Since then the organs of special sensation have one common organ in which

the senses when functioning must meet, and this must be situated midway

between what is called before and behind (we call ‘before’ the direction from

which sensation comes, ‘behind’ the opposite), further, since in all living

things the body is divided into upper and lower (they all have upper and

lower  parts,  so  that  this  is  true  of  plants  as  well),  clearly  the  nutritive

principle must be situated midway between these regions. That part where

food enters we call upper, considering it by itself and not relatively to the

surrounding  universe,  while  downward  is  that  part  by  which  the  primary

excrement is discharged.  Plants  are  the  reverse  of  animals  in  this  respect.  To  man  in  particular

among the animals, on account of his erect stature, belongs the characteristic

of having his upper parts pointing upwards in the sense in which that applies

to the universe, while in the others these are in an intermediate position. But

in plants, owing to their being stationary and drawing their sustenance from

the  ground,  the  upper  part  must  always  be  down;  for  there  is  a

correspondence between the roots in a plant and what is called the mouth in

animals, by means of which they take in their food, whether the source of

supply be the earth or each other’s bodies.


2


All perfectly formed animals are to be divided into three parts, one that by

which food is taken in, one that by which excrement is discharged, and the

third the region intermediate between them. In the largest animals this latter

is called the chest and in the others something corresponding; in some also it

is more distinctly marked off than in others. All those also that are capable of

progression have additional members subservient to this purpose, by means

of which they bear the whole trunk, to wit legs and feet and whatever parts

are possessed of the same powers. Now it is evident both by observation and

by inference that the source of the nutritive soul is in the midst of the three

parts. For many animals, when either part-the head or the receptacle of the

food-is  cut  off,  retain  life  in  that  member  to  which  the  middle  remains

attached. This can be seen to occur in many insects, e.g. wasps and bees, and

many animals also besides insects can, though divided, continue to live by

means of the part connected with nutrition.

  While  this  member  is  indeed  in  actuality  single,  yet  potentially  it  is

multiple, for these animals have a constitution similar to that of Plants; plants

when cut into sections continue to live, and a number of trees can be derived

from one single source. A separate account will be given of the reason why

some plants cannot live when divided, while others can be propagated by the

taking of slips. In this respect, however, plants and insects are alike.

It  is  true  that  the  nutritive  soul,  in  beings  possessing  it,  while  actually

single must be potentially plural. And it is too with the principle of sensation,

for evidently the divided segments of these animals have sensation. They are

unable, however, to preserve their constitution, as plants can, not possessing

the organs on which the continuance of life depends, for some lack the meansfor seizing, others for receiving their food; or again they may be destitute of

other organs as well.

  Divisible animals are like a number of animals grown together, but animals

of  superior  construction  behave  differently  because  their  constitution  is  a

unity of the highest possible kind. Hence some of the organs on division

display slight sensitiveness because they retain some psychical susceptibility;

the animals continue to move after the vitals have been abstracted: tortoises,

for example, do so even after the heart has been removed.


3


The same phenomenon is evident both in plants and in animals, and in

plants we note it both in their propagation by seed and in grafts and cuttings.

Genesis from seeds always starts from the middle. All seeds are bivalvular,

and the place of junction is situated at the point of attachment (to the plant),

an intermediate part belonging to both halves. It is from this part that both

root and stem of growing things emerge; the starting-point is in a central

position between them. In the case of grafts and cuttings this is particularly

true of the buds; for the bud is in a way the starting-point of the branch, but at

the same time it is in a central position. Hence it is either this that is cut off,

or into this that the new shoot is inserted, when we wish either a new branch

or a new root to spring from it; which proves that the point of origin in

growth is intermediate between stem and root.

  Likewise in sanguineous animals the heart is the first organ developed; this

is evident from what has been observed in those cases where observation of

their growth is possible. Hence in bloodless animals also what corresponds to

the heart must develop first. We have already asserted in our treatise on The

Parts of Animals that it is from the heart that the veins issue, and that in

sanguineous animals the blood is the final nutriment from which the members

are formed. Hence it is clear that there is one function in nutrition which the

mouth has the faculty of performing, and a different one appertaining to the

stomach. But it is the heart that has supreme control, exercising an additional

and completing function. Hence in sanguineous animals the source both of

the sensitive and of the nutritive soul must be in the heart, for the functions

relative to nutrition exercised by the other parts are ancillary to the activity of

the heart. It is the part of the dominating organ to achieve the final result, as

of  the  physician’s  efforts  to  be  directed  towards  health,  and  not  to  beoccupied with subordinate offices.

  Certainly, however, all saguineous animals have the supreme organ of the

sensefaculties in the heart, for it is here that we must look for the common

sensorium belonging to all the sense-organs. These in two cases, taste and

touch, can be clearly seen to extend to the heart, and hence the others also

must  lead  to  it,  for  in  it  the  other  organs  may  possibly  initiate  changes,

whereas  with  the  upper  region  of  the  body  taste  and  touch  have  no

connexion. Apart from these considerations, if the life is always located in

this part, evidently the principle of sensation must be situated there too, for it

is qua animal that an animal is said to be a living thing, and it is called animal

because endowed with sensation. Elsewhere in other works we have stated

the reasons why some of the sense-organs are, as is evident, connected with

the heart, while others are situated in the head. (It is this fact that causes some

people to think that it is in virtue of the brain that the function of perception

belongs to animals.)


4


  Thus if, on the one hand, we look to the observed facts, what we have said

makes  it  clear  that  the  source  of  the  sensitive  soul,  together  with  that

connected  with  growth  and  nutrition,  is  situated  in  this  organ  and  in  the

central one of the three divisions of the body. But it follows by deduction

also; for we see that in every case, when several results are open to her,

Nature always brings to pass the best. Now if both principles are located in

the  midst  of  the  substance,  the  two  parts  of  the  body,  viz.  that  which

elaborates and that which receives the nutriment in its final form will best

perform their appropriate function; for the soul will then be close to each, and

the  central  situation  which  it  will,  as  such,  occupy  is  the  position  of  a

dominating power.

  Further, that which employs an instrument and the instrument it employs

must  be  distinct  (and  must  be  spatially  diverse  too,  if  possible,  as  in

capacity), just as the flute and that which plays it-the hand-are diverse. Thus

if animal is defined by the possession of sensitive soul, this soul must in the

sanguineous  animals  be  in  the  heart,  and,  in  the  bloodless  ones,  in  the

corresponding part of their body. But in animals all the members and the

whole body possess some connate warmth of constitution, and hence when

alive they are observed to be warm, but when dead and deprived of life theyare the opposite. Indeed, the source of this warmth must be in the heart in

sanguineous  animals,  and  in  the  case  of  bloodless  animals  in  the

corresponding  organ,  for,  though  all  parts  of  the  body  by  means  of  their

natural heat elaborate and concoct the nutriment, the governing organ takes

the chief share in this process. Hence, though the other members become

cold,  life  remains;  but  when  the  warmth  here  is  quenched,  death  always

ensues, because the source of heat in all the other members depends on this,

and  the  soul  is,  as  it  were,  set  aglow  with  fire  in  this  part,  which  in

sanguineous animals is the heart and in the bloodless order the analogous

member. Hence, of necessity, life must be coincident with the maintenance of

heat, and what we call death is its destruction.


5


  However, it is to be noticed that there are two ways in which fire ceases to

exist; it may go out either by exhaustion or by extinction. That which is self-

caused we call exhaustion, that due to its opposites extinction. [The former is

that due to old age, the latter to violence.] But either of these ways in which

fire ceases to be may be brought about by the same cause, for, when there is a

deficiency of nutriment and the warmth can obtain no maintenance, the fire

fails; and the reason is that the opposite, checking digestion, prevents the fire

from being fed. But in other cases the result is exhaustion,-when the heat

accumulates excessively owing to lack of respiration and of refrigeration. For

in this case what happens is that the heat, accumulating in great quantity,

quickly uses up its nutriment and consumes it all before more is sent up by

evaporation. Hence not only is a smaller fire readily put out by a large one,

but of itself the candle flame is consumed when inserted in a large blaze just

as is the case with any other combustible. The reason is that the nutriment in

the flame is seized by the larger one before fresh fuel can be added, for fire is

ever coming into being and rushing just like a river, but so speedily as to

elude observation.

  Clearly therefore, if the bodily heat must be conserved (as is necessary if

life is to continue), there must be some way of cooling the heat resident in the

source  of  warmth.  Take  as  an  illustration  what  occurs  when  coals  are

confined in a brazier. If they are kept covered up continuously by the so-

called  ‘choker’,  they  are  quickly  extinguished,  but,  if  the  lid  is  in  rapid

alternation lifted up and put on again they remain glowing for a long time.Banking up a fire also keeps it in, for the ashes, being porous, do not prevent

the  passage  of  air,  and  again  they  enable  it  to  resist  extinction  by  the

surrounding air by means of the supply of heat which it possesses. However,

we have stated in The Problems the reasons why these operations, namely

banking up and covering up a fire, have the opposite effects (in the one case

the fire goes out, in the other it continues alive for a considerable time).


6


  Everything living has soul, and it, as we have said, cannot exist without the

presence of heat in the constitution. In plants the natural heat is sufficiently

well  kept  alive  by  the  aid  which  their  nutriment  and  the  surrounding  air

supply. For the food has a cooling effect [as it enters, just as it has in man]

when first it is taken in, whereas abstinence from food produces heat and

thirst. The air, if it be motionless, becomes hot, but by the entry of food a

motion is set up which lasts until digestion is completed and so cools it. If the

surrounding air is excessively cold owing to the time of year, there being

severe frost, plants shrivel, or if, in the extreme heats of summer the moisture

drawn from the ground cannot produce its cooling effect, the heat comes to

an end by exhaustion. Trees suffering at such seasons are said to be blighted

or  star-stricken.  Hence  the  practice  of  laying  beneath  the  roots  stones  of

certain species or water in pots, for the purpose of cooling the roots of the

plants.

  Some animals pass their life in the water, others in the air, and therefore

these media furnish the source and means of refrigeration, water in the one

case, air in the other. We must proceed-and it will require further application

on  our  part-to  give  an  account  of  the  way  and  manner  in  which  this

refrigeration occurs.


7


A few of the previous physical philosophers have spoken of respiration.

The reason, however, why it exists in animals they have either not declared

or, when they have, their statements are not correct and show a comparative

lack of acquaintance with the facts. Moreover they assert that all animals

respire-which is untrue. Hence these points must first claim our attention, inorder that we may not be thought to make unsubstantiated charges against

authors no longer alive.

First then, it is evident that all animals with lungs breathe, but in some

cases breathing animals have a bloodless and spongy lung, and then there is

less need for respiration. These animals can remain under water for a time,

which  relatively  to  their  bodily  strength,  is  considerable.  All  oviparous

animals, e.g. the frog-tribe, have a spongy lung. Also hemydes and tortoises

can remain for a long time immersed in water; for their lung, containing little

blood, has not much heat. Hence, when once it is inflated, it itself, by means

of its motion, produces a cooling effect and enables the animal to remain

immersed for a long time. Suffocation, however, always ensues if the animal

is forced to hold its breath for too long a time, for none of this class take in

water in the way fishes do. On the other hand, animals which have the lung

charged with blood have greater need of respiration on account of the amount

of  their  heat,  while  none  at  all  of  the  others  which  do  not  possess  lungs

breathe.


8


  Democritus of Abdera and certain others who have treated of respiration,

while saying nothing definite about the lungless animals, nevertheless seem

to speak as if all breathed. But Anaxagoras and Diogenes both maintain that

all  breathe,  and  state  the  manner  in  which  fishes  and  oysters  respire.

Anaxagoras says that when fishes discharge water through their gills, air is

formed in the mouth, for there can be no vacuum, and that it is by drawing in

this that they respire. Diogenes’ statement is that, when they discharge water

through their gills, they suck the air out of the water surrounding the mouth

by means of the vacuum formed in the mouth, for he believes there is air in

the water.

But  these  theories  are  untenable.  Firstly,  they  state  only  what  is  the

common element in both operations and so leave out the half of the matter.

For  what  goes  by  the  name  of  respiration  consists,  on  the  one  hand,  of

inhalation, and, on the other, of the exhalation of breath; but, about the latter

they say nothing, nor do they describe how such animals emit their breath.

Indeed, explanation is for them impossible for, when the creatures respire,

they must discharge their breath by the same passage as that by which they

draw it in, and this must happen in alternation. Hence, as a result, they musttake the water into their mouth at the same time as they breathe out. But the

air  and  the  water  must  meet  and  obstruct  each  other.  Further,  when  they

discharge the water they must emit their breath by the mouth or the gills, and

the result will be that they will breathe in and breathe out at the same time,

for it is at that moment that respiration is said to occur. But it is impossible

that they should do both at the same time. Hence, if respiring creatures must

both exhale and inhale the air, and if none of these animals can breathe out,

evidently none can respire at all.


9


  Further, the assertion that they draw in air out of the mouth or out of the

water by means of the mouth is an impossibility, for, not having a lung, they

have no windpipe; rather the stomach is closely juxtaposed to the mouth, so

that they must do the sucking with the stomach. But in that case the other

animals would do so also, which is not the truth; and the water-animals also

would be seen to do it when out of the water, whereas quite evidently they do

not.  Further,  in  all  animals  that  respire  and  draw  breath  there  is  to  be

observed a certain motion in the part of the body which draws in the air, but

in the fishes this does not occur. Fishes do not appear to move any of the

parts in the region of the stomach, except the gills alone, and these move both

when they are in the water and when they are thrown on to dry land and gasp.

Moreover, always when respiring animals are killed by being suffocated in

water, bubbles are formed of the air which is forcibly discharged, as happens,

e.g. when one forces a tortoise or a frog or any other animal of a similar class

to stay beneath water. But with fishes this result never occurs, in whatsoever

way we try to obtain it, since they do not contain air drawn from an external

source. Again, the manner of respiration said to exist in them might occur in

the case of men also when they are under water. For if fishes draw in air out

of the surrounding water by means of their mouth why should not men too

and other animals do so also; they should also, in the same way as fishes,

draw in air out of the mouth. If in the former case it were possible, so also

should it be in the latter. But, since in the one it is not so, neither does it occur

in the other. Furthermore, why do fishes, if they respire, die in the air and

gasp (as can be seen) as in suffocation? It is not want of food that produces

this effect upon them, and the reason given by Diogenes is foolish, for he

says that in air they take in too much air and hence die, but in the water theytake in a moderate amount. But that should be a possible occurrence with

land  animals  also;  as  facts  are,  however,  no  land  animal  seems  to  be

suffocated  by  excessive  respiration.  Again,  if  all  animals  breathe,  insects

must do so also. many of them seem to live though divided not merely into

two, but into several parts, e.g. the class called Scolopendra. But how can

they, when thus divided, breathe, and what is the organ they employ? The

main reason why these writers have not given a good account of these facts is

that they have no acquaintance with the internal organs, and that they did not

accept the doctrine that there is a final cause for whatever Nature does. If

they  had  asked  for  what  purpose  respiration  exists  in  animals,  and  had

considered this with reference to the organs, e.g. the gills and the lungs, they

would have discovered the reason more speedily.


10


  Democritus, however, does teach that in the breathing animals there is a

certain result produced by respiration; he asserts that it prevents the soul from

being extruded from the body. Nevertheless, he by no means asserts that it is

for this purpose that Nature so contrives it, for he, like the other physical

philosophers, altogether fails to attain to any such explanation. His statement

is that the soul and the hot element are identical, being the primary forms

among the spherical particles. Hence, when these are being crushed together

by the surrounding atmosphere thrusting them out, respiration, according to

his account, comes in to succour them. For in the air there are many of those

particles which he calls mind and soul. Hence, when we breathe and the air

enters, these enter along with it, and by their action cancel the pressure, thus

preventing the expulsion of the soul which resides in the animal.

This  explains  why  life  and  death  are  bound  up  with  the  taking  in  and

letting  out  of  the  breath;  for  death  occurs  when  the  compression  by  the

surrounding air gains the upper hand, and, the animal being unable to respire,

the  air  from  outside  can  no  longer  enter  and  counteract  the  compression.

Death is the departure of those forms owing to the expulsive pressure exerted

by the surrounding air. Death, however, occurs not by haphazard but, when

natural, owing to old age, and, when unnatural, to violence.

But the reason for this and why all must die Democritus has by no means

made clear. And yet, since evidently death occurs at one time of life and not

at another, he should have said whether the cause is external or internal.Neither does he assign the cause of the beginning of respiration, nor say

whether it is internal or external. Indeed, it is not the case that the external

mind superintends the reinforcement; rather the origin of breathing and of the

respiratory motion must be within: it is not due to pressure from around. It is

absurd also that what surrounds should compress and at the same time by

entering dilate. This then is practically his theory, and how he puts it.

But  if  we  must  consider  that  our  previous  account  is  true,  and  that

respiration does not occur in every animal, we must deem that this explains

death not universally, but only in respiring animals. Yet neither is it a good

account of these even, as may clearly be seen from the facts and phenomena

of which we all have experience. For in hot weather we grow warmer, and,

having more need of respiration, we always breathe faster. But, when the air

around  is  cold  and  contracts  and  solidifies  the  body,  retardation  of  the

breathing results. Yet this was just the time when the external air should enter

and annul the expulsive movement, whereas it is the opposite that occurs. For

when the breath is not let out and the heat accumulates too much then we

need to respire, and to respire we must draw in the breath. When hot, people

breathe rapidly, because they must do so in order to cool themselves, just

when the theory of Democritus would make them add fire to fire.


11


The theory found in the Timaeus, of the passing round of the breath by

pushing, by no means determines how, in the case of the animals other than

land-animals, their heat is preserved, and whether it is due to the same or a

different cause. For if respiration occurs only in land-animals we should be

told what is the reason of that. Likewise, if it is found in others also, but in a

different form, this form of respiration, if they all can breathe, must also be

described.

  Further, the method of explaining involves a fiction. It is said that when the

hot  air  issues  from  the  mouth  it  pushes  the  surrounding  air,  which  being

carried on enters the very place whence the internal warmth issued, through

the interstices of the porous flesh; and this reciprocal replacement is due to

the fact that a vacuum cannot exist. But when it has become hot the air passes

out again by the same route, and pushes back inwards through the mouth the

air that had been discharged in a warm condition. It is said that it is this

action which goes on continuously when the breath is taken in and let out.But according to this way of thinking it will follow that we breathe out

before we breathe in. But the opposite is the case, as evidence shows, for

though these two functions go on in alternation, yet the last act when life

comes to a close is the letting out of the breath, and hence its admission must

have been the beginning of the process.

  Once more, those who give this kind of explanation by no means state the

final cause of the presence in animals of this function (to wit the admission

and  emission  of  the  breath),  but  treat  it  as  though  it  were  a  contingent

accompaniment of life. Yet it evidently has control over life and death, for it

results synchronously that when respiring animals are unable to breathe they

perish. Again, it is absurd that the passage of the hot air out through the

mouth and back again should be quite perceptible, while we were not able to

detect the thoracic influx and the return outwards once more of the heated

breath. It is also nonsense that respiration should consist in the entrance of

heat, for the evidence is to the contrary effect; what is breathed out is hot, and

what is breathed in is cold. When it is hot we pant in breathing, for, because

what enters does not adequately perform its cooling function, we have as a

consequence to draw the breath frequently.


12


It is certain, however, that we must not entertain the notion that it is for

purposes of nutrition that respiration is designed, and believe that the internal

fire is fed by the breath; respiration, as it were, adding fuel to the fire, while

the feeding of the flame results in the outward passage of the breath. To

combat this doctrine I shall repeat what I said in opposition to the previous

theories. This, or something analogous to it, should occur in the other animals

also  (on  this  theory),  for  all  possess  vital  heat.  Further,  how  are  we  to

describe this fictitious process of the generation of heat from the breath?

Observation shows rather that it is a product of the food. A consequence also

of this theory is that the nutriment would enter and the refuse be discharged

by the same channel, but this does not appear to occur in the other instances.


13


  Empedocles also gives an account of respiration without, however, makingclear what its purpose is, or whether or not it is universal in animals. Also

when dealing with respiration by means of the nostrils he imagines he is

dealing with what is the primary kind of respiration. Even the breath which

passes through the nostrils passes through the windpipe out of the chest as

well, and without the latter the nostrils cannot act. Again, when animals are

bereft of respiration through the nostrils, no detrimental result ensues, but,

when  prevented  from  breathing  through  the  windpipe,  they  die.  Nature

employs respiration through the nostrils as a secondary function in certain

animals in order to enable them to smell. But the reason why it exists in some

only is that though almost all animals are endowed with the sense of smell,

the sense-organ is not the same in all.

A more precise account has been given about this elsewhere. Empedocles,

however, explains the passage inwards and outwards of the breath, by the

theory that there are certain blood-vessels, which, while containing blood, are

not filled by it, but have passages leading to the outer air, the calibre of which

is fine in contrast to the size of the solid particles, but large relatively to those

in the air. Hence, since it is the nature of the blood to move upwards and

downwards, when it moves down the air rushes in and inspiration occurs;

when the blood rises, the air is forced out and the outward motion of the

breath results. He compares this process to what occurs in a clepsydra.

<

div class="quote">

  Thus all things outwards breathe and in;—their flesh has tubes

Bloodless, that stretch towards the body’s outmost edge,

Which, at their mouths, full many frequent channels pierce,

Cleaving the extreme nostrils through; thus, while the gore

Lies hid, for air is cut a thoroughfare most plain.

And thence, whenever shrinks away the tender blood,

Enters the blustering wind with swelling billow wild.

But when the blood leaps up, backward it breathes. As when

With water-clock of polished bronze a maiden sporting,

Sets on her comely hand the narrow of the tube

And dips it in the frail-formed water’s silvery sheen;

Not then the flood the vessel enters, but the air,

Until she frees the crowded stream. But then indeed

Upon the escape runs in the water meet.

So also when within the vessel’s deeps the waterRemains, the opening by the hand of flesh being closed,

The outer air that entrance craves restrains the flood

At the gates of the sounding narrow,

upon the surface pressing,

Until the maid withdraws her hand. But then in contrariwise

Once more the air comes in and water meet flows out.

Thus to the to the subtle blood, surging throughout the limbs,

Whene’er it shrinks away into the far recesses

Admits a stream of air rushing with swelling wave,

But, when it backward leaps, in like bulk air flows out.

 

This then is what he says of respiration. But, as we said, all animals that

evidently respire do so by means of the windpipe, when they breathe either

through  the  mouth  or  through  the  nostrils.  Hence,  if  it  is  of  this  kind  of

respiration that he is talking, we must ask how it tallies with the explanation

given. But the facts seem to be quite opposed. The chest is raised in the

manner of a forge-bellows when the breath is drawn in-it is quite reasonable

that it should be heat which raises up and that the blood should occupy the

hot region-but it collapses and sinks down, like the bellows once more, when

the breath is let out. The difference is that in a bellows it is not by the same

channel that the air is taken in and let out, but in breathing it is.

But, if Empedocles is accounting only for respiration through the nostrils,

he is much in error, for that does not involve the nostrils alone, but passes by

the channel beside the uvula where the extremity of the roof of the mouth is,

some of the air going this way through the apertures of the nostrils and some

through the mouth, both when it enters and when it passes out. Such then is

the nature and magnitude of the difficulties besetting the theories of other

writers concerning respiration.


14


We have already stated that life and the presence of soul involve a certain

heat. Not even the digesting process to which is due the nutrition of animals

occurs apart from soul and warmth, for it is to fire that in all cases elaboration

is due. It is for this reason, precisely, that the primary nutritive soul also must

be located in that part of the body and in that division of this region which is

the immediate vehicle of this principle. The region in question is intermediatebetween that where food enters and that where excrement is discharged. In

bloodless animals it has no name, but in the sanguineous class this organ is

called the heart. The blood constitutes the nutriment from which the organs of

the animal are directly formed. Likewise the bloodvessels must have the same

originating source, since the one exists for the other’s behoof-as a vessel or

receptacle for it. In sanguineous animals the heart is the starting-point of the

veins;  they  do  not  traverse  it,  but  are  found  to  stretch  out  from  it,  as

dissections enable us to see.

Now the other psychical faculties cannot exist apart from the power of

nutrition (the reason has already been stated in the treatise On the Soul), and

this depends on the natural fire, by the union with which Nature has set it

aglow. But fire, as we have already stated, is destroyed in two ways, either by

extinction or by exhaustion. It suffers extinction from its opposites. Hence it

can be extinguished by the surrounding cold both when in mass and (though

more speedily) when scattered. Now this way of perishing is due to violence

equally  in  living  and  in  lifeless  objects,  for  the  division  of  an  animal  by

instruments and consequent congelation by excess of cold cause death. But

exhaustion is due to excess of heat; if there is too much heat close at hand

and the thing burning does not have a fresh supply of fuel added to it, it goes

out by exhaustion, not by the action of cold. Hence, if it is going to continue

it must be cooled, for cold is a preventive against this form of extinction.


15


  Some animals occupy the water, others live on land, and, that being so, in

the case of those which are very small and bloodless the refrigeration due to

the surrounding water or air is sufficient to prevent destruction from this

cause. Having little heat, they require little cold to combat it. Hence too such

animals are almost all short-lived, for, being small, they have less scope for

deflection towards either extreme. But some insects are longer-lived though

bloodless, like all the others), and these have a deep indentation beneath the

waist,  in  order  to  secure  cooling  through  the  membrane,  which  there  is

thinner. They are warmer animals and hence require more refrigeration, and

such are bees (some of which live as long as seven years) and all that make a

humming noise, like wasps, cockchafers, and crickets. They make a sound as

if of panting by means of air, for, in the middle section itself, the air which

exists internally and is involved in their construction, causing a rising andfalling movement, produces friction against the membrane. The way in which

they move this region is like the motion due to the lungs in animals that

breathe the outer air, or to the gills in fishes. What occurs is comparable to

the suffocation of a respiring animal by holding its mouth, for then the lung

causes a heaving motion of this kind. In the case of these animals this internal

motion is not sufficient for refrigeration, but in insects it is. It is by friction

against the membrane that they produce the humming sound, as we said, in

the way that children do by blowing through the holes of a reed covered by a

fine membrane. It is thus that the singing crickets too produce their song;

they possess greater warmth and are indented at the waist, but the songless

variety have no fissure there.

  Animals  also  which  are  sanguineous  and  possess  a  lung,  though  that

contains little blood and is spongy, can in some cases, owing to the latter fact,

live a long time without breathing; for the lung, containing little blood or

fluid,  can  rise  a  long  way:  its  own  motion  can  for  a  long  time  produce

sufficient refrigeration. But at last it ceases to suffice, and the animal dies of

suffocation if it does not respire-as we have already said. For of exhaustion

that  kind  which  is  destruction  due  to  lack  of  refrigeration  is  called

suffocation, and whatsoever is thus destroyed is said to be suffocated.

We have already stated that among animals insects do not respire, and the

fact is open to observation in the case of even small creatures like flies and

bees, for they can swim about in a fluid for a long time if it is not too hot or

too cold. Yet animals with little strength tend to breathe more frequently.

These, however, die of what is called suffocation when the stomach becomes

filled and the heat in the central segment is destroyed. This explains also why

they revive after being among ashes for a time.

  Again among water-animals those that are bloodless remain alive longer in

air  than  those  that  have  blood  and  admit  the  sea-water,  as,  for  example,

fishes. Since it is a small quantity of heat they possess, the air is for a long

time  adequate  for  the  purposes  of  refrigeration  in  such  animals  as  the

crustacea and the polyps. It does not however suffice, owing to their want of

heat, to keep them finally in life, for most fishes also live though among

earth,  yet  in  a  motionless  state,  and  are  to  be  found  by  digging.  For  all

animals  that  have  no  lung  at  all  or  have  a  bloodless  one  require  less

refrigeration.


16  Concerning the bloodless animals we have declared that in some cases it is

the surrounding air, in others fluid, that aids the maintenance of life. But in

the case of animals possessing blood and heart, all which have a lung admit

the air and produce the cooling effect by breathing in and out. All animals

have a lung that are viviparous and are so internally, not externally merely

(the Selachia are viviparous, but not internally), and of the oviparous class

those that have wings, e.g. birds, and those with scales, e.g. tortoises, lizards,

and snakes. The former class have a lung charged with blood, but in the most

part of the latter it is spongy. Hence they employ respiration more sparingly

as already said. The function is found also in all that frequent and pass their

life in the water, e.g. the class of water-snakes and frogs and crocodiles and

hemydes, both sea—and land-tortoises, and seals.

All these and similar animals both bring forth on land and sleep on shore

or, when they do so in the water, keep the head above the surface in order to

respire.  But  all  with  gills  produce  refrigeration  by  taking  in  water;  the

Selachia and all other footless animals have gills. Fish are footless, and the

limbs they have get their name (pterugion) from their similarity to wings

(pterux). But of those with feet one only, so far as observed, has gills. It is

called the tadpole.

No animal yet has been seen to possess both lungs and gills, and the reason

for this is that the lung is designed for the purpose of refrigeration by means

of the air (it seems to have derived its name (pneumon) from its function as a

receptacle of the breath (pneuma)), while gills are relevant to refrigeration by

water. Now for one purpose one organ is adapted and one single means of

refrigeration is sufficient in every case. Hence, since we see that Nature does

nothing in vain, and if there were two organs one would be purposeless, this

is the reason why some animals have gills, others lungs, but none possess

both.


17


  Every animal in order to exist requires nutriment, in order to prevent itself

from dying, refrigeration; and so Nature employs the same organ for both

purposes. For, as in some cases the tongue serves both for discerning tastes

and  for  speech,  so  in  animals  with  lungs  the  mouth  is  employed  both  in

working up the food and in the passage of the breath outwards and inwards.

In lungless and non-respiring animals it is employed in working up the food,while in those of them that require refrigeration it is the gills that are created

for this purpose.

We shall state further on how it is that these organs have the faculty of

producing  refrigeration.  But  to  prevent  their  food  from  impeding  these

operations there is a similar contrivance in the respiring animals and in those

that admit water. At the moment of respiration they do not take in food, for

otherwise  suffocation  results  owing  to  the  food,  whether  liquid  or  dry,

slipping  in  through  the  windpipe  and  lying  on  the  lung.  The  windpipe  is

situated before the oesophagus, through which food passes into what is called

the stomach, but in quadrupeds which are sanguineous there is, as it were, a

lid over the windpipe-the epiglottis. In birds and oviparous quadrupeds this

covering  is  absent,  but  its  office  is  discharged  by  a  contraction  of  the

windpipe. The latter class contract the windpipe when swallowing their food;

the former close down the epiglottis. When the food has passed, the epiglottis

is in the one case raised, and in the other the windpipe is expanded, and the

air  enters  to  effect  refrigeration.  In  animals  with  gills  the  water  is  first

discharged through them and then the food passes in through the mouth; they

have no windpipe and hence can take no harm from liquid lodging in this

organ, only from its entering the stomach. For these reasons the expulsion of

water and the seizing of their food is rapid, and their teeth are sharp and in

almost all cases arranged in a saw-like fashion, for they are debarred from

chewing their food.


18


  Among  water-animals  the  cetaceans  may  give  rise  to  some  perplexity,

though they too can be rationally explained.

  Examples of such animals are dolphins and whales, and all others that have

a blowhole. They have no feet, yet possess a lung though admitting the sea-

water. The reason for possessing a lung is that which we have now stated

[refrigeration]; the admission of water is not for the purpose of refrigeration.

That is effected by respiration, for they have a lung. Hence they sleep with

their head out of the water, and dolphins, at any rate, snore. Further, if they

are  entangled  in  nets  they  soon  die  of  suffocation  owing  to  lack  of

respiration, and hence they can be seen to come to the surface owing to the

necessity of breathing. But, since they have to feed in the water, they must

admit it, and it is in order to discharge this that they all have a blow-hole;after admitting the water they expel it through the blow-hole as the fishes do

through the gills. The position of the blow-hole is an indication of this, for it

leads to none of the organs which are charged with blood; but it lies before

the brain and thence discharges water.

It is for the very same reason that molluscs and crustaceans admit water-I

mean such animals as Carabi and Carcini. For none of these is refrigeration a

necessity, for in every case they have little heat and are bloodless, and hence

are sufficiently cooled by the surrounding water. But in feeding they admit

water,  and  hence  must  expel  it  in  order  to  prevent  its  being  swallowed

simultaneously with the food. Thus crustaceans, like the Carcini and Carabi,

discharge water through the folds beside their shaggy parts, while cuttlefish

and the polyps employ for this purpose the hollow above the head. There is,

however, a more precise account of these in the History of Animals.

  Thus it has been explained that the cause of the admission of the water is

refrigeration, and the fact that animals constituted for a life in water must

feed in it.


19


An account must next be given of refrigeration and the manner in which it

occurs in respiring animals and those possessed of gills. We have already said

that all animals with lungs respire. The reason why some creatures have this

organ, and why those having it need respiration, is that the higher animals

have a greater proportion of heat, for at the same time they must have been

assigned a higher soul and they have a higher nature than plants. Hence too

those with most blood and most warmth in the lung are of greater size, and

animal in which the blood in the lung is purest and most plentiful is the most

erect, namely man; and the reason why he alone has his upper part directed to

the upper part of the universe is that he possesses such a lung. Hence this

organ as much as any other must be assigned to the essence of the animal

both in man and in other cases.

This  then  is  the  purpose  of  refrigeration.  As  for  the  constraining  and

efficient cause, we must believe that it created animals like this, just as it

created many others also not of this constitution. For some have a greater

proportion of earth in their composition, like plants, and others, e.g. aquatic

animals,  contain  a  larger  amount  of  water;  while  winged  and  terrestrial

animals have an excess of air and fire respectively. It is always in the regionproper to the element preponderating in the scheme of their constitution that

things exist.


20


  Empedocles is then in error when he says that those animals which have

the most warmth and fire live in the water to counterbalance the excess of

heat in their constitution, in order that, since they are deficient in cold and

fluid, they may be kept in life by the contrary character of the region they

occupy; for water has less heat than air. But it is wholly absurd that the

water-animals  should  in  every  case  originate  on  dry  land,  and  afterwards

change their place of abode to the water; for they are almost all footless. He,

however,  when  describing  their  original  structure  says  that,  though

originating on dry land, they have abandoned it and migrated to the water.

But again it is evident that they are not warmer than land-animals, for in

some cases they have no blood at all, in others little.

The question, however, as to what sorts of animals should be called warm

and what cold, has in each special case received consideration. Though in one

respect  there  is  reason  in  the  explanation  which  Empedocles  aims  at

establishing, yet his account is not correct. Excess in a bodily state is cured

by a situation or season of opposite character, but the constitution is best

maintained by an environment akin to it. There is a difference between the

material of which any animal is constituted and the states and dispositions of

that material. For example, if nature were to constitute a thing of wax or of

ice, she would not preserve it by putting it in a hot place, for the opposing

quality would quickly destroy it, seeing that heat dissolves that which cold

congeals. Again, a thing composed of salt or nitre would not be taken and

placed in water, for fluid dissolves that of which the consistency is due to the

hot and the dry.

  Hence  if  the  fluid  and  the  dry  supply  the  material  for  all  bodies,  it  is

reasonable that things the composition of which is due to the fluid and the

cold should have liquid for their medium [and, if they are cold, they will exist

in the cold], while that which is due to the dry will be found in the dry. Thus

trees grow not in water but on dry land. But the same theory would relegate

them to the water, on account of their excess of dryness, just as it does the

things that are excessively fiery. They would migrate thither not on account

of its cold but owing to its fluidity.  Thus the natural character of the material of objects is of the same nature

as the region in which they exist; the liquid is found in liquid, the dry on land,

the warm in air. With regard, however, to states of body, a cold situation has,

on  the  other  hand,  a  beneficial  effect  on  excess  of  heat,  and  a  warm

environment on excess of cold, for the region reduces to a mean the excess in

the  bodily  condition.  The  regions  appropriate  to  each  material  and  the

revolutions of the seasons which all experience supply the means which must

be sought in order to correct such excesses; but, while states of the body can

be  opposed  in  character  to  the  environment,  the  material  of  which  it  is

composed can never be so. This, then, is a sufficient explanation of why it is

not owing to the heat in their constitution that some animals are aquatic,

others terrestrial, as Empedocles maintains, and of why some possess lungs

and others do not.


21


The explanation of the admission of air and respiration in those animals in

which a lung is found, and especially in those in which it is full of blood, is to

be found in the fact that it is of a spongy nature and full of tubes, and that it is

the most fully charged with blood of all the visceral organs. All animals with

a full-blooded lung require rapid refrigeration because there is little scope for

deviation  from  the  normal  amount  of  their  vital  fire;  the  air  also  must

penetrate all through it on account of the large quantity of blood and heat it

contains. But both these operations can be easily performed by air, for, being

of a subtle nature, it penetrates everywhere and that rapidly, and so performs

its cooling function; but water has the opposite characteristics.

The reason why animals with a full-blooded lung respire most is hence

manifest; the more heat there is, the greater is the need for refrigeration, and

at the same time breath can easily pass to the source of heat in the heart.


22


In order to understand the way in which the heart is connected with the

lung by means of passages, we must consult both dissections and the account

in the History of Animals. The universal cause of the need which the animal

has for refrigeration, is the union of the soul with fire that takes place in theheart.  Respiration  is  the  means  of  effecting  refrigeration,  of  which  those

animals make use that possess a lung as well as a heart. But when they, as for

example the fishes, which on account of their aquatic nature have no lung,

possess the latter organ without the former, the cooling is effected through

the  gills  by  means  of  water.  For  ocular  evidence  as  to  how  the  heart  is

situated relatively to the gills we must employ dissections, and for precise

details  we  must  refer  to  Natural  History.  As  a  summarizing  statement,

however, and for present purposes, the following is the account of the matter.

It  might  appear  that  the  heart  has  not  the  same  position  in  terrestrial

animals and fishes, but the position really is identical, for the apex of the

heart is in the direction in which they incline their heads. But it is towards the

mouth in fishes that the apex of the heart points, seeing that they do not

incline their heads in the same direction as land-animals do. Now from the

extremity of the heart a tube of a sinewy, arterial character runs to the centre

where the gills all join. This then is the largest of those ducts, but on either

side of the heart others also issue and run to the extremity of each gill, and by

means of the ceaseless flow of water through the gills, effect the cooling

which passes to the heart.

In similar fashion as the fish move their gills, respiring animals with rapid

action  raise  and  let  fall  the  chest  according  as  the  breath  is  admitted  or

expelled. If air is limited in amount and unchanged they are suffocated, for

either medium, owing to contact with the blood, rapidly becomes hot. The

heat of the blood counteracts the refrigeration and, when respiring animals

can no longer move the lung aquatic animals their gills, whether owing to

discase or old age, their death ensues.


23


To be born and to die are common to all animals, but there are specifically

diverse  ways  in  which  these  phenomena  occur;  of  destruction  there  are

different types, though yet something is common to them all. There is violent

death and again natural death, and the former occurs when the cause of death

is external, the latter when it is internal, and involved from the beginning in

the constitution of the organ, and not an affection derived from a foreign

source. In the case of plants the name given to this is withering, in animals

senility.  Death  and  decay  pertain  to  all  things  that  are  not  imperfectly

developed; to the imperfect also they may be ascribed in nearly the same butnot an identical sense. Under the imperfect I class eggs and seeds of plants as

they are before the root appears.

It is always to some lack of heat that death is due, and in perfect creatures

the cause is its failure in the organ containing the source of the creature’s

essential nature. This member is situate, as has been said, at the junction of

the upper and lower parts; in plants it is intermediate between the root and the

stem, in sanguineous animals it is the heart, and in those that are bloodless

the  corresponding  part  of  their  body.  But  some  of  these  animals  have

potentially many sources of life, though in actuality they possess only one.

This  is  why  some  insects  live  when  divided,  and  why,  even  among

sanguineous animals, all whose vitality is not intense live for a long time

after the heart has been removed. Tortoises, for example, do so and make

movements with their feet, so long as the shell is left, a fact to be explained

by the natural inferiority of their constitution, as it is in insects also.

The source of life is lost to its possessors when the heat with which it is

bound up is no longer tempered by cooling, for, as I have often remarked, it

is consumed by itself. Hence when, owing to lapse of time, the lung in the

one class and the gills in the other get dried up, these organs become hard and

earthy and incapable of movement, and cannot be expanded or contracted.

Finally things come to a climax, and the fire goes out from exhaustion.

  Hence a small disturbance will speedily cause death in old age. Little heat

remains, for the most of it has been breathed away in the long period of life

preceding,  and  hence  any  increase  of  strain  on  the  organ  quickly  causes

extinction. It is just as though the heart contained a tiny feeble flame which

the slightest movement puts out. Hence in old age death is painless, for no

violent disturbance is required to cause death, and there is an entire absence

of feeling when the soul’s connexion is severed. All diseases which harden

the lung by forming tumours or waste residues, or by excess of morbid heat,

as happens in fevers, accelerate the breathing owing to the inability of the

lung to move far either upwards or downwards. Finally, when motion is no

longer possible, the breath is given out and death ensues.


24


  Generation is the initial participation, mediated by warm substance, in the

nutritive soul, and life is the maintenance of this participation. Youth is the

period of the growth of the primary organ of refrigeration, old age of itsdecay, while the intervening time is the prime of life.

A violent death or dissolution consists in the extinction or exhaustion of

the vital heat (for either of these may cause dissolution), while natural death

is the exhaustion of the heat owing to lapse of time, and occurring at the end

of life. In plants this is to wither, in animals to die. Death, in old age, is the

exhaustion due to inability on the part of the organ, owing to old age, to

produce refrigeration. This then is our account of generation and life and

death, and the reason for their occurrence in animals.


25


It is hence also clear why respiring animals are suffocated in water and

fishes in air. For it is by water in the latter class, by air in the former that

refrigeration is effected, and either of these means of performing the function

is removed by a change of environment.

  There is also to be explained in either case the cause of the cause of the

motion of the gills and of the lungs, the rise and fall of which effects the

admission and expulsion of the breath or of water. The following, moreover,

is the manner of the constitution of the organ.


26


In  connexion  with  the  heart  there  are  three  phenomena,  which,  though

apparently of the same nature, are really not so, namely palpitation, pulsation,

and respiration.

  Palpitation is the rushing together of the hot substance in the heart owing

to the chilling influence of residual or waste products. It occurs, for example,

in the ailment known as ‘spasms’ and in other diseases. It occurs also in fear,

for when one is afraid the upper parts become cold, and the hot substance,

fleeing  away,  by  its  concentration  in  the  heart  produces  palpitation.  It  is

crushed into so small a space that sometimes life is extinguished, and the

animals die of the fright and morbid disturbance.

The beating of the heart, which, as can be seen, goes on continuously, is

similar to the throbbing of an abscess. That, however, is accompanied by

pain, because the change produced in the blood is unnatural, and it goes on

until the matter formed by concoction is discharged. There is a similaritybetween  this  phenomenon  and  that  of  boiling;  for  boiling  is  due  to  the

volatilization of fluid by heat and the expansion consequent on increase of

bulk. But in an abscess, if there is no evaporation through the walls, the

process terminates in suppuration due to the thickening of the liquid, while in

boiling it ends in the escape of the fluid out of the containing vessel.

In the heart the beating is produced by the heat expanding the fluid, of

which the food furnishes a constant supply. It occurs when the fluid rises to

the outer wall of the heart, and it goes on continuously; for there is a constant

flow of the fluid that goes to constitute the blood, it being in the heart that the

blood receives its primary elaboration. That this is so we can perceive in the

initial stages of generation, for the heart can be seen to contain blood before

the veins become distinct. This explains why pulsation in youth exceeds that

in older people, for in the young the formation of vapour is more abundant.

All the veins pulse, and do so simultaneously with each other, owing to

their connexion with the heart. The heart always beats, and hence they also

beat continuously and simultaneously with each other and with it.

  Palpitation, then, is the recoil of the heart against the compression due to

cold; and pulsation is the volatilization of the heated fluid.


27


  Respiration takes place when the hot substance which is the seat of the

nutritive  principle  increases.  For  it,  like  the  rest  of  the  body,  requires

nutrition, and more so than the members, for it is through it that they are

nourished. But when it increases it necessarily causes the organ to rise. This

organ we must to be constructed like the bellows in a smithy, for both heart

and lungs conform pretty well to this shape. Such a structure must be double,

for the nutritive principle must be situated in the centre of the natural force.

  Thus on increase of bulk expansion results, which necessarily causes the

surrounding parts to rise. Now this can be seen to occur when people respire;

they raise their chest because the motive principle of the organ described

resident within the chest causes an identical expansion of this organ. When it

dilates the outer air must rush in as into a bellows, and, being cold, by its

chilling influence reduces by extinction the excess of the fire. But, as the

increase of bulk causes the organ to dilate, so diminution causes contraction,

and when it collapses the air which entered must pass out again. When it

enters the air is cold, but on issuing it is warm owing to its contact with theheat resident in this organ, and this is specially the case in those animals that

possess a full-blooded lung. The numerous canal-like ducts in the lung, into

which it passes, have each a blood-vessel lying alongside, so that the whole

lung is thought to be full of blood. The inward passage of the air is called

respiration,  the  outward  expiration,  and  this  double  movement  goes  on

continuously  just  so  long  as  the  animal  lives  and  keeps  this  organ  in

continuous motion; it is for this reason that life is bound up with the passage

of the breath outwards and inwards.

It is in the same way that the motion of the gills in fishes takes place.

When the hot substance in the blood throughout the members rises, the gills

rise too, and let the water pass through, but when it is chilled and retreats

through  its  channels  to  the  heart,  they  contract  and  eject  the  water.

Continually  as  the  heat  in  the  heart  rises,  continually  on  being  chilled  it

returns thither again. Hence, as in respiring animals life and death are bound

up  with  respiration,  so  in  the  other  animals  class  they  depend  on  the

admission of water.

Our  discussion  of  life  and  death  and  kindred  topics  is  now  practically

complete. But health and discase also claim the attention of the scientist, and

not  mercly  of  the  physician,  in  so  far  as  an  account  of  their  causes  is

concerned.  The  extent  to  which  these  two  differ  and  investigate  diverse

provinces must not escape us, since facts show that their inquiries are, to a

certain extent, at least conterminous. For physicians of culture and refinement

make some mention of natural science, and claim to derive their principles

from it, while the most accomplished investigators into nature generally push

their studies so far as to conclude with an account of medical principles.                                    Part 4


                          Animal Physics                      The History of Animals, Book I


translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson


<

div id="book1" class="chapter" title="Book I">


1


Of the parts of animals some are simple: to wit, all such as divide into parts

uniform with themselves, as flesh into flesh; others are composite, such as

divide into parts not uniform with themselves, as, for instance, the hand does

not divide into hands nor the face into faces.

And  of  such  as  these,  some  are  called  not  parts  merely,  but  limbs  or

members. Such are those parts that, while entire in themselves, have within

themselves other diverse parts: as for instance, the head, foot, hand, the arm

as a whole, the chest; for these are all in themselves entire parts, and there are

other diverse parts belonging to them.

All those parts that do not subdivide into parts uniform with themselves are

composed of parts that do so subdivide, for instance, hand is composed of

flesh, sinews, and bones. Of animals, some resemble one another in all their

parts, while others have parts wherein they differ. Sometimes the parts are

identical in form or species, as, for instance, one man’s nose or eye resembles

another man’s nose or eye, flesh flesh, and bone bone; and in like manner

with a horse, and with all other animals which we reckon to be of one and the

same species: for as the whole is to the whole, so each to each are the parts

severally. In other cases the parts are identical, save only for a difference in

the way of excess or defect, as is the case in such animals as are of one and

the same genus. By ‘genus’ I mean, for instance, Bird or Fish, for each of

these  is  subject  to  difference  in  respect  of  its  genus,  and  there  are  many

species of fishes and of birds.

  Within the limits of genera, most of the parts as a rule exhibit differences

through contrast of the property or accident, such as colour and shape, to

which they are subject: in that some are more and some in a less degree the

subject of the same property or accident; and also in the way of multitude orfewness, magnitude or parvitude, in short in the way of excess or defect.

Thus in some the texture of the flesh is soft, in others firm; some have a long

bill, others a short one; some have abundance of feathers, others have only a

small quantity. It happens further that some have parts that others have not:

for instance, some have spurs and others not, some have crests and others not;

but as a general rule, most parts and those that go to make up the bulk of the

body are either identical with one another, or differ from one another in the

way of contrast and of excess and defect. For ‘the more’ and ‘the less’ may

be represented as ‘excess’ or ‘defect’.

  Once  again,  we  may  have  to  do  with  animals  whose  parts  are  neither

identical in form nor yet identical save for differences in the way of excess or

defect: but they are the same only in the way of analogy, as, for instance,

bone is only analogous to fish-bone, nail to hoof, hand to claw, and scale to

feather; for what the feather is in a bird, the scale is in a fish.

The  parts,  then,  which  animals  severally  possess  are  diverse  from,  or

identical with, one another in the fashion above described. And they are so

furthermore in the way of local disposition: for many animals have identical

organs that differ in position; for instance, some have teats in the breast,

others close to the thighs.

Of the substances that are composed of parts uniform (or homogeneous)

with themselves, some are soft and moist, others are dry and solid. The soft

and moist are such either absolutely or so long as they are in their natural

conditions, as, for instance, blood, serum, lard, suet, marrow, sperm, gall,

milk in such as have it flesh and the like; and also, in a different way, the

superfluities, as phlegm and the excretions of the belly and the bladder. The

dry and solid are such as sinew, skin, vein, hair, bone, gristle, nail, horn (a

term which as applied to the part involves an ambiguity, since the whole also

by virtue of its form is designated horn), and such parts as present an analogy

to these.

  Animals differ from one another in their modes of subsistence, in their

actions, in their habits, and in their parts. Concerning these differences we

shall first speak in broad and general terms, and subsequently we shall treat

of the same with close reference to each particular genus.

  Differences are manifested in modes of subsistence, in habits, in actions

performed. For instance, some animals live in water and others on land. And

of those that live in water some do so in one way, and some in another: that is

to say, some live and feed in the water, take in and emit water, and cannotlive if deprived of water, as is the case with the great majority of fishes;

others get their food and spend their days in the water, but do not take in

water but air, nor do they bring forth in the water. Many of these creatures are

furnished  with  feet,  as  the  otter,  the  beaver,  and  the  crocodile;  some  are

furnished with wings, as the diver and the grebe; some are destitute of feet, as

the water-snake. Some creatures get their living in the water and cannot exist

outside it: but for all that do not take in either air or water, as, for instance,

the sea-nettle and the oyster. And of creatures that live in the water some live

in the sea, some in rivers, some in lakes, and some in marshes, as the frog and

the newt.

Of  animals  that  live  on  dry  land  some  take  in  air  and  emit  it,  which

phenomena are termed ‘inhalation’ and ‘exhalation’; as, for instance, man

and all such land animals as are furnished with lungs. Others, again, do not

inhale air, yet live and find their sustenance on dry land; as, for instance, the

wasp, the bee, and all other insects. And by ‘insects’ I mean such creatures as

have nicks or notches on their bodies, either on their bellies or on both backs

and bellies.

And of land animals many, as has been said, derive their subsistence from

the water; but of creatures that live in and inhale water not a single one

derives its subsistence from dry land.

  Some animals at first live in water, and by and by change their shape and

live out of water, as is the case with river worms, for out of these the gadfly

develops.

  Furthermore, some animals are stationary, and some are erratic. Stationary

animals are found in water, but no such creature is found on dry land. In the

water are many creatures that live in close adhesion to an external object, as

is the case with several kinds of oyster. And, by the way, the sponge appears

to be endowed with a certain sensibility: as a proof of which it is alleged that

the difficulty in detaching it from its moorings is increased if the movement

to detach it be not covertly applied.

  Other creatures adhere at one time to an object and detach themselves from

it at other times, as is the case with a species of the so-called sea-nettle; for

some  of  these  creatures  seek  their  food  in  the  night-time  loose  and

unattached.

  Many creatures are unattached but motionless, as is the case with oysters

and  the  so-called  holothuria.  Some  can  swim,  as,  for  instance,  fishes,

molluscs, and crustaceans, such as the crawfish. But some of these last moveby walking, as the crab, for it is the nature of the creature, though it lives in

water, to move by walking.

Of land animals some are furnished with wings, such as birds and bees,

and these are so furnished in different ways one from another; others are

furnished with feet. Of the animals that are furnished with feet some walk,

some  creep,  and  some  wriggle.  But  no  creature  is  able  only  to  move  by

flying, as the fish is able only to swim, for the animals with leathern wings

can walk; the bat has feet and the seal has imperfect feet.

  Some birds have feet of little power, and are therefore called Apodes. This

little bird is powerful on the wing; and, as a rule, birds that resemble it are

weak-footed and strong winged, such as the swallow and the drepanis or (?)

Alpine swift; for all these birds resemble one another in their habits and in

their plumage, and may easily be mistaken one for another. (The apus is to be

seen at all seasons, but the drepanis only after rainy weather in summer; for

this is the time when it is seen and captured, though, as a general rule, it is a

rare bird.)

  Again,  some  animals  move  by  walking  on  the  ground  as  well  as  by

swimming in water.

  Furthermore,  the  following  differences  are  manifest  in  their  modes  of

living and in their actions. Some are gregarious, some are solitary, whether

they be furnished with feet or wings or be fitted for a life in the water; and

some partake of both characters, the solitary and the gregarious. And of the

gregarious, some are disposed to combine for social purposes, others to live

each for its own self.

  Gregarious creatures are, among birds, such as the pigeon, the crane, and

the  swan;  and,  by  the  way,  no  bird  furnished  with  crooked  talons  is

gregarious.  Of  creatures  that  live  in  water  many  kinds  of  fishes  are

gregarious, such as the so-called migrants, the tunny, the pelamys, and the

bonito.

Man, by the way, presents a mixture of the two characters, the gregarious

and the solitary.

  Social creatures are such as have some one common object in view; and

this property is not common to all creatures that are gregarious. Such social

creatures are man, the bee, the wasp, the ant, and the crane.

  Again, of these social creatures some submit to a ruler, others are subject

to no governance: as, for instance, the crane and the several sorts of bee

submit to a ruler, whereas ants and numerous other creatures are every onehis own master.

And again, both of gregarious and of solitary animals, some are attached to

a fixed home and others are erratic or nomad.

Also,  some  are  carnivorous,  some  graminivorous,  some  omnivorous:

whilst some feed on a peculiar diet, as for instance the bees and the spiders,

for the bee lives on honey and certain other sweets, and the spider lives by

catching flies; and some creatures live on fish. Again, some creatures catch

their food, others treasure it up; whereas others do not so.

  Some creatures provide themselves with a dwelling, others go without one:

of the former kind are the mole, the mouse, the ant, the bee; of the latter kind

are many insects and quadrupeds. Further, in respect to locality of dwelling

place, some creatures dwell under ground, as the lizard and the snake; others

live  on  the  surface  of  the  ground,  as  the  horse  and  the  dog.  make  to

themselves holes, others do not

  Some are nocturnal, as the owl and the bat; others live in the daylight.

  Moreover, some creatures are tame and some are wild: some are at all

times tame, as man and the mule; others are at all times savage, as the leopard

and the wolf; and some creatures can be rapidly tamed, as the elephant.

  Again, we may regard animals in another light. For, whenever a race of

animals is found domesticated, the same is always to be found in a wild

condition; as we find to be the case with horses, kine, swine, (men), sheep,

goats, and dogs.

  Further, some animals emit sound while others are mute, and some are

endowed with voice: of these latter some have articulate speech, while others

are inarticulate; some are given to continual chirping and twittering some are

prone  to  silence;  some  are  musical,  and  some  unmusical;  but  all  animals

without exception exercise their power of singing or chattering chiefly in

connexion with the intercourse of the sexes.

  Again,  some  creatures  live  in  the  fields,  as  the  cushat;  some  on  the

mountains, as the hoopoe; some frequent the abodes of men, as the pigeon.

  Some, again, are peculiarly salacious, as the partridge, the barn-door cock

and their congeners; others are inclined to chastity, as the whole tribe of

crows, for birds of this kind indulge but rarely in sexual intercourse.

Of marine animals, again, some live in the open seas, some near the shore,

some on rocks.

  Furthermore, some are combative under offence; others are provident for

defence. Of the former kind are such as act as aggressors upon others orretaliate when subjected to ill usage, and of the latter kind are such as merely

have some means of guarding themselves against attack.

  Animals  also  differ  from  one  another  in  regard  to  character  in  the

following  respects.  Some  are  good-tempered,  sluggish,  and  little  prone  to

ferocity, as the ox; others are quick tempered, ferocious and unteachable, as

the wild boar; some are intelligent and timid, as the stag and the hare; others

are mean and treacherous, as the snake; others are noble and courageous and

high-bred, as the lion; others are thorough-bred and wild and treacherous, as

the wolf: for, by the way, an animal is highbred if it come from a noble stock,

and  an  animal  is  thorough-bred  if  it  does  not  deflect  from  its  racial

characteristics.

  Further, some are crafty and mischievous, as the fox; some are spirited and

affectionate and fawning, as the dog; others are easy-tempered and easily

domesticated, as the elephant; others are cautious and watchful, as the goose;

others are jealous and self-conceited, as the peacock. But of all animals man

alone is capable of deliberation.

  Many animals have memory, and are capable of instruction; but no other

creature except man can recall the past at will.

  With regard to the several genera of animals, particulars as to their habits

of life and modes of existence will be discussed more fully by and by.

<

div id="section2" class="section" title="2">


2


  Common to all animals are the organs whereby they take food and the

organs where into they take it; and these are either identical with one another,

or are diverse in the ways above specified: to wit, either identical in form, or

varying  in  respect  of  excess  or  defect,  or  resembling  one  another

analogically, or differing in position.

  Furthermore, the great majority of animals have other organs besides these

in common, whereby they discharge the residuum of their food: I say, the

great majority, for this statement does not apply to all. And, by the way, the

organ whereby food is taken in is called the mouth, and the organ whereinto

it  is  taken,  the  belly;  the  remainder  of  the  alimentary  system  has  a  great

variety of names.

Now  the  residuum  of  food  is  twofold  in  kind,  wet  and  dry,  and  suchcreatures as have organs receptive of wet residuum are invariably found with

organs receptive of dry residuum; but such as have organs receptive of dry

residuum need not possess organs receptive of wet residuum. In other words,

an animal has a bowel or intestine if it have a bladder; but an animal may

have a bowel and be without a bladder. And, by the way, I may here remark

that the organ receptive of wet residuum is termed ‘bladder’, and the organ

receptive of dry residuum ‘intestine or ‘bowel’.

<

div id="section3" class="section" title="3">


3


Of  animals  otherwise,  a  great  many  have,  besides  the  organs  above-

mentioned, an organ for excretion of the sperm: and of animals capable of

generation one secretes into another, and the other into itself. The latter is

termed ‘female’, and the former ‘male’; but some animals have neither male

nor female. Consequently, the organs connected with this function differ in

form, for some animals have a womb and others an organ analogous thereto.

The  above-mentioned  organs,  then,  are  the  most  indispensable  parts  of

animals;  and  with  some  of  them  all  animals  without  exception,  and  with

others animals for the most part, must needs be provided.

One sense, and one alone, is common to all animals-the sense of touch.

Consequently, there is no special name for the organ in which it has its seat;

for  in  some  groups  of  animals  the  organ  is  identical,  in  others  it  is  only

analogous.

<

div id="section4" class="section" title="4">


4


  Every animal is supplied with moisture, and, if the animal be deprived of

the same by natural causes or artificial means, death ensues: further, every

animal has another part in which the moisture is contained. These parts are

blood and vein, and in other animals there is something to correspond; but in

these latter the parts are imperfect, being merely fibre and serum or lymph.

  Touch has its seat in a part uniform and homogeneous, as in the flesh or