either that no one should possess more than a certain quantity of land, or that,

if he did, the land should not be within a certain distance from the town or the

acropolis. Formerly in many states there was a law forbidding any one to sell

his original allotment of land. There is a similar law attributed to Oxylus,

which is to the effect that there should be a certain portion of every man’s

land on which he could not borrow money. A useful corrective to the evil of

which I am speaking would be the law of the Aphytaeans, who, although they

are numerous, and do not possess much land, are all of them husbandmen.

For their properties are reckoned in the census; not entire, but only in such

small portions that even the poor may have more than the amount required.

Next best to an agricultural, and in many respects similar, are a pastoral

people, who live by their flocks; they are the best trained of any for war,

robust in body and able to camp out. The people of whom other democracies

consist are far inferior to them, for their life is inferior; there is no room for

moral excellence in any of their employments, whether they be mechanics or

traders  or  laborers.  Besides,  people  of  this  class  can  readily  come  to  the

assembly, because they are continually moving about in the city and in the

agora; whereas husbandmen are scattered over the country and do not meet,

or  equally  feel  the  want  of  assembling  together.  Where  the  territory  also

happens to extend to a distance from the city, there is no difficulty in making

an  excellent  democracy  or  constitutional  government;  for  the  people  are

compelled to settle in the country, and even if there is a town population the

assembly ought not to meet, in democracies, when the country people cannot

come. We have thus explained how the first and best form of democracy

should be constituted; it is clear that the other or inferior sorts will deviate in

a regular order, and the population which is excluded will at each stage be of

a lower kind.

The last form of democracy, that in which all share alike, is one which

cannot be borne by all states, and will not last long unless well regulated by

laws and customs. The more general causes which tend to destroy this or

other  kinds  of  government  have  been  pretty  fully  considered.  In  order  to

constitute such a democracy and strengthen the people, the leaders have been

in the habit including as many as they can, and making citizens not only of

those who are legitimate, but even of the illegitimate, and of those who have

only one parent a citizen, whether father or mother; for nothing of this sort

comes amiss to such a democracy. This is the way in which demagogues

proceed. Whereas the right thing would be to make no more additions whenthe number of the commonalty exceeds that of the notables and of the middle

class—beyond this not to go. When in excess of this point, the constitution

becomes  disorderly,  and  the  notables  grow  excited  and  impatient  of  the

democracy, as in the insurrection at Cyrene; for no notice is taken of a little

evil,  but  when  it  increases  it  strikes  the  eye.  Measures  like  those  which

Cleisthenes passed when he wanted to increase the power of the democracy

at Athens, or such as were taken by the founders of popular government at

Cyrene,  are  useful  in  the  extreme  form  of  democracy.  Fresh  tribes  and

brotherhoods should be established; the private rites of families should be

restricted and converted into public ones; in short, every contrivance should

be adopted which will mingle the citizens with one another and get rid of old

connections. Again, the measures which are taken by tyrants appear all of

them to be democratic; such, for instance, as the license permitted to slaves

(which may be to a certain extent advantageous) and also that of women and

children, and the aflowing everybody to live as he likes. Such a government

will have many supporters, for most persons would rather live in a disorderly

than in a sober manner.


V


The  mere  establishment  of  a  democracy  is  not  the  only  or  principal

business of the legislator, or of those who wish to create such a state, for any

state,  however  badly  constituted,  may  last  one,  two,  or  three  days;  a  far

greater  difficulty  is  the  preservation  of  it.  The  legislator  should  therefore

endeavor to have a firm foundation according to the principles already laid

down concerning the preservation and destruction of states; he should guard

against the destructive elements, and should make laws, whether written or

unwritten, which will contain all the preservatives of states. He must not

think the truly democratical or oligarchical measure to be that which will give

the greatest amount of democracy or oligarchy, but that which will make

them  last  longest.  The  demagogues  of  our  own  day  often  get  property

confiscated in the law-courts in order to please the people. But those who

have the welfare of the state at heart should counteract them, and make a law

that the property of the condemned should not be public and go into the

treasury but be sacred. Thus offenders will be as much afraid, for they will be

punished all the same, and the people, having nothing to gain, will not be so

ready to condemn the accused. Care should also be taken that state trials areas few as possible, and heavy penalties should be inflicted on those who

bring groundless accusations; for it is the practice to indict, not members of

the  popular  party,  but  the  notables,  although  the  citizens  ought  to  be  all

attached to the constitution as well, or at any rate should not regard their

rulers as enemies.

Now, since in the last and worst form of democracy the citizens are very

numerous, and can hardly be made to assemble unless they are paid, and to

pay them when there are no revenues presses hardly upon the notables (for

the money must be obtained by a property tax and confiscations and corrupt

practices  of  the  courts,  things  which  have  before  now  overthrown  many

democracies); where, I say, there are no revenues, the government should

hold few assemblies, and the law-courts should consist of many persons, but

sit for a few days only. This system has two advantages: first, the rich do not

fear the expense, even although they are unpaid themselves when the poor are

paid; and secondly, causes are better tried, for wealthy persons, although they

do not like to be long absent from their own affairs, do not mind going for a

few days to the law-courts. Where there are revenues the demagogues should

not  be  allowed  after  their  manner  to  distribute  the  surplus;  the  poor  are

always receiving and always wanting more and more, for such help is like

water poured into a leaky cask. Yet the true friend of the people should see

that they be not too poor, for extreme poverty lowers the character of the

democracy; measures therefore should be taken which will give them lasting

prosperity; and as this is equally the interest of all classes, the proceeds of the

public revenues should be accumulated and distributed among its poor, if

possible, in such quantities as may enable them to purchase a little farm, or,

at any rate, make a beginning in trade or husbandry. And if this benevolence

cannot be extended to all, money should be distributed in turn according to

tribes or other divisions, and in the meantime the rich should pay the fee for

the attendance of the poor at the necessary assemblies; and should in return

be excused from useless public services. By administering the state in this

spirit the Carthaginians retain the affections of the people; their policy is from

time to time to send some of them into their dependent towns, where they

grow rich. It is also worthy of a generous and sensible nobility to divide the

poor amongst them, and give them the means of going to work. The example

of the people of Tarentum is also well deserving of imitation, for, by sharing

the  use  of  their  own  property  with  the  poor,  they  gain  their  good  will.

Moreover, they divide all their offices into two classes, some of them beingelected by vote, the others by lot; the latter, that the people may participate in

them, and the former, that the state may be better administered. A like result

may be gained by dividing the same offices, so as to have two classes of

magistrates, one chosen by vote, the other by lot.

  Enough has been said of the manner in which democracies ought to be

constituted.


VI


  From these considerations there will be no difficulty in seeing what should

be the constitution of oligarchies. We have only to reason from opposites and

compare each form of oligarchy with the corresponding form of democracy.

The  first  and  best  attempered  of  oligarchies  is  akin  to  a  constitutional

government. In this there ought to be two standards of qualification; the one

high, the other low—the lower qualifying for the humbler yet indispensable

offices and the higher for the superior ones. He who acquires the prescribed

qualification  should  have  the  rights  of  citizenship.  The  number  of  those

admitted should be such as will make the entire governing body stronger than

those who are excluded, and the new citizen should be always taken out of

the better class of the people. The principle, narrowed a little, gives another

form of oligarchy; until at length we reach the most cliquish and tyrannical of

them  all,  answering  to  the  extreme  democracy,  which,  being  the  worst,

requires vigilance in proportion to its badness. For as healthy bodies and

ships  well  provided  with  sailors  may  undergo  many  mishaps  and  survive

them, whereas sickly constitutions and rotten ill-manned ships are ruined by

the  very  least  mistake,  so  do  the  worst  forms  of  government  require  the

greatest care. The populousness of democracies generally preserves them (for

e state need not be much increased,since there is no necessity tha number is

to  democracy  in  the  place  of  justice  based  on  proportion);  whereas  the

preservation of an oligarchy clearly depends on an opposite principle, viz.,

good order.


VII


As there are four chief divisions of the common people—husbandmen,

mechanics, retail traders, laborers; so also there are four kinds of militaryforces—the  cavalry,  the  heavy  infantry,  the  light  armed  troops,  the  navy.

When the country is adapted for cavalry, then a strong oligarchy is likely to

be established. For the security of the inhabitants depends upon a force of this

sort,  and  only  rich  men  can  afford  to  keep  horses.  The  second  form  of

oligarchy prevails when the country is adapted to heavy infantry; for this

service is better suited to the rich than to the poor. But the light-armed and

the  naval  element  are  wholly  democratic;  and  nowadays,  where  they  are

numerous, if the two parties quarrel, the oligarchy are often worsted by them

in the struggle. A remedy for this state of things may be found in the practice

of  generals  who  combine  a  proper  contingent  of  light-armed  troops  with

cavalry and heavy-armed. And this is the way in which the poor get the better

of the rich in civil contests; being lightly armed, they fight with advantage

against  cavalry  and  heavy  being  lightly  armed,  they  fight  with  advantage

against cavalry and heavy infantry. An oligarchy which raises such a force

out of the lower classes raises a power against itself. And therefore, since the

ages of the citizens vary and some are older and some younger, the fathers

should  have  their  own  sons,  while  they  are  still  young,  taught  the  agile

movements of light-armed troops; and these, when they have been taken out

of the ranks of the youth, should become light-armed warriors in reality. The

oligarchy should also yield a share in the government to the people, either, as

I said before, to those who have a property qualification, or, as in the case of

Thebes, to those who have abstained for a certain number of years from mean

employments, or, as at Massalia, to men of merit who are selected for their

worthiness,  whether  previously  citizens  or  not.  The  magistracies  of  the

highest rank, which ought to be in the hands of the governing body, should

have expensive duties attached to them, and then the people will not desire

them and will take no offense at the privileges of their rulers when they see

that  they  pay  a  heavy  fine  for  their  dignity.  It  is  fitting  also  that  the

magistrates  on  entering  office  should  offer  magnificent  sacrifices  or  erect

some  public  edifice,  and  then  the  people  who  participate  in  the

entertainments,  and  see  the  city  decorated  with  votive  offerings  and

buildings, will not desire an alteration in the government, and the notables

will have memorials of their munificence. This, however, is anything but the

fashion of our modern oligarchs, who are as covetous of gain as they are of

honor; oligarchies like theirs may be well described as petty democracies.

Enough  of  the  manner  in  which  democracies  and  oligarchies  should  be

organized.VIII


Next in order follows the right distribution of offices, their number, their

nature, their duties, of which indeed we have already spoken. No state can

exist not having the necessary offices, and no state can be well administered

not having the offices which tend to preserve harmony and good order. In

small states, as we have already remarked, there must not be many of them,

but in larger there must be a larger number, and we should carefully consider

which offices may properly be united and which separated.

First among necessary offices is that which has the care of the market; a

magistrate should be appointed to inspect contracts and to maintain order. For

in every state there must inevitably be buyers and sellers who will supply one

another’s wants; this is the readiest way to make a state self-sufficing and so

fulfill the purpose for which men come together into one state. A second

office  of  a  similar  kind  undertakes  the  supervision  and  embellishment  of

public and private buildings, the maintaining and repairing of houses and

roads, the prevention of disputes about boundaries, and other concerns of a

like  nature.  This  is  commonly  called  the  office  of  City  Warden,  and  has

various  departments,  which,  in  more  populous  towns,  are  shared  among

different persons, one, for example, taking charge of the walls, another of the

fountains, a third of harbors. There is another equally necessary office, and of

a similar kind, having to do with the same matters without the walls and in

the country—the magistrates who hold this office are called Wardens of the

country, or Inspectors of the woods. Besides these three there is a fourth

office of receivers of taxes, who have under their charge the revenue which is

distributed  among  the  various  departments;  these  are  called  Receivers  or

Treasurers. Another officer registers all private contracts, and decisions of the

courts,  all  public  indictments,  and  also  all  preliminary  proceedings.  This

office again is sometimes subdivided, in which case one officer is appointed

over all the rest. These officers are called Recorders or Sacred Recorders,

Presidents, and the like.

Next to these comes an office of which the duties are the most necessary

and also the most difficult, viz., that to which is committed the execution of

punishments, or the exaction of fines from those who are posted up according

to the registers; and also the custody of prisoners. The difficulty of this office

arises out of the odium which is attached to it; no one will undertake it unless

great profits are to be made, and any one who does is loath to execute thelaw. Still the office is necessary; for judicial decisions are useless if they take

no effect; and if society cannot exist without them, neither can it exist without

the execution of them. It is an office which, being so unpopular, should not

be entrusted to one person, but divided among several taken from different

courts. In like manner an effort should be made to distribute among different

persons the writing up of those who are on the register of public debtors.

Some sentences should be executed by the magistrates also, and in particular

penalties due to the outgoing magistrates should be exacted by the incoming

ones; and as regards those due to magistrates already in office, when one

court has given judgement, another should exact the penalty; for example, the

wardens of the city should exact the fines imposed by the wardens of the

agora, and others again should exact the fines imposed by them. For penalties

are more likely to be exacted when less odium attaches to the exaction of

them; but a double odium is incurred when the judges who have passed also

execute the sentence, and if they are always the executioners, they will be the

enemies of all.

In many places, while one magistracy executes the sentence, another has

the custody of the prisoners, as, for example, ‘the Eleven’ at Athens. It is well

to separate off the jailorship also, and try by some device to render the office

less unpopular. For it is quite as necessary as that of the executioners; but

good men do all they can to avoid it, and worthless persons cannot safely be

trusted with it; for they themselves require a guard, and are not fit to guard

others. There ought not therefore to be a single or permanent officer set apart

for  this  duty;  but  it  should  be  entrusted  to  the  young,  wherever  they  are

organized into a band or guard, and different magistrates acting in turn should

take charge of it.

  These are the indispensable officers, and should be ranked first; next in

order follow others, equally necessary, but of higher rank, and requiring great

experience and fidelity. Such are the officers to which are committed the

guard of the city, and other military functions. Not only in time of war but of

peace their duty will be to defend the walls and gates, and to muster and

marshal the citizens. In some states there are many such offices; in others

there are a few only, while small states are content with one; these officers

are called generals or commanders. Again, if a state has cavalry or light-

armed troops or archers or a naval force, it will sometimes happen that each

of  these  departments  has  separate  officers,  who  are  called  admirals,  or

generals  of  cavalry  or  of  light-armed  troops.  And  there  are  subordinateofficers  called  naval  captains,  and  captains  of  light-armed  troops  and  of

horse; having others under them: all these are included in the department of

war. Thus much of military command.

But since many, not to say all, of these offices handle the public money,

there must of necessity be another office which examines and audits them,

and  has  no  other  functions.  Such  officers  are  called  by  various  names—

Scrutineers,  Auditors,  Accountants,  Controllers.  Besides  all  these  offices

there is another which is supreme over them, and to this is often entrusted

both  the  introduction  and  the  ratification  of  measures,  or  at  all  events  it

presides, in a democracy, over the assembly. For there must be a body which

convenes the supreme authority in the state. In some places they are called

‘probuli,’ because they hold previous deliberations, but in a democracy more

commonly ‘councillors.’ These are the chief political offices.

  Another  set  of  officers  is  concerned  with  the  maintenance  of  religion

priests and guardians see to the preservation and repair of the temples of the

Gods and to other matters of religion. One office of this sort may be enough

in  small  places,  but  in  larger  ones  there  are  a  great  many  besides  the

priesthood;  for  example,  superintendents  of  public  worship,  guardians  of

shrines, treasurers of the sacred revenues. Nearly connected with these there

are also the officers appointed for the performance of the public sacrifices,

except any which the law assigns to the priests; such sacrifices derive their

dignity from the public hearth of the city. They are sometimes called archons,

sometimes kings, and sometimes prytanes.

These,  then,  are  the  necessary  offices,  which  may  be  summed  up  as

follows:  offices  concerned  with  matters  of  religion,  with  war,  with  the

revenue and expenditure, with the market, with the city, with the harbors,

with the country; also with the courts of law, with the records of contracts,

with  execution  of  sentences,  with  custody  of  prisoners,  with  audits  and

scrutinies and accounts of magistrates; lastly, there are those which preside

over the public deliberations of the state. There are likewise magistracies

characteristic of states which are peaceful and prosperous, and at the same

time have a regard to good order: such as the offices of guardians of women,

guardians of the law, guardians of children, and directors of gymnastics; also

superintendents of gymnastic and Dionysiac contests, and of other similar

spectacles. Some of these are clearly not democratic offices; for example, the

guardianships of women and children—the poor, not having any slaves, must

employ both their women and children as servants.  Once  more:  there  are  three  offices  according  to  whose  directions  the

highest  magistrates  are  chosen  in  certain  states—guardians  of  the  law,

probuli, councillors—of these, the guardians of the law are an aristocratical,

the probuli an oligarchical, the council a democratical institution. Enough of

the different kinds of offices.                                Politics, Book VII


Translated by Benjamin Jowett


<

div id="book7" class="book">


I


He who would duly inquire about the best form of a state ought first to

determine which is the most eligible life; while this remains uncertain the

best form of the state must also be uncertain; for, in the natural order of

things, those may be expected to lead the best life who are governed in the

best  manner  of  which  their  circumstances  admit.  We  ought  therefore  to

ascertain,  first  of  all,  which  is  the  most  generally  eligible  life,  and  then

whether the same life is or is not best for the state and for individuals.

  Assuming that enough has been already said in discussions outside the

school concerning the best life, we will now only repeat what is contained in

them. Certainly no one will dispute the propriety of that partition of goods

which separates them into three classes, viz., external goods, goods of the

body, and goods of the soul, or deny that the happy man must have all three.

For no one would maintain that he is happy who has not in him a particle of

courage or temperance or justice or prudence, who is afraid of every insect

which flutters past him, and will commit any crime, however great, in order

to gratify his lust of meat or drink, who will sacrifice his dearest friend for the

sake of half-a-farthing, and is as feeble and false in mind as a child or a

madman. These propositions are almost universally acknowledged as soon as

they are uttered, but men differ about the degree or relative superiority of this

or that good. Some think that a very moderate amount of virtue is enough, but

set no limit to their desires of wealth, property, power, reputation, and the

like.  To  whom  we  reply  by  an  appeal  to  facts,  which  easily  prove  that

mankind do not acquire or preserve virtue by the help of external goods, but

external goods by the help of virtue, and that happiness, whether consisting in

pleasure or virtue, or both, is more often found with those who are most

highly  cultivated  in  their  mind  and  in  their  character,  and  have  only  amoderate share of external goods, than among those who possess external

goods to a useless extent but are deficient in higher qualities; and this is not

only matter of experience, but, if reflected upon, will easily appear to be in

accordance with reason. For, whereas external goods have a limit, like any

other instrument, and all things useful are of such a nature that where there is

too much of them they must either do harm, or at any rate be of no use, to

their possessors, every good of the soul, the greater it is, is also of greater use,

if the epithet useful as well as noble is appropriate to such subjects. No proof

is required to show that the best state of one thing in relation to another

corresponds in degree of excellence to the interval between the natures of

which we say that these very states are states: so that, if the soul is more

noble than our possessions or our bodies, both absolutely and in relation to

us, it must be admitted that the best state of either has a similar ratio to the

other. Again, it is for the sake of the soul that goods external and goods of the

body are eligible at all, and all wise men ought to choose them for the sake of

the soul, and not the soul for the sake of them.

Let us acknowledge then that each one has just so much of happiness as he

has of virtue and wisdom, and of virtuous and wise action. God is a witness

to us of this truth, for he is happy and blessed, not by reason of any external

good, but in himself and by reason of his own nature. And herein of necessity

lies the difference between good fortune and happiness; for external goods

come of themselves, and chance is the author of them, but no one is just or

temperate by or through chance. In like manner, and by a similar train of

argument, the happy state may be shown to be that which is best and which

acts rightly; and rightly it cannot act without doing right actions, and neither

individual nor state can do right actions without virtue and wisdom. Thus the

courage, justice, and wisdom of a state have the same form and nature as the

qualities which give the individual who possesses them the name of just,

wise, or temperate.

  Thus much may suffice by way of preface: for I could not avoid touching

upon these questions, neither could I go through all the arguments affecting

them; these are the business of another science.

Let us assume then that the best life, both for individuals and states, is the

life of virtue, when virtue has external goods enough for the performance of

good actions. If there are any who controvert our assertion, we will in this

treatise pass them over, and consider their objections hereafter.II


  There remains to be discussed the question whether the happiness of the

individual is the same as that of the state, or different. Here again there can be

no doubt—no one denies that they are the same. For those who hold that the

well-being of the individual consists in his wealth, also think that riches make

the happiness of the whole state, and those who value most highly the life of

a tyrant deem that city the happiest which rules over the greatest number;

while they who approve an individual for his virtue say that the more virtuous

a  city  is,  the  happier  it  is.  Two  points  here  present  themselves  for

consideration: first (1), which is the more eligible life, that of a citizen who is

a member of a state, or that of an alien who has no political ties; and again

(2), which is the best form of constitution or the best condition of a state,

either on the supposition that political privileges are desirable for all, or for a

majority only? Since the good of the state and not of the individual is the

proper subject of political thought and speculation, and we are engaged in a

political  discussion,  while  the  first  of  these  two  points  has  a  secondary

interest for us, the latter will be the main subject of our inquiry.

Now it is evident that the form of government is best in which every man,

whoever he is, can act best and live happily. But even those who agree in

thinking that the life of virtue is the most eligible raise a question, whether

the life of business and politics is or is not more eligible than one which is

wholly  independent  of  external  goods,  I  mean  than  a  contemplative  life,

which by some is maintained to be the only one worthy of a philosopher. For

these two lives—the life of the philosopher and the life of the statesman—

appear to have been preferred by those who have been most keen in the

pursuit of virtue, both in our own and in other ages. Which is the better is a

question of no small moment; for the wise man, like the wise state, will

necessarily regulate his life according to the best end. There are some who

think  that  while  a  despotic  rule  over  others  is  the  greatest  injustice,  to

exercise a constitutional rule over them, even though not unjust, is a great

impediment to a man’s individual wellbeing. Others take an opposite view;

they maintain that the true life of man is the practical and political, and that

every virtue admits of being practiced, quite as much by statesmen and rulers

as  by  private  individuals.  Others,  again,  are  of  opinion  that  arbitrary  and

tyrannical rule alone consists with happiness; indeed, in some states the entire

aim both of the laws and of the constitution is to give men despotic powerover their neighbors. And, therefore, although in most cities the laws may be

said generally to be in a chaotic state, still, if they aim at anything, they aim

at the maintenance of power: thus in Lacedaemon and Crete the system of

education and the greater part of the of the laws are framed with a view to

war. And in all nations which are able to gratify their ambition military power

is  held  in  esteem,  for  example  among  the  Scythians  and  Persians  and

Thracians and Celts.

In  some  nations  there  are  even  laws  tending  to  stimulate  the  warlike

virtues,  as  at  Carthage,  where  we  are  told  that  men  obtain  the  honor  of

wearing as many armlets as they have served campaigns. There was once a

law in Macedonia that he who had not killed an enemy should wear a halter,

and among the Scythians no one who had not slain his man was allowed to

drink out of the cup which was handed round at a certain feast. Among the

Iberians, a warlike nation, the number of enemies whom a man has slain is

indicated by the number of obelisks which are fixed in the earth round his

tomb; and there are numerous practices among other nations of a like kind,

some of them established by law and others by custom. Yet to a reflecting

mind  it  must  appear  very  strange  that  the  statesman  should  be  always

considering how he can dominate and tyrannize over others, whether they

will or not. How can that which is not even lawful be the business of the

statesman or the legislator? Unlawful it certainly is to rule without regard to

justice, for there may be might where there is no right. The other arts and

sciences offer no parallel a physician is not expected to persuade or coerce

his patients, nor a pilot the passengers in his ship. Yet most men appear to

think that the art of despotic government is statesmanship, and what men

affirm to be unjust and inexpedient in their own case they are not ashamed of

practicing towards others; they demand just rule for themselves, but where

other  men  are  concerned  they  care  nothing  about  it.  Such  behavior  is

irrational; unless the one party is, and the other is not, born to serve, in which

case men have a right to command, not indeed all their fellows, but only

those who are intended to be subjects; just as we ought not to hunt mankind,

whether for food or sacrifice, but only the animals which may be hunted for

food or sacrifice, this is to say, such wild animals as are eatable. And surely

there may be a city happy in isolation, which we will assume to be well-

governed  (for  it  is  quite  possible  that  a  city  thus  isolated  might  be  well-

administered and have good laws); but such a city would not be constituted

with any view to war or the conquest of enemies—all that sort of thing mustbe  excluded.  Hence  we  see  very  plainly  that  warlike  pursuits,  although

generally to be deemed honorable, are not the supreme end of all things, but

only means. And the good lawgiver should inquire how states and races of

men and communities may participate in a good life, and in the happiness

which is attainable by them. His enactments will not be always the same; and

where there are neighbors he will have to see what sort of studies should be

practiced  in  relation  to  their  several  characters,  or  how  the  measures

appropriate in relation to each are to be adopted. The end at which the best

form of government should aim may be properly made a matter of future

consideration.


III


Let us now address those who, while they agree that the life of virtue is the

most eligible, differ about the manner of practicing it. For some renounce

political power, and think that the life of the freeman is different from the life

of the statesman and the best of all; but others think the life of the statesman

best. The argument of the latter is that he who does nothing cannot do well,

and that virtuous activity is identical with happiness. To both we say: ‘you

are partly right and partly wrong.’ first class are right in affirming that the life

of the freeman is better than the life of the despot; for there is nothing grand

or noble in having the use of a slave, in so far as he is a slave; or in issuing

commands about necessary things. But it is an error to suppose that every sort

of rule is despotic like that of a master over slaves, for there is as great a

difference between the rule over freemen and the rule over slaves as there is

between slavery by nature and freedom by nature, about which I have said

enough at the commencement of this treatise. And it is equally a mistake to

place inactivity above action, for happiness is activity, and the actions of the

just and wise are the realization of much that is noble.

But perhaps some one, accepting these premises, may still maintain that

supreme power is the best of all things, because the possessors of it are able

to perform the greatest number of noble actions. if so, the man who is able to

rule, instead of giving up anything to his neighbor, ought rather to take away

his power; and the father should make no account of his son, nor the son of

his father, nor friend of friend; they should not bestow a thought on one

another in comparison with this higher object, for the best is the most eligible

and ‘doing eligible’ and ‘doing well’ is the best. There might be some truth insuch a view if we assume that robbers and plunderers attain the chief good.

But this can never be; their hypothesis is false. For the actions of a ruler

cannot really be honorable, unless he is as much superior to other men as a

husband is to a wife, or a father to his children, or a master to his slaves. And

therefore he who violates the law can never recover by any success, however

great,  what  he  has  already  lost  in  departing  from  virtue.  For  equals  the

honorable and the just consist in sharing alike, as is just and equal. But that

the unequal should be given to equals, and the unlike to those who are like, is

contrary  to  nature,  and  nothing  which  is  contrary  to  nature  is  good.  If,

therefore, there is any one superior in virtue and in the power of performing

the best actions, him we ought to follow and obey, but he must have the

capacity for action as well as virtue.

If  we  are  right  in  our  view,  and  happiness  is  assumed  to  be  virtuous

activity, the active life will be the best, both for every city collectively, and

for individuals. Not that a life of action must necessarily have relation to

others, as some persons think, nor are those ideas only to be regarded as

practical which are pursued for the sake of practical results, but much more

the  thoughts  and  contemplations  which  are  independent  and  complete  in

themselves; since virtuous activity, and therefore a certain kind of action, is

an end, and even in the case of external actions the directing mind is most

truly said to act. Neither, again, is it necessary that states which are cut off

from others and choose to live alone should be inactive; for activity, as well

as other things, may take place by sections; there are many ways in which the

sections of a state act upon one another. The same thing is equally true of

every individual. If this were otherwise, God and the universe, who have no

external actions over and above their own energies, would be far enough

from  perfection.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  same  life  is  best  for  each

individual, and for states and for mankind collectively


IV


  Thus far by way of introduction. In what has preceded I have discussed

other forms of government; in what remains the first point to be considered is

what should be the conditions of the ideal or perfect state; for the perfect state

cannot exist without a due supply of the means of life. And therefore we must

presuppose many purely imaginary conditions, but nothing impossible. There

will be a certain number of citizens, a country in which to place them, and thelike. As the weaver or shipbuilder or any other artisan must have the material

proper for his work (and in proportion as this is better prepared, so will the

result of his art be nobler), so the statesman or legislator must also have the

materials suited to him.

First among the materials required by the statesman is population: he will

consider what should be the number and character of the citizens, and then

what should be the size and character of the country. Most persons think that

a state in order to be happy ought to be large; but even if they are right, they

have no idea what is a large and what a small state. For they judge of the size

of the city by the number of the inhabitants; whereas they ought to regard, not

their number, but their power. A city too, like an individual, has a work to do;

and that city which is best adapted to the fulfillment of its work is to be

deemed greatest, in the same sense of the word great in which Hippocrates

might be called greater, not as a man, but as a physician, than some one else

who was taller And even if we reckon greatness by numbers, we ought not to

include everybody, for there must always be in cities a multitude of slaves

and sojourners and foreigners; but we should include those only who are

members of the state, and who form an essential part of it. The number of the

latter is a proof of the greatness of a city; but a city which produces numerous

artisans and comparatively few soldiers cannot be great, for a great city is not

to be confounded with a populous one. Moreover, experience shows that a

very populous city can rarely, if ever, be well governed; since all cities which

have a reputation for good government have a limit of population. We may

argue on grounds of reason, and the same result will follow. For law is order,

and good law is good order; but a very great multitude cannot be orderly: to

introduce order into the unlimited is the work of a divine power—of such a

power  as  holds  together  the  universe.  Beauty  is  realized  in  number  and

magnitude, and the state which combines magnitude with good order must

necessarily be the most beautiful. To the size of states there is a limit, as there

is to other things, plants, animals, implements; for none of these retain their

natural power when they are too large or too small, but they either wholly

lose their nature, or are spoiled. For example, a ship which is only a span

long will not be a ship at all, nor a ship a quarter of a mile long; yet there may

be a ship of a certain size, either too large or too small, which will still be a

ship, but bad for sailing. In like manner a state when composed of too few is

not, as a state ought to be, self-sufficing; when of too many, though self-

sufficing in all mere necessaries, as a nation may be, it is not a state, beingalmost incapable of constitutional government. For who can be the general of

such  a  vast  multitude,  or  who  the  herald,  unless  he  have  the  voice  of  a

Stentor?

A  state,  then,  only  begins  to  exist  when  it  has  attained  a  population

sufficient  for  a  good  life  in  the  political  community:  it  may  indeed,  if  it

somewhat exceed this number, be a greater state. But, as I was saying, there

must  be  a  limit.  What  should  be  the  limit  will  be  easily  ascertained  by

experience. For both governors and governed have duties to perform; the

special functions of a governor to command and to judge. But if the citizens

of a state are to judge and to distribute offices according to merit, then they

must  know  each  other’s  characters;  where  they  do  not  possess  this

knowledge, both the election to offices and the decision of lawsuits will go

wrong.  When  the  population  is  very  large  they  are  manifestly  settled  at

haphazard, which clearly ought not to be. Besides, in an over-populous state

foreigners and metics will readily acquire the rights of citizens, for who will

find them out? Clearly then the best limit of the population of a state is the

largest number which suffices for the purposes of life, and can be taken in at

a single view. Enough concerning the size of a state.


V


  Much the same principle will apply to the territory of the state: every one

would agree in praising the territory which is most entirely self-sufficing; and

that must be the territory which is all-producing, for to have all things and to

want  nothing  is  sufficiency.  In  size  and  extent  it  should  be  such  as  may

enable  the  inhabitants  to  live  at  once  temperately  and  liberally  in  the

enjoyment of leisure. Whether we are right or wrong in laying down this limit

we will inquire more precisely hereafter, when we have occasion to consider

what is the right use of property and wealth: a matter which is much disputed,

because  men  are  inclined  to  rush  into  one  of  two  extremes,  some  into

meanness, others into luxury.

It is not difficult to determine the general character of the territory which is

required  (there  are,  however,  some  points  on  which  military  authorities

should be heard); it should be difficult of access to the enemy, and easy of

egress to the inhabitants. Further, we require that the land as well as the

inhabitants of whom we were just now speaking should be taken in at a single

view, for a country which is easily seen can be easily protected. As to theposition of the city, if we could have what we wish, it should be well situated

in regard both to sea and land. This then is one principle, that it should be a

convenient center for the protection of the whole country: the other is, that it

should be suitable for receiving the fruits of the soil, and also for the bringing

in of timber and any other products that are easily transported.


VI


  Whether a communication with the sea is beneficial to a well-ordered state

or  not  is  a  question  which  has  often  been  asked.  It  is  argued  that  the

introduction of strangers brought up under other laws, and the increase of

population, will be adverse to good order; the increase arises from their using

the sea and having a crowd of merchants coming and going, and is inimical to

good government. Apart from these considerations, it would be undoubtedly

better, both with a view to safety and to the provision of necessaries, that the

city  and  territory  should  be  connected  with  the  sea;  the  defenders  of  a

country,  if  they  are  to  maintain  themselves  against  an  enemy,  should  be

easily relieved both by land and by sea; and even if they are not able to attack

by sea and land at once, they will have less difficulty in doing mischief to

their assailants on one element, if they themselves can use both. Moreover, it

is necessary that they should import from abroad what is not found in their

own country, and that they should export what they have in excess; for a city

ought to be a market, not indeed for others, but for herself.

  Those who make themselves a market for the world only do so for the sake

of revenue, and if a state ought not to desire profit of this kind it ought not to

have  such  an  emporium.  Nowadays  we  often  see  in  countries  and  cities

dockyards and harbors very conveniently placed outside the city, but not too

far off; and they are kept in dependence by walls and similar fortifications.

Cities thus situated manifestly reap the benefit of intercourse with their ports;

and any harm which is likely to accrue may be easily guarded against by the

laws, which will pronounce and determine who may hold communication

with one another, and who may not.

  There can be no doubt that the possession of a moderate naval force is

advantageous to a city; the city should be formidable not only to its own

citizens but to some of its neighbors, or, if necessary, able to assist them by

sea as well as by land. The proper number or magnitude of this naval force is

relative to the character of the state; for if her function is to take a leadingpart in politics, her naval power should be commensurate with the scale of

her enterprises. The population of the state need not be much increased, since

there is no necessity that the sailors should be citizens: the marines who have

the control and command will be freemen, and belong also to the infantry;

and wherever there is a dense population of Perioeci and husbandmen, there

will always be sailors more than enough. Of this we see instances at the

present day. The city of Heraclea, for example, although small in comparison

with many others, can man a considerable fleet. Such are our conclusions

respecting the territory of the state, its harbors, its towns, its relations to the

sea, and its maritime power.


VII


  Having spoken of the number of the citizens, we will proceed to speak of

what  should  be  their  character.  This  is  a  subject  which  can  be  easily

understood by any one who casts his eye on the more celebrated states of

Hellas,  and  generally  on  the  distribution  of  races  in  the  habitable  world.

Those who live in a cold climate and in Europe are full of spirit, but wanting

in intelligence and skill; and therefore they retain comparative freedom, but

have  no  political  organization,  and  are  incapable  of  ruling  over  others.

Whereas  the  natives  of  Asia  are  intelligent  and  inventive,  but  they  are

wanting in spirit, and therefore they are always in a state of subjection and

slavery. But the Hellenic race, which is situated between them, is likewise

intermediate in character, being high-spirited and also intelligent. Hence it

continues free, and is the best-governed of any nation, and, if it could be

formed into one state, would be able to rule the world. There are also similar

differences in the different tribes of Hellas; for some of them are of a one-

sided nature, and are intelligent or courageous only, while in others there is a

happy combination of both qualities. And clearly those whom the legislator

will most easily lead to virtue may be expected to be both intelligent and

courageous. Some say that the guardians should be friendly towards those

whom  they  know,  fierce  towards  those  whom  they  do  not  know.  Now,

passion is the quality of the soul which begets friendship and enables us to

love;  notably  the  spirit  within  us  is  more  stirred  against  our  friends  and

acquaintances than against those who are unknown to us, when we think that

we are despised by them; for which reason Archilochus, complaining of his

friends, very naturally addresses his soul in these words:For surely thou art plagued on account of friends.


The power of command and the love of freedom are in all men based upon

this quality, for passion is commanding and invincible. Nor is it right to say

that the guardians should be fierce towards those whom they do not know, for

we ought not to be out of temper with any one; and a lofty spirit is not fierce

by nature, but only when excited against evil-doers. And this, as I was saying

before, is a feeling which men show most strongly towards their friends if

they think they have received a wrong at their hands: as indeed is reasonable;

for, besides the actual injury, they seem to be deprived of a benefit by those

who owe them one. Hence the saying:


  Cruel is the strife of brethren,


and again:


  They who love in excess also hate in excess.


  Thus we have nearly determined the number and character of the citizens

of our state, and also the size and nature of their territory. I say ‘nearly,’ for

we ought not to require the same minuteness in theory as in the facts given by

perception.


VIII


As in other natural compounds the conditions of a composite whole are not

necessarily  organic  parts  of  it,  so  in  a  state  or  in  any  other  combination

forming a unity not everything is a part, which is a necessary condition. The

members of an association have necessarily some one thing the same and

common to all, in which they share equally or unequally for example, food or

land or any other thing. But where there are two things of which one is a

means and the other an end, they have nothing in common except that the one

receives what the other produces. Such, for example, is the relation which

workmen  and  tools  stand  to  their  work;  the  house  and  the  builder  have

nothing in common, but the art of the builder is for the sake of the house.

And so states require property, but property, even though living beings are

included in it, is no part of a state; for a state is not a community of livingbeings only, but a community of equals, aiming at the best life possible. Now,

whereas  happiness  is  the  highest  good,  being  a  realization  and  perfect

practice of virtue, which some can attain, while others have little or none of

it, the various qualities of men are clearly the reason why there are various

kinds of states and many forms of government; for different men seek after

happiness  in  different  ways  and  by  different  means,  and  so  make  for

themselves different modes of life and forms of government. We must see

also how many things are indispensable to the existence of a state, for what

we call the parts of a state will be found among the indispensables. Let us

then enumerate the functions of a state, and we shall easily elicit what we

want:

First,  there  must  be  food;  secondly,  arts,  for  life  requires  many

instruments; thirdly, there must be arms, for the members of a community

have need of them, and in their own hands, too, in order to maintain authority

both  against  disobedient  subjects  and  against  external  assailants;  fourthly,

there must be a certain amount of revenue, both for internal needs, and for the

purposes of war; fifthly, or rather first, there must be a care of religion which

is commonly called worship; sixthly, and most necessary of all there must be

a power of deciding what is for the public interest, and what is just in men’s

dealings with one another.

  These are the services which every state may be said to need. For a state is

not  a  mere  aggregate  of  persons,  but  a  union  of  them  sufficing  for  the

purposes of life; and if any of these things be wanting, it is as we maintain

impossible that the community can be absolutely self-sufficing. A state then

should be framed with a view to the fulfillment of these functions. There

must  be  husbandmen  to  procure  food,  and  artisans,  and  a  warlike  and  a

wealthy  class,  and  priests,  and  judges  to  decide  what  is  necessary  and

expedient.


IX


  Having determined these points, we have in the next place to consider

whether all ought to share in every sort of occupation. Shall every man be at

once husbandman, artisan, councillor, judge, or shall we suppose the several

occupations just mentioned assigned to different persons? or, thirdly, shall

some employments be assigned to individuals and others common to all? The

same arrangement, however, does not occur in every constitution; as we weresaying, all may be shared by all, or not all by all, but only by some; and

hence arise the differences of constitutions, for in democracies all share in all,

in oligarchies the opposite practice prevails. Now, since we are here speaking

of the best form of government, i.e., that under which the state will be most

happy (and happiness, as has been already said, cannot exist without virtue),

it clearly follows that in the state which is best governed and possesses men

who  are  just  absolutely,  and  not  merely  relatively  to  the  principle  of  the

constitution, the citizens must not lead the life of mechanics or tradesmen, for

such  a  life  is  ignoble,  and  inimical  to  virtue.  Neither  must  they  be

husbandmen, since leisure is necessary both for the development of virtue

and the performance of political duties.

  Again, there is in a state a class of warriors, and another of councillors,

who advise about the expedient and determine matters of law, and these seem

in an especial manner parts of a state. Now, should these two classes be

distinguished, or are both functions to be assigned to the same persons? Here

again there is no difficulty in seeing that both functions will in one way

belong to the same, in another, to different persons. To different persons in so

far as these i.e., the physical and the employments are suited to different

primes of life, for the one requires mental wisdom and the other strength. But

on the other hand, since it is an impossible thing that those who are able to

use or to resist force should be willing to remain always in subjection, from

this point of view the persons are the same; for those who carry arms can

always determine the fate of the constitution. It remains therefore that both

functions should be entrusted by the ideal constitution to the same persons,

not, however, at the same time, but in the order prescribed by nature, who has

given to young men strength and to older men wisdom. Such a distribution of

duties will be expedient and also just, and is founded upon a principle of

conformity  to  merit.  Besides,  the  ruling  class  should  be  the  owners  of

property, for they are citizens, and the citizens of a state should be in good

circumstances; whereas mechanics or any other class which is not a producer

of virtue have no share in the state. This follows from our first principle, for

happiness cannot exist without virtue, and a city is not to be termed happy in

regard to a portion of the citizens, but in regard to them all. And clearly

property should be in their hands, since the husbandmen will of necessity be

slaves or barbarian Perioeci.

Of the classes enumerated there remain only the priests, and the manner in

which their office is to be regulated is obvious. No husbandman or mechanicshould be appointed to it; for the Gods should receive honor from the citizens

only.  Now  since  the  body  of  the  citizen  is  divided  into  two  classes,  the

warriors and the councillors and it is beseeming that the worship of the Gods

should be duly performed, and also a rest provided in their service for those

who from age have given up active life, to the old men of these two classes

should be assigned the duties of the priesthood.

We have shown what are the necessary conditions, and what the parts of a

state: husbandmen, craftsmen, and laborers of an kinds are necessary to the

existence of states, but the parts of the state are the warriors and councillors.

And these are distinguished severally from one another, the distinction being

in some cases permanent, in others not.


X


It is not a new or recent discovery of political philosophers that the state

ought to be divided into classes, and that the warriors should be separated

from the husbandmen. The system has continued in Egypt and in Crete to this

day, and was established, as tradition says, by a law of Sesostris in Egypt and

of Minos in Crete. The institution of common tables also appears to be of

ancient date, being in Crete as old as the reign of Minos, and in Italy far

older.  The  Italian  historians  say  that  there  was  a  certain  Italus,  king  of

Oenotria, from whom the Oenotrians were called Italians, and who gave the

name of Italy to the promontory of Europe lying within the Scylletic and

Lametic Gulfs, which are distant from one another only half a day’s journey.

They  say  that  this  Italus  converted  the  Oenotrians  from  shepherds  into

husbandmen, and besides other laws which he gave them, was the founder of

their common meals; even in our day some who are derived from him retain

this institution and certain other laws of his. On the side of Italy towards

Tyrrhenia dwelt the Opici, who are now, as of old, called Ausones; and on

the side towards Iapygia and the Ionian Gulf, in the district called Siritis, the

Chones, who are likewise of Oenotrian race. From this part of the world

originally came the institution of common tables; the separation into castes

from Egypt, for the reign of Sesostris is of far greater antiquity than that of

Minos. It is true indeed that these and many other things have been invented

several times over in the course of ages, or rather times without number; for

necessity may be supposed to have taught men the inventions which were

absolutely required, and when these were provided, it was natural that otherthings which would adorn and enrich life should grow up by degrees. And we

may infer that in political institutions the same rule holds. Egypt witnesses to

the antiquity of all these things, for the Egyptians appear to be of all people

the most ancient; and they have laws and a regular constitution existing from

time immemorial. We should therefore make the best use of what has been

already discovered, and try to supply defects.

I have already remarked that the land ought to belong to those who possess

arms and have a share in the government, and that the husbandmen ought to

be a class distinct from them; and I have determined what should be the

extent and nature of the territory. Let me proceed to discuss the distribution

of the land, and the character of the agricultural class; for I do not think that

property ought to be common, as some maintain, but only that by friendly

consent there should be a common use of it; and that no citizen should be in

want of subsistence.

As to common meals, there is a general agreement that a well ordered city

should have them; and we will hereafter explain what are our own reasons for

taking this view. They ought, however, to be open to all the citizens. And yet

it is not easy for the poor to contribute the requisite sum out of their private

means,  and  to  provide  also  for  their  household.  The  expense  of  religious

worship  should  likewise  be  a  public  charge.  The  land  must  therefore  be

divided into two parts, one public and the other private, and each part should

be subdivided, part of the public land being appropriated to the service of the

Gods, and the other part used to defray the cost of the common meals; while

of the private land, part should be near the border, and the other near the city,

so that, each citizen having two lots, they may all of them have land in both

places; there is justice and fairness in such a division, and it tends to inspire

unanimity among the people in their border wars. Where there is not this

arrangement  some  of  them  are  too  ready  to  come  to  blows  with  their

neighbors, while others are so cautious that they quite lose the sense of honor.

Wherefore there is a law in some places which forbids those who dwell near

the border to take part in public deliberations about wars with neighbors, on

the ground that their interests will pervert their judgment. For the reasons

already mentioned, then, the land should be divided in the manner described.

The very best thing of all would be that the husbandmen should be slaves

taken from among men who are not all of the same race and not spirited, for

if they have no spirit they will be better suited for their work, and there will

be no danger of their making a revolution. The next best thing would be thatthey should be Perioeci of foreign race, and of a like inferior nature; some of

them should be the slaves of individuals, and employed in the private estates

of men of property, the remainder should be the property of the state and

employed on the common land. I will hereafter explain what is the proper

treatment of slaves, and why it is expedient that liberty should be always held

out to them as the reward of their services.


XI


We have already said that the city should be open to the land and to the

sea, and to the whole country as far as possible. In respect of the place itself

our wish would be that its situation should be fortunate in four things. The

first, health—this is a necessity: cities which lie towards the east, and are

blown  upon  by  winds  coming  from  the  east,  are  the  healthiest;  next  in

healthfulness are those which are sheltered from the north wind, for they have

a milder winter. The site of the city should likewise be convenient both for

political administration and for war. With a view to the latter it should afford

easy egress to the citizens, and at the same time be inaccessible and difficult

of capture to enemies. There should be a natural abundance of springs and

fountains in the town, or, if there is a deficiency of them, great reservoirs may

be established for the collection of rainwater, such as will not fail when the

inhabitants are cut off from the country by by war. Special care should be

taken  of  the  health  of  the  inhabitants,  which  will  depend  chiefly  on  the

healthiness of the locality and of the quarter to which they are exposed, and

secondly,  on  the  use  of  pure  water;  this  latter  point  is  by  no  means  a

secondary consideration. For the elements which we use most and oftenest

for the support of the body contribute most to health, and among these are

water and air. Wherefore, in all wise states, if there is a want of pure water,

and  the  supply  is  not  all  equally  good,  the  drinking  water  ought  to  be

separated from that which is used for other purposes.

As to strongholds, what is suitable to different forms of government varies:

thus an acropolis is suited to an oligarchy or a monarchy, but a plain to a

democracy; neither to an aristocracy, but rather a number of strong places.

The arrangement of private houses is considered to be more agreeable and

generally  more  convenient,  if  the  streets  are  regularly  laid  out  after  the

modern fashion which Hippodamus introduced, but for security in war the

antiquated mode of building, which made it difficult for strangers to get outof a town and for assailants to find their way in, is preferable. A city should

therefore adopt both plans of building: it is possible to arrange the houses

irregularly, as husbandmen plant their vines in what are called ‘clumps.’ The

whole town should not be laid out in straight lines, but only certain quarters

and regions; thus security and beauty will be combined.

As to walls, those who say that cities making any pretension to military

virtue should not have them, are quite out of date in their notions; and they

may see the cities which prided themselves on this fancy confuted by facts.

True, there is little courage shown in seeking for safety behind a rampart

when an enemy is similar in character and not much superior in number; but

the  superiority  of  the  besiegers  may  be  and  often  is  too  much  both  for

ordinary human valor and for that which is found only in a few; and if they

are to be saved and to escape defeat and outrage, the strongest wall will be

the truest soldierly precaution, more especially now that missiles and siege

engines have been brought to such perfection. To have no walls would be as

foolish as to choose a site for a town in an exposed country, and to level the

heights;  or  as  if  an  individual  were  to  leave  his  house  unwalled,  lest  the

inmates should become cowards. Nor must we forget that those who have

their cities surrounded by walls may either take advantage of them or not, but

cities which are unwalled have no choice.

If  our  conclusions  are  just,  not  only  should  cities  have  walls,  but  care

should  be  taken  to  make  them  ornamental,  as  well  as  useful  for  warlike

purposes, and adapted to resist modern inventions. For as the assailants of a

city do all they can to gain an advantage, so the defenders should make use of

any means of defense which have been already discovered, and should devise

and invent others, for when men are well prepared no enemy even thinks of

attacking them.


XII


As the walls are to be divided by guardhouses and towers built at suitable

intervals, and the body of citizens must be distributed at common tables, the

idea will naturally occur that we should establish some of the common tables

in the guardhouses. These might be arranged as has been suggested; while the

principal common tables of the magistrates will occupy a suitable place, and

there also will be the buildings appropriated to religious worship except in

the case of those rites which the law or the Pythian oracle has restricted to aspecial locality. The site should be a spot seen far and wide, which gives due

elevation to virtue and towers over the neighborhood. Below this spot should

be  established  an  agora,  such  as  that  which  the  Thessalians  call  the

‘freemen’s agora’; from this all trade should be excluded, and no mechanic,

husbandman, or any such person allowed to enter, unless he be summoned by

the magistrates. It would be a charming use of the place, if the gymnastic

exercises of the elder men were performed there. For in this noble practice

different ages should be separated, and some of the magistrates should stay

with the boys, while the grown-up men remain with the magistrates; for the

presence of the magistrates is the best mode of inspiring true modesty and

ingenuous fear. There should also be a traders’ agora, distinct and apart from

the other, in a situation which is convenient for the reception of goods both

by sea and land.

But in speaking of the magistrates we must not forget another section of

the  citizens,  viz.,  the  priests,  for  whom  public  tables  should  likewise  be

provided in their proper place near the temples. The magistrates who deal

with contracts, indictments, summonses, and the like, and those who have the

care of the agora and of the city, respectively, ought to be established near an

agora and some public place of meeting; the neighborhood of the traders’

agora will be a suitable spot; the upper agora we devote to the life of leisure,

the other is intended for the necessities of trade.

The same order should prevail in the country, for there too the magistrates,

called  by  some  ‘Inspectors  of  Forests’  and  by  others  ‘Wardens  of  the

Country,’ must have guardhouses and common tables while they are on duty;

temples should also be scattered throughout the country, dedicated, some to

Gods, and some to heroes.

But it would be a waste of time for us to linger over details like these. The

difficulty is not in imagining but in carrying them out. We may talk about

them as much as we like, but the execution of them will depend upon fortune.

Wherefore let us say no more about these matters for the present.


XIII


  Returning to the constitution itself, let us seek to determine out of what and

what  sort  of  elements  the  state  which  is  to  be  happy  and  well-governed

should be composed. There are two things in which all which all well-being

consists: one of them is the choice of a right end and aim of action, and theother the discovery of the actions which are means towards it; for the means

and the end may agree or disagree. Sometimes the right end is set before

men, but in practice they fail to attain it; in other cases they are successful in

all the means, but they propose to themselves a bad end; and sometimes they

fail in both. Take, for example, the art of medicine; physicians do not always

understand the nature of health, and also the means which they use may not

effect the desired end. In all arts and sciences both the end and the means

should be equally within our control.

The happiness and well-being which all men manifestly desire, some have

the power of attaining, but to others, from some accident or defect of nature,

the attainment of them is not granted; for a good life requires a supply of

external goods, in a less degree when men are in a good state, in a greater

degree  when  they  are  in  a  lower  state.  Others  again,  who  possess  the

conditions of happiness, go utterly wrong from the first in the pursuit of it.

But since our object is to discover the best form of government, that, namely,

under which a city will be best governed, and since the city is best governed

which has the greatest opportunity of obtaining happiness, it is evident that

we must clearly ascertain the nature of happiness.

We maintain, and have said in the Ethics, if the arguments there adduced

are of any value, that happiness is the realization and perfect exercise of

virtue,  and  this  not  conditional,  but  absolute.  And  I  used  the  term

‘conditional’ to express that which is indispensable, and ‘absolute’ to express

that which is good in itself. Take the case of just actions; just punishments

and chastisements do indeed spring from a good principle, but they are good

only because we cannot do without them—it would be better that neither

individuals nor states should need anything of the sort—but actions which

aim at honor and advantage are absolutely the best. The conditional action is

only the choice of a lesser evil; whereas these are the foundation and creation

of good. A good man may make the best even of poverty and disease, and the

other  ills  of  life;  but  he  can  only  attain  happiness  under  the  opposite

conditions  (for  this  also  has  been  determined  in  accordance  with  ethical

arguments, that the good man is he for whom, because he is virtuous, the

things that are absolutely good are good; it is also plain that his use of these

goods must be virtuous and in the absolute sense good). This makes men

fancy that external goods are the cause of happiness, yet we might as well say

that a brilliant performance on the lyre was to be attributed to the instrument

and not to the skill of the performer.It follows then from what has been said that some things the legislator

must find ready to his hand in a state, others he must provide. And therefore

we can only say: May our state be constituted in such a manner as to be

blessed with the goods of which fortune disposes (for we acknowledge her

power): whereas virtue and goodness in the state are not a matter of chance

but the result of knowledge and purpose. A city can be virtuous only when

the citizens who have a share in the government are virtuous, and in our state

all  the  citizens  share  in  the  government;  let  us  then  inquire  how  a  man

becomes  virtuous.  For  even  if  we  could  suppose  the  citizen  body  to  be

virtuous, without each of them being so, yet the latter would be better, for in

the virtue of each the virtue of all is involved.

  There  are  three  things  which  make  men  good  and  virtuous;  these  are

nature, habit, rational principle. In the first place, every one must be born a

man and not some other animal; so, too, he must have a certain character,

both of body and soul. But some qualities there is no use in having at birth,

for they are altered by habit, and there are some gifts which by nature are

made to be turned by habit to good or bad. Animals lead for the most part a

life of nature, although in lesser particulars some are influenced by habit as

well.  Man  has  rational  principle,  in  addition,  and  man  only.  Wherefore

nature, habit, rational principle must be in harmony with one another; for

they do not always agree; men do many things against habit and nature, if

rational  principle  persuades  them  that  they  ought.  We  have  already

determined what natures are likely to be most easily molded by the hands of

the legislator. An else is the work of education; we learn some things by habit

and some by instruction.


XIV


  Since  every  political  society  is  composed  of  rulers  and  subjects  let  us

consider whether the relations of one to the other should interchange or be

permanent. For the education of the citizens will necessarily vary with the

answer given to this question. Now, if some men excelled others in the same

degree in which gods and heroes are supposed to excel mankind in general

(having in the first place a great advantage even in their bodies, and secondly

in their minds), so that the superiority of the governors was undisputed and

patent to their subjects, it would clearly be better that once for an the one

class should rule and the other serve. But since this is unattainable, and kingshave no marked superiority over their subjects, such as Scylax affirms to be

found among the Indians, it is obviously necessary on many grounds that all

the citizens alike should take their turn of governing and being governed.

Equality  consists  in  the  same  treatment  of  similar  persons,  and  no

government  can  stand  which  is  not  founded  upon  justice.  For  if  the

government be unjust every one in the country unites with the governed in

the desire to have a revolution, and it is an impossibility that the members of

the government can be so numerous as to be stronger than all their enemies

put together. Yet that governors should excel their subjects is undeniable.

How all this is to be effected, and in what way they will respectively share in

the government, the legislator has to consider. The subject has been already

mentioned.  Nature  herself  has  provided  the  distinction  when  she  made  a

difference between old and young within the same species, of whom she

fitted the one to govern and the other to be governed. No one takes offense at

being governed when he is young, nor does he think himself better than his

governors, especially if he will enjoy the same privilege when he reaches the

required age.

We  conclude  that  from  one  point  of  view  governors  and  governed  are

identical, and from another different. And therefore their education must be

the same and also different. For he who would learn to command well must,

as men say, first of all learn to obey. As I observed in the first part of this

treatise, there is one rule which is for the sake of the rulers and another rule

which is for the sake of the ruled; the former is a despotic, the latter a free

government. Some commands differ not in the thing commanded, but in the

intention with which they are imposed. Wherefore, many apparently menial

offices  are  an  honor  to  the  free  youth  by  whom  they  are  performed;  for

actions do not differ as honorable or dishonorable in themselves so much as

in the end and intention of them. But since we say that the virtue of the

citizen and ruler is the same as that of the good man, and that the same person

must first be a subject and then a ruler, the legislator has to see that they

become good men, and by what means this may be accomplished, and what is

the end of the perfect life.

Now the soul of man is divided into two parts, one of which has a rational

principle in itself, and the other, not having a rational principle in itself, is

able to obey such a principle. And we call a man in any way good because he

has the virtues of these two parts. In which of them the end is more likely to

be found is no matter of doubt to those who adopt our division; for in theworld both of nature and of art the inferior always exists for the sake of the

better  or  superior,  and  the  better  or  superior  is  that  which  has  a  rational

principle. This principle, too, in our ordinary way of speaking, is divided into

two kinds, for there is a practical and a speculative principle. This part, then,

must  evidently  be  similarly  divided.  And  there  must  be  a  corresponding

division of actions; the actions of the naturally better part are to be preferred

by those who have it in their power to attain to two out of the three or to all,

for  that  is  always  to  every  one  the  most  eligible  which  is  the  highest

attainable by him. The whole of life is further divided into two parts, business

and leisure, war and peace, and of actions some aim at what is necessary and

useful, and some at what is honorable. And the preference given to one or the

other class of actions must necessarily be like the preference given to one or

other part of the soul and its actions over the other; there must be war for the

sake of peace, business for the sake of leisure, things useful and necessary for

the sake of things honorable. All these points the statesman should keep in

view when he frames his laws; he should consider the parts of the soul and

their functions, and above all the better and the end; he should also remember

the diversities of human lives and actions. For men must be able to engage in

business and go to war, but leisure and peace are better; they must do what is

necessary and indeed what is useful, but what is honorable is better. On such

principles children and persons of every age which requires education should

be trained. Whereas even the Hellenes of the present day who are reputed to

be best governed, and the legislators who gave them their constitutions, do

not appear to have framed their governments with a regard to the best end, or

to have given them laws and education with a view to all the virtues, but in a

vulgar spirit have fallen back on those which promised to be more useful and

profitable. Many modern writers have taken a similar view: they commend

the  Lacedaemonian  constitution,  and  praise  the  legislator  for  making

conquest and war his sole aim, a doctrine which may be refuted by argument

and has long ago been refuted by facts. For most men desire empire in the

hope of accumulating the goods of fortune; and on this ground Thibron and

all  those  who  have  written  about  the  Lacedaemonian  constitution  have

praised  their  legislator,  because  the  Lacedaemonians,  by  being  trained  to

meet dangers, gained great power. But surely they are not a happy people

now that their empire has passed away, nor was their legislator right. How

ridiculous is the result, if, when they are continuing in the observance of his

laws and no one interferes with them, they have lost the better part of life!These writers further err about the sort of government which the legislator

should approve, for the government of freemen is nobler and implies more

virtue than despotic government. Neither is a city to be deemed happy or a

legislator to be praised because he trains his citizens to conquer and obtain

dominion over their neighbors, for there is great evil in this. On a similar

principle any citizen who could, should obviously try to obtain the power in

his own state—the crime which the Lacedaemonians accuse king Pausanias

of attempting, although he had so great honor already. No such principle and

no law having this object is either statesmanlike or useful or right. For the

same things are best both for individuals and for states, and these are the

things which the legislator ought to implant in the minds of his citizens.

  Neither should men study war with a view to the enslavement of those who

do not deserve to be enslaved; but first of all they should provide against their

own enslavement, and in the second place obtain empire for the good of the

governed, and not for the sake of exercising a general despotism, and in the

third place they should seek to be masters only over those who deserve to be

slaves. Facts, as well as arguments, prove that the legislator should direct all

his  military  and  other  measures  to  the  provision  of  leisure  and  the

establishment of peace. For most of these military states are safe only while

they are at war, but fall when they have acquired their empire; like unused

iron they lose their temper in time of peace. And for this the legislator is to

blame, he never having taught them how to lead the life of peace.


XV


  Since the end of individuals and of states is the same, the end of the best

man and of the best constitution must also be the same; it is therefore evident

that there ought to exist in both of them the virtues of leisure; for peace, as

has been often repeated, is the end of war, and leisure of toil. But leisure and

cultivation may be promoted, not only by those virtues which are practiced in

leisure, but also by some of those which are useful to business. For many

necessaries of life have to be supplied before we can have leisure. Therefore a

city must be temperate and brave, and able to endure: for truly, as the proverb

says, ‘There is no leisure for slaves,’ and those who cannot face danger like

men are the slaves of any invader. Courage and endurance are required for

business and philosophy for leisure, temperance and justice for both, and

more especially in times of peace and leisure, for war compels men to be justand temperate, whereas the enjoyment of good fortune and the leisure which

comes with peace tend to make them insolent. Those then who seem to be the

best-off  and  to  be  in  the  possession  of  every  good,  have  special  need  of

justice and temperance—for example, those (if such there be, as the poets

say)  who  dwell  in  the  Islands  of  the  Blest;  they  above  all  will  need

philosophy and temperance and justice, and all the more the more leisure they

have, living in the midst of abundance. There is no difficulty in seeing why

the state that would be happy and good ought to have these virtues. If it be

disgraceful in men not to be able to use the goods of life, it is peculiarly

disgraceful not to be able to use them in time of leisure—to show excellent

qualities in action and war, and when they have peace and leisure to be no

better than slaves. Wherefore we should not practice virtue after the manner

of the Lacedaemonians. For they, while agreeing with other men in their

conception of the highest goods, differ from the rest of mankind in thinking

that they are to be obtained by the practice of a single virtue. And since they

think  these  goods  and  the  enjoyment  of  them  greater  than  the  enjoyment

derived from the virtues … and that it should be practiced for its own sake, is

evident from what has been said; we must now consider how and by what

means it is to be attained.

We have already determined that nature and habit and rational principle are

required, and, of these, the proper nature of the citizens has also been defined

by us. But we have still to consider whether the training of early life is to be

that of rational principle or habit, for these two must accord, and when in

accord they will then form the best of harmonies. The rational principle may

be mistaken and fail in attaining the highest ideal of life, and there may be a

like evil influence of habit. Thus much is clear in the first place, that, as in all

other  things,  birth  implies  an  antecedent  beginning,  and  that  there  are

beginnings  whose  end  is  relative  to  a  further  end.  Now,  in  men  rational

principle and mind are the end towards which nature strives, so that the birth

and moral discipline of the citizens ought to be ordered with a view to them.

In the second place, as the soul and body are two, we see also that there are

two parts of the soul, the rational and the irrational, and two corresponding

states—reason and appetite. And as the body is prior in order of generation to

the soul, so the irrational is prior to the rational. The proof is that anger and

wishing and desire are implanted in children from their very birth, but reason

and understanding are developed as they grow older. Wherefore, the care of

the body ought to precede that of the soul, and the training of the appetitivepart should follow: none the less our care of it must be for the sake of the

reason, and our care of the body for the sake of the soul.


XVI


  Since the legislator should begin by considering how the frames of the

children whom he is rearing may be as good as possible, his first care will be

about marriage—at what age should his citizens marry, and who are fit to

marry? In legislating on this subject he ought to consider the persons and the

length  of  their  life,  that  their  procreative  life  may  terminate  at  the  same

period, and that they may not differ in their bodily powers, as will be the case

if the man is still able to beget children while the woman is unable to bear

them, or the woman able to bear while the man is unable to beget, for from

these  causes  arise  quarrels  and  differences  between  married  persons.

Secondly, he must consider the time at which the children will succeed to

their parents; there ought not to be too great an interval of age, for then the

parents will be too old to derive any pleasure from their affection, or to be of

any use to them. Nor ought they to be too nearly of an age; to youthful

marriages there are many objections—the children will be wanting in respect

to the parents, who will seem to be their contemporaries, and disputes will

arise in the management of the household. Thirdly, and this is the point from

which we digressed, the legislator must mold to his will the frames of newly-

born children. Almost all these objects may be secured by attention to one

point. Since the time of generation is commonly limited within the age of

seventy years in the case of a man, and of fifty in the case of a woman, the

commencement of the union should conform to these periods. The union of

male and female when too young is bad for the procreation of children; in all

other animals the offspring of the young are small and in-developed, and with

a  tendency  to  produce  female  children,  and  therefore  also  in  man,  as  is

proved  by  the  fact  that  in  those  cities  in  which  men  and  women  are

accustomed to marry young, the people are small and weak; in childbirth also

younger women suffer more, and more of them die; some persons say that

this was the meaning of the response once given to the Troezenians—the

oracle really meant that many died because they married too young; it had

nothing  to  do  with  the  ingathering  of  the  harvest.  It  also  conduces  to

temperance not to marry too soon; for women who marry early are apt to be

wanton; and in men too the bodily frame is stunted if they marry while theseed is growing (for there is a time when the growth of the seed, also, ceases,

or  continues  to  but  a  slight  extent).  Women  should  marry  when  they  are

about eighteen years of age, and men at seven and thirty; then they are in the

prime of life, and the decline in the powers of both will coincide. Further, the

children, if their birth takes place soon, as may reasonably be expected, will

succeed in the beginning of their prime, when the fathers are already in the

decline of life, and have nearly reached their term of three-score years and

ten.

  Thus much of the age proper for marriage: the season of the year should

also be considered; according to our present custom, people generally limit

marriage  to  the  season  of  winter,  and  they  are  right.  The  precepts  of

physicians and natural philosophers about generation should also be studied

by  the  parents  themselves;  the  physicians  give  good  advice  about  the

favorable  conditions  of  the  body,  and  the  natural  philosophers  about  the

winds; of which they prefer the north to the south.

  What constitution in the parent is most advantageous to the offspring is a

subject  which  we  will  consider  more  carefully  when  we  speak  of  the

education  of  children,  and  we  will  only  make  a  few  general  remarks  at

present. The constitution of an athlete is not suited to the life of a citizen, or

to health, or to the procreation of children, any more than the valetudinarian

or exhausted constitution, but one which is in a mean between them. A man’s

constitution should be inured to labor, but not to labor which is excessive or

of one sort only, such as is practiced by athletes; he should be capable of all

the actions of a freeman. These remarks apply equally to both parents.

  Women who are with child should be careful of themselves; they should

take exercise and have a nourishing diet. The first of these prescriptions the

legislator will easily carry into effect by requiring that they shall take a walk

daily to some temple, where they can worship the gods who preside over

birth. Their minds, however, unlike their bodies, they ought to keep quiet, for

the offspring derive their natures from their mothers as plants do from the

earth.

As  to  the  exposure  and  rearing  of  children,  let  there  be  a  law  that  no

deformed child shall live, but that on the ground of an excess in the number

of children, if the established customs of the state forbid this (for in our state

population has a limit), no child is to be exposed, but when couples have

children in excess, let abortion be procured before sense and life have begun;

what may or may not be lawfully done in these cases depends on the questionof life and sensation.

And now, having determined at what ages men and women are to begin

their union, let us also determine how long they shall continue to beget and

bear  offspring  for  the  state;  men  who  are  too  old,  like  men  who  are  too

young, produce children who are defective in body and mind; the children of

very old men are weakly. The limit then, should be the age which is the prime

of their intelligence, and this in most persons, according to the notion of some

poets who measure life by periods of seven years, is about fifty; at four or

five years or later, they should cease from having families; and from that time

forward only cohabit with one another for the sake of health; or for some

similar reason.

As to adultery, let it be held disgraceful, in general, for any man or woman

to be found in any way unfaithful when they are married, and called husband

and wife. If during the time of bearing children anything of the sort occur, let

the guilty person be punished with a loss of privileges in proportion to the

offense.


XVII


  After the children have been born, the manner of rearing them may be

supposed to have a great effect on their bodily strength. It would appear from

the example of animals, and of those nations who desire to create the military

habit, that the food which has most milk in it is best suited to human beings;

but  the  less  wine  the  better,  if  they  would  escape  diseases.  Also  all  the

motions to which children can be subjected at their early age are very useful.

But in order to preserve their tender limbs from distortion, some nations have

had  recourse  to  mechanical  appliances  which  straighten  their  bodies.  To

accustom children to the cold from their earliest years is also an excellent

practice, which greatly conduces to health, and hardens them for military

service. Hence many barbarians have a custom of plunging their children at

birth into a cold stream; others, like the Celts, clothe them in a light wrapper

only. For human nature should be early habituated to endure all which by

habit  it  can  be  made  to  endure;  but  the  process  must  be  gradual.  And

children, from their natural warmth, may be easily trained to bear cold. Such

care should attend them in the first stage of life.

The next period lasts to the age of five; during this no demand should be

made upon the child for study or labor, lest its growth be impeded; and thereshould be sufficient motion to prevent the limbs from being inactive. This can

be secured, among other ways, by amusement, but the amusement should not

be vulgar or tiring or effeminate. The Directors of Education, as they are

termed, should be careful what tales or stories the children hear, for all such

things  are  designed  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  business  of  later  life,  and

should be for the most part imitations of the occupations which they will

hereafter pursue in earnest. Those are wrong who in their laws attempt to

check the loud crying and screaming of children, for these contribute towards

their growth, and, in a manner, exercise their bodies. Straining the voice has a

strengthening effect similar to that produced by the retention of the breath in

violent exertions. The Directors of Education should have an eye to their

bringing up, and in particular should take care that they are left as little as

possible with slaves. For until they are seven years old they must five at

home; and therefore, even at this early age, it is to be expected that they

should acquire a taint of meanness from what they hear and see. Indeed, there

is nothing which the legislator should be more careful to drive away than

indecency of speech; for the light utterance of shameful words leads soon to

shameful actions. The young especially should never be allowed to repeat or

hear anything of the sort. A freeman who is found saying or doing what is

forbidden, if he be too young as yet to have the privilege of reclining at the

public tables, should be disgraced and beaten, and an elder person degraded

as  his  slavish  conduct  deserves.  And  since  we  do  not  allow  improper

language, clearly we should also banish pictures or speeches from the stage

which are indecent. Let the rulers take care that there be no image or picture

representing unseemly actions, except in the temples of those Gods at whose

festivals the law permits even ribaldry, and whom the law also permits to be

worshipped by persons of mature age on behalf of themselves, their children,

and their wives. But the legislator should not allow youth to be spectators of

iambi or of comedy until they are of an age to sit at the public tables and to

drink strong wine; by that time education will have armed them against the

evil influences of such representations.

We have made these remarks in a cursory manner—they are enough for

the present occasion; but hereafter we will return to the subject and after a

fuller  discussion  determine  whether  such  liberty  should  or  should  not  be

granted, and in what way granted, if at all. Theodorus, the tragic actor, was

quite right in saying that he would not allow any other actor, not even if he

were quite second-rate, to enter before himself, because the spectators grewfond of the voices which they first heard. And the same principle applies

universally to association with things as well as with persons, for we always

like best whatever comes first. And therefore youth should be kept strangers

to all that is bad, and especially to things which suggest vice or hate. When

the five years have passed away, during the two following years they must

look  on  at  the  pursuits  which  they  are  hereafter  to  learn.  There  are  two

periods of life with reference to which education has to be divided, from

seven to the age of puberty, and onwards to the age of one and twenty. The

poets who divide ages by sevens are in the main right: but we should observe

the divisions actually made by nature; for the deficiencies of nature are what

art and education seek to fill up.

Let  us  then  first  inquire  if  any  regulations  are  to  be  laid  down  about

children, and secondly, whether the care of them should be the concern of the

state or of private individuals, which latter is in our own day the common

custom, and in the third place, what these regulations should be.                                Politics, Book VIII


Translated by Benjamin Jowett


<

div id="book8" class="book">


I


No one will doubt that the legislator should direct his attention above all to

the  education  of  youth;  for  the  neglect  of  education  does  harm  to  the

constitution The citizen should be molded to suit the form of government

under which he lives. For each government has a peculiar character which

originally  formed  and  which  continues  to  preserve  it.  The  character  of

democracy  creates  democracy,  and  the  character  of  oligarchy  creates

oligarchy; and always the better the character, the better the government.

  Again,  for  the  exercise  of  any  faculty  or  art  a  previous  training  and

habituation are required; clearly therefore for the practice of virtue. And since

the whole city has one end, it is manifest that education should be one and the

same for all, and that it should be public, and not private—not as at present,

when  every  one  looks  after  his  own  children  separately,  and  gives  them

separate instruction of the sort which he thinks best; the training in things

which are of common interest should be the same for all. Neither must we

suppose that any one of the citizens belongs to himself, for they all belong to

the state, and are each of them a part of the state, and the care of each part is

inseparable from the care of the whole. In this particular as in some others the

Lacedaemonians are to be praised, for they take the greatest pains about their

children, and make education the business of the state.


II


That education should be regulated by law and should be an affair of state

is not to be denied, but what should be the character of this public education,

and how young persons should be educated, are questions which remain to be

considered.  As  things  are,  there  is  disagreement  about  the  subjects.  Formankind are by no means agreed about the things to be taught, whether we

look to virtue or the best life. Neither is it clear whether education is more

concerned  with  intellectual  or  with  moral  virtue.  The  existing  practice  is

perplexing; no one knows on what principle we should proceed—should the

useful in life, or should virtue, or should the higher knowledge, be the aim of

our training; all three opinions have been entertained. Again, about the means

there  is  no  agreement;  for  different  persons,  starting  with  different  ideas

about the nature of virtue, naturally disagree about the practice of it. There

can be no doubt that children should be taught those useful things which are

really necessary, but not all useful things; for occupations are divided into

liberal  and  illiberal;  and  to  young  children  should  be  imparted  only  such

kinds of knowledge as will be useful to them without vulgarizing them. And

any occupation, art, or science, which makes the body or soul or mind of the

freeman less fit for the practice or exercise of virtue, is vulgar; wherefore we

call those arts vulgar which tend to deform the body, and likewise all paid

employments, for they absorb and degrade the mind. There are also some

liberal arts quite proper for a freeman to acquire, but only in a certain degree,

and if he attend to them too closely, in order to attain perfection in them, the

same evil effects will follow. The object also which a man sets before him

makes a great difference; if he does or learns anything for his own sake or for

the sake of his friends, or with a view to excellence the action will not appear

illiberal; but if done for the sake of others, the very same action will be

thought menial and servile. The received subjects of instruction, as I have

already remarked, are partly of a liberal and party of an illiberal character.


III


The customary branches of education are in number four; they are—(1)

reading  and  writing,  (2)  gymnastic  exercises,  (3)  music,  to  which  is

sometimes added (4) drawing. Of these, reading and writing and drawing are

regarded as useful for the purposes of life in a variety of ways, and gymnastic

exercises are thought to infuse courage. concerning music a doubt may be

raised—in our own day most men cultivate it for the sake of pleasure, but

originally it was included in education, because nature herself, as has been

often said, requires that we should be able, not only to work well, but to use

leisure well; for, as I must repeat once again, the first principle of all action is

leisure. Both are required, but leisure is better than occupation and is its end;and  therefore  the  question  must  be  asked,  what  ought  we  to  do  when  at

leisure? Clearly we ought not to be amusing ourselves, for then amusement

would  be  the  end  of  life.  But  if  this  is  inconceivable,  and  amusement  is

needed more amid serious occupations than at other times (for he who is hard

at work has need of relaxation, and amusement gives relaxation, whereas

occupation  is  always  accompanied  with  exertion  and  effort),  we  should

introduce  amusements  only  at  suitable  times,  and  they  should  be  our

medicines, for the emotion which they create in the soul is a relaxation, and

from  the  pleasure  we  obtain  rest.  But  leisure  of  itself  gives  pleasure  and

happiness and enjoyment of life, which are experienced, not by the busy man,

but by those who have leisure. For he who is occupied has in view some end

which he has not attained; but happiness is an end, since all men deem it to be

accompanied  with  pleasure  and  not  with  pain.  This  pleasure,  however,  is

regarded differently by different persons, and varies according to the habit of

individuals; the pleasure of the best man is the best, and springs from the

noblest  sources.  It  is  clear  then  that  there  are  branches  of  learning  and

education  which  we  must  study  merely  with  a  view  to  leisure  spent  in

intellectual activity, and these are to be valued for their own sake; whereas

those kinds of knowledge which are useful in business are to be deemed

necessary, and exist for the sake of other things. And therefore our fathers

admitted music into education, not on the ground either of its necessity or

utility,  for  it  is  not  necessary,  nor  indeed  useful  in  the  same  manner  as

reading and writing, which are useful in money-making, in the management

of a household, in the acquisition of knowledge and in political life, nor like

drawing, useful for a more correct judgment of the works of artists, nor again

like gymnastic, which gives health and strength; for neither of these is to be

gained from music. There remains, then, the use of music for intellectual

enjoyment in leisure; which is in fact evidently the reason of its introduction,

this being one of the ways in which it is thought that a freeman should pass

his leisure; as Homer says,


But he who alone should be called to the pleasant feast,


and afterwards he speaks of others whom he describes as inviting


The bard who would delight them all.


And in another place Odysseus says there is no better way of passing lifethan when men’s hearts are merry and

The banqueters in the hall, sitting in order, hear the voice of the minstrel.

It is evident, then, that there is a sort of education in which parents should

train their sons, not as being useful or necessary, but because it is liberal or

noble. Whether this is of one kind only, or of more than one, and if so, what

they are, and how they are to be imparted, must hereafter be determined.

Thus much we are now in a position to say, that the ancients witness to us;

for their opinion may be gathered from the fact that music is one of the

received  and  traditional  branches  of  education.  Further,  it  is  clear  that

children should be instructed in some useful things—for example, in reading

and writing—not only for their usefulness, but also because many other sorts

of  knowledge  are  acquired  through  them.  With  a  like  view  they  may  be

taught drawing, not to prevent their making mistakes in their own purchases,

or in order that they may not be imposed upon in the buying or selling of

articles, but perhaps rather because it makes them judges of the beauty of the

human form. To be always seeking after the useful does not become free and

exalted souls. Now it is clear that in education practice must be used before

theory, and the body be trained before the mind; and therefore boys should be

handed over to the trainer, who creates in them the roper habit of body, and to

the wrestling-master, who teaches them their exercises.


IV


Of those states which in our own day seem to take the greatest care of

children, some aim at producing in them an athletic habit, but they only injure

their forms and stunt their growth. Although the Lacedaemonians have not

fallen  into  this  mistake,  yet  they  brutalize  their  children  by  laborious

exercises which they think will make them courageous. But in truth, as we

have  often  repeated,  education  should  not  be  exclusively,  or  principally,

directed to this end. And even if we suppose the Lacedaemonians to be right

in their end, they do not attain it. For among barbarians and among animals

courage is found associated, not with the greatest ferocity, but with a gentle

and lion like temper. There are many races who are ready enough to kill and

eat men, such as the Achaeans and Heniochi, who both live about the Black

Sea; and there are other mainland tribes, as bad or worse, who all live by

plunder,  but  have  no  courage.  It  is  notorious  that  the  Lacedaemonians

themselves, while they alone were assiduous in their laborious drill, weresuperior  to  others,  but  now  they  are  beaten  both  in  war  and  gymnastic

exercises.  For  their  ancient  superiority  did  not  depend  on  their  mode  of

training their youth, but only on the circumstance that they trained them when

their only rivals did not. Hence we may infer that what is noble, not what is

brutal, should have the first place; no wolf or other wild animal will face a

really noble danger; such dangers are for the brave man. And parents who

devote  their  children  to  gymnastics  while  they  neglect  their  necessary

education, in reality vulgarize them; for they make them useful to the art of

statesmanship in one quality only, and even in this the argument proves them

to be inferior to others. We should judge the Lacedaemonians not from what

they  have  been,  but  from  what  they  are;  for  now  they  have  rivals  who

compete with their education; formerly they had none.

It is an admitted principle, that gymnastic exercises should be employed in

education, and that for children they should be of a lighter kind, avoiding

severe diet or painful toil, lest the growth of the body be impaired. The evil of

excessive training in early years is strikingly proved by the example of the

Olympic victors; for not more than two or three of them have gained a prize

both as boys and as men; their early training and severe gymnastic exercises

exhausted their constitutions. When boyhood is over, three years should be

spent in other studies; the period of life which follows may then be devoted

to hard exercise and strict diet. Men ought not to labor at the same time with

their minds and with their bodies; for the two kinds of labor are opposed to

one another; the labor of the body impedes the mind, and the labor of the

mind the body.


V


  Concerning music there are some questions which we have already raised;

these we may now resume and carry further; and our remarks will serve as a

prelude  to  this  or  any  other  discussion  of  the  subject.  It  is  not  easy  to

determine the nature of music, or why any one should have a knowledge of it.

Shall  we  say,  for  the  sake  of  amusement  and  relaxation,  like  sleep  or

drinking, which are not good in themselves, but are pleasant, and at the same

time ‘care to cease,’ as Euripides says? And for this end men also appoint

music, and make use of all three alike—sleep, drinking, music—to which

some add dancing. Or shall we argue that music conduces to virtue, on the

ground that it can form our minds and habituate us to true pleasures as ourbodies are made by gymnastic to be of a certain character? Or shall we say

that it contributes to the enjoyment of leisure and mental cultivation, which is

a third alternative? Now obviously youths are not to be instructed with a view

to their amusement, for learning is no amusement, but is accompanied with

pain. Neither is intellectual enjoyment suitable to boys of that age, for it is the

end, and that which is imperfect cannot attain the perfect or end. But perhaps

it may be said that boys learn music for the sake of the amusement which

they  will  have  when  they  are  grown  up.  If  so,  why  should  they  learn

themselves, and not, like the Persian and Median kings, enjoy the pleasure

and instruction which is derived from hearing others? (for surely persons who

have made music the business and profession of their lives will be better

performers than those who practice only long enough to learn). If they must

learn  music,  on  the  same  principle  they  should  learn  cookery,  which  is

absurd. And even granting that music may form the character, the objection

still  holds:  why  should  we  learn  ourselves?  Why  cannot  we  attain  true

pleasure  and  form  a  correct  judgment  from  hearing  others,  like  the

Lacedaemonians?—for  they,  without  learning  music,  nevertheless  can

correctly judge, as they say, of good and bad melodies. Or again, if music

should be used to promote cheerfulness and refined intellectual enjoyment,

the  objection  still  remains—why  should  we  learn  ourselves  instead  of

enjoying the performances of others? We may illustrate what we are saying

by our conception of the Gods; for in the poets Zeus does not himself sing or

play on the lyre. Nay, we call professional performers vulgar; no freeman

would play or sing unless he were intoxicated or in jest. But these matters

may be left for the present.

The first question is whether music is or is not to be a part of education. Of

the  three  things  mentioned  in  our  discussion,  which  does  it  produce?—

education or amusement or intellectual enjoyment, for it may be reckoned

under all three, and seems to share in the nature of all of them. Amusement is

for the sake of relaxation, and relaxation is of necessity sweet, for it is the

remedy  of  pain  caused  by  toil;  and  intellectual  enjoyment  is  universally

acknowledged to contain an element not only of the noble but of the pleasant,

for happiness is made up of both. All men agree that music is one of the

pleasantest things, whether with or without songs; as Musaeus says:


  Song to mortals of all things the sweetest.  Hence and with good reason it is introduced into social gatherings and

entertainments,  because  it  makes  the  hearts  of  men  glad:  so  that  on  this

ground alone we may assume that the young ought to be trained in it. For

innocent pleasures are not only in harmony with the perfect end of life, but

they also provide relaxation. And whereas men rarely attain the end, but often

rest by the way and amuse themselves, not only with a view to a further end,

but also for the pleasure’s sake, it may be well at times to let them find a

refreshment in music. It sometimes happens that men make amusement the

end, for the end probably contains some element of pleasure, though not any

ordinary or lower pleasure; but they mistake the lower for the higher, and in

seeking for the one find the other, since every pleasure has a likeness to the

end of action. For the end is not eligible for the sake of any future good, nor

do the pleasures which we have described exist for the sake of any future

good but of the past, that is to say, they are the alleviation of past toils and

pains. And we may infer this to be the reason why men seek happiness from

these pleasures.

But music is pursued, not only as an alleviation of past toil, but also as

providing recreation. And who can say whether, having this use, it may not

also have a nobler one? In addition to this common pleasure, felt and shared

in by all (for the pleasure given by music is natural, and therefore adapted to

all  ages  and  characters),  may  it  not  have  also  some  influence  over  the

character  and  the  soul?  It  must  have  such  an  influence  if  characters  are

affected by it. And that they are so affected is proved in many ways, and not

least by the power which the songs of Olympus exercise; for beyond question

they inspire enthusiasm, and enthusiasm is an emotion of the ethical part of

the soul. Besides, when men hear imitations, even apart from the rhythms and

tunes themselves, their feelings move in sympathy. Since then music is a

pleasure, and virtue consists in rejoicing and loving and hating aright, there is

clearly nothing which we are so much concerned to acquire and to cultivate

as  the  power  of  forming  right  judgments,  and  of  taking  delight  in  good

dispositions  and  noble  actions.  Rhythm  and  melody  supply  imitations  of

anger and gentleness, and also of courage and temperance, and of all the

qualities  contrary  to  these,  and  of  the  other  qualities  of  character,  which

hardly  fall  short  of  the  actual  affections,  as  we  know  from  our  own

experience, for in listening to such strains our souls undergo a change. The

habit of feeling pleasure or pain at mere representations is not far removed

from the same feeling about realities; for example, if any one delights in thesight of a statue for its beauty only, it necessarily follows that the sight of the

original will be pleasant to him. The objects of no other sense, such as taste

or touch, have any resemblance to moral qualities; in visible objects there is

only a little, for there are figures which are of a moral character, but only to a

slight extent, and all do not participate in the feeling about them. Again,

figures and colors are not imitations, but signs, of moral habits, indications

which  the  body  gives  of  states  of  feeling.  The  connection  of  them  with

morals is slight, but in so far as there is any, young men should be taught to

look, not at the works of Pauson, but at those of Polygnotus, or any other

painter or sculptor who expresses moral ideas. On the other hand, even in

mere melodies there is an imitation of character, for the musical modes differ

essentially  from  one  another,  and  those  who  hear  them  are  differently

affected by each. Some of them make men sad and grave, like the so-called

Mixolydian, others enfeeble the mind, like the relaxed modes, another, again,

produces a moderate and settled temper, which appears to be the peculiar

effect of the Dorian; the Phrygian inspires enthusiasm. The whole subject has

been well treated by philosophical writers on this branch of education, and

they confirm their arguments by facts. The same principles apply to rhythms;

some have a character of rest, others of motion, and of these latter again,

some have a more vulgar, others a nobler movement. Enough has been said to

show that music has a power of forming the character, and should therefore

be introduced into the education of the young. The study is suited to the stage

of youth, for young persons will not, if they can help, endure anything which

is not sweetened by pleasure, and music has a natural sweetness. There seems

to be in us a sort of affinity to musical modes and rhythms, which makes

some  philosophers  say  that  the  soul  is  a  tuning,  others,  that  it  possesses

tuning.


VI


And now we have to determine the question which has been already raised,

whether children should be themselves taught to sing and play or not. Clearly

there is a considerable difference made in the character by the actual practice

of the art. It is difficult, if not impossible, for those who do not perform to be

good  judges  of  the  performance  of  others.  Besides,  children  should  have

something  to  do,  and  the  rattle  of  Archytas,  which  people  give  to  their

children in order to amuse them and prevent them from breaking anything inthe house, was a capital invention, for a young thing cannot be quiet. The

rattle is a toy suited to the infant mind, and education is a rattle or toy for

children of a larger growth. We conclude then that they should be taught

music in such a way as to become not only critics but performers.

The question what is or is not suitable for different ages may be easily

answered; nor is there any difficulty in meeting the objection of those who

say that the study of music is vulgar. We reply (1) in the first place, that they

who are to be judges must also be performers, and that they should begin to

practice  early,  although  when  they  are  older  they  may  be  spared  the

execution; they must have learned to appreciate what is good and to delight in

it, thanks to the knowledge which they acquired in their youth. As to (2) the

vulgarizing effect which music is supposed to exercise, this is a question

which we shall have no difficulty in determining, when we have considered

to what extent freemen who are being trained to political virtue should pursue

the art, what melodies and what rhythms they should be allowed to use, and

what instruments should be employed in teaching them to play; for even the

instrument makes a difference. The answer to the objection turns upon these

distinctions;  for  it  is  quite  possible  that  certain  methods  of  teaching  and

learning music do really have a degrading effect. It is evident then that the

learning  of  music  ought  not  to  impede  the  business  of  riper  years,  or  to

degrade the body or render it unfit for civil or military training, whether for

bodily exercises at the time or for later studies.

The right measure will be attained if students of music stop short of the

arts which are practiced in professional contests, and do not seek to acquire

those  fantastic  marvels  of  execution  which  are  now  the  fashion  in  such

contests, and from these have passed into education. Let the young practice

even such music as we have prescribed, only until they are able to feel delight

in noble melodies and rhythms, and not merely in that common part of music

in which every slave or child and even some animals find pleasure.

  From these principles we may also infer what instruments should be used.

The flute, or any other instrument which requires great skill, as for example

the harp, ought not to be admitted into education, but only such as will make

intelligent students of music or of the other parts of education. Besides, the

flute is not an instrument which is expressive of moral character; it is too

exciting. The proper time for using it is when the performance aims not at

instruction, but at the relief of the passions. And there is a further objection;

the impediment which the flute presents to the use of the voice detracts fromits educational value. The ancients therefore were right in forbidding the flute

to youths and freemen, although they had once allowed it. For when their

wealth gave them a greater inclination to leisure, and they had loftier notions

of excellence, being also elated with their success, both before and after the

Persian War, with more zeal than discernment they pursued every kind of

knowledge, and so they introduced the flute into education. At Lacedaemon

there was a choragus who led the chorus with a flute, and at Athens the

instrument became so popular that most freemen could play upon it. The

popularity  is  shown  by  the  tablet  which  Thrasippus  dedicated  when  he

furnished the chorus to Ecphantides. Later experience enabled men to judge

what was or was not really conducive to virtue, and they rejected both the

flute and several other old-fashioned instruments, such as the Lydian harp,

the many-stringed lyre, the ‘heptagon,’ ‘triangle,’ ‘sambuca,’ the like—which

are intended only to give pleasure to the hearer, and require extraordinary

skill of hand. There is a meaning also in the myth of the ancients, which tells

how Athene invented the flute and then threw it away. It was not a bad idea

of theirs, that the Goddess disliked the instrument because it made the face

ugly; but with still more reason may we say that she rejected it because the

acquirement of flute-playing contributes nothing to the mind, since to Athene

we ascribe both knowledge and art.

  Thus then we reject the professional instruments and also the professional

mode  of  education  in  music  (and  by  professional  we  mean  that  which  is

adopted in contests), for in this the performer practices the art, not for the

sake of his own improvement, but in order to give pleasure, and that of a

vulgar sort, to his hearers. For this reason the execution of such music is not

the  part  of  a  freeman  but  of  a  paid  performer,  and  the  result  is  that  the

performers are vulgarized, for the end at which they aim is bad. The vulgarity

of the spectator tends to lower the character of the music and therefore of the

performers; they look to him—he makes them what they are, and fashions

even their bodies by the movements which he expects them to exhibit.


VII


We have also to consider rhythms and modes, and their use in education.

Shall we use them all or make a distinction? and shall the same distinction be

made for those who practice music with a view to education, or shall it be

some other? Now we see that music is produced by melody and rhythm, andwe ought to know what influence these have respectively on education, and

whether we should prefer excellence in melody or excellence in rhythm. But

as the subject has been very well treated by many musicians of the present

day,  and  also  by  philosophers  who  have  had  considerable  experience  of

musical education, to these we would refer the more exact student of the

subject; we shall only speak of it now after the manner of the legislator,

stating the general principles.

We accept the division of melodies proposed by certain philosophers into

ethical melodies, melodies of action, and passionate or inspiring melodies,

each having, as they say, a mode corresponding to it. But we maintain further

that music should be studied, not for the sake of one, but of many benefits,

that  is  to  say,  with  a  view  to  (1)  education,  (2)  purgation  (the  word

‘purgation’ we use at present without explanation, but when hereafter we

speak of poetry, we will treat the subject with more precision); music may

also  serve  (3)  for  for  enjoyment,  for  relaxation,  and  for  recreation  after

exertion. It is clear, therefore, that all the modes must be employed by us, but

not all of them in the same manner. In education the most ethical modes are

to be preferred, but in listening to the performances of others we may admit

the modes of action and passion also. For feelings such as pity and fear, or,

again, enthusiasm, exist very strongly in some souls, and have more or less

influence over all. Some persons fall into a religious frenzy, whom we see as

a  result  of  the  sacred  melodies—when  they  have  used  the  melodies  that

excite the soul to mystic frenzy—restored as though they had found healing

and purgation. Those who are influenced by pity or fear, and every emotional

nature, must have a like experience, and others in so far as each is susceptible

to such emotions, and all are in a manner purged and their souls lightened and

delighted.  The  purgative  melodies  likewise  give  an  innocent  pleasure  to

mankind. Such are the modes and the melodies in which those who perform

music at the theater should be invited to compete. But since the spectators are

of  two  kinds—the  one  free  and  educated,  and  the  other  a  vulgar  crowd

composed of mechanics, laborers, and the like—there ought to be contests

and exhibitions instituted for the relaxation of the second class also. And the

music will correspond to their minds; for as their minds are perverted from

the  natural  state,  so  there  are  perverted  modes  and  highly  strung  and

unnaturally colored melodies. A man receives pleasure from what is natural

to him, and therefore professional musicians may be allowed to practice this

lower sort of music before an audience of a lower type. But, for the purposesof education, as I have already said, those modes and melodies should be

employed which are ethical, such as the Dorian, as we said before; though we

may include any others which are approved by philosophers who have had a

musical education. The Socrates of the Republic is wrong in retaining only

the Phrygian mode along with the Dorian, and the more so because he rejects

the  flute;  for  the  Phrygian  is  to  the  modes  what  the  flute  is  to  musical

instruments—both of them are exciting and emotional. Poetry proves this, for

Bacchic frenzy and all similar emotions are most suitably expressed by the

flute,  and  are  better  set  to  the  Phrygian  than  to  any  other  mode.  The

dithyramb, for example, is acknowledged to be Phrygian, a fact of which the

connoisseurs of music offer many proofs, saying, among other things, that

Philoxenus, having attempted to compose his Mysians as a dithyramb in the

Dorian mode, found it impossible, and fell back by the very nature of things

into the more appropriate Phrygian. All men agree that the Dorian music is

the gravest and manliest. And whereas we say that the extremes should be

avoided and the mean followed, and whereas the Dorian is a mean between

the other modes, it is evident that our youth should be taught the Dorian

music.

Two  principles  have  to  be  kept  in  view,  what  is  possible,  what  is

becoming: at these every man ought to aim. But even these are relative to

age; the old, who have lost their powers, cannot very well sing the high-

strung modes, and nature herself seems to suggest that their songs should be

of the more relaxed kind. Wherefore the musicians likewise blame Socrates,

and with justice, for rejecting the relaxed modes in education under the idea

that they are intoxicating, not in the ordinary sense of intoxication (for wine

rather tends to excite men), but because they have no strength in them. And

so, with a view also to the time of life when men begin to grow old, they

ought to practice the gentler modes and melodies as well as the others, and,

further, any mode, such as the Lydian above all others appears to be, which is

suited to children of tender age, and possesses the elements both of order and

of  education.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  education  should  be  based  upon  three

principles—the mean, the possible, the becoming, these three.                          The Athenian Constitution


Translated by Sir Frederic G. Kenyon


<

div class="chapter">


1


… [They were tried] by a court empanelled from among the noble families,

and sworn upon the sacrifices. The part of accuser was taken by Myron. They

were found guilty of the sacrilege, and their bodies were cast out of their

graves  and  their  race  banished  for  evermore.  In  view  of  this  expiation,

Epimenides the Cretan performed a purification of the city.


2


  After this event there was contention for a long time between the upper

classes  and  the  populace.  Not  only  was  the  constitution  at  this  time

oligarchical  in  every  respect,  but  the  poorer  classes,  men,  women,  and

children, were the serfs of the rich. They were known as Pelatae and also as

Hectemori,  because  they  cultivated  the  lands  of  the  rich  at  the  rent  thus

indicated. The whole country was in the hands of a few persons, and if the

tenants failed to pay their rent they were liable to be haled into slavery, and

their  children  with  them.  All  loans  secured  upon  the  debtor’s  person,  a

custom which prevailed until the time of Solon, who was the first to appear as

the  champion  of  the  people.  But  the  hardest  and  bitterest  part  of  the

constitution in the eyes of the masses was their state of serfdom. Not but what

they were also discontented with every other feature of their lot; for, to speak

generally, they had no part nor share in anything.


3


Now the ancient constitution, as it existed before the time of Draco, was

organized  as  follows.  The  magistrates  were  elected  according  toqualifications  of  birth  and  wealth.  At  first  they  governed  for  life,  but

subsequently for terms of ten years. The first magistrates, both in date and in

importance, were the King, the Polemarch, and the Archon. The earliest of

these offices was that of the King, which existed from ancestral antiquity. To

this was added, secondly, the office of Polemarch, on account of some of the

kings proving feeble in war; for it was on this account that Ion was invited to

accept the post on an occasion of pressing need. The last of the three offices

was  that  of  the  Archon,  which  most  authorities  state  to  have  come  into

existence in the time of Medon. Others assign it to the time of Acastus, and

adduce as proof the fact that the nine Archons swear to execute their oaths ‘as

in the days of Acastus,’ which seems to suggest that it was in his time that the

descendants of Codrus retired from the kingship in return for the prerogatives

conferred upon the Archon. Whichever way it may be, the difference in date

is small; but that it was the last of these magistracies to be created is shown

by the fact that the Archon has no part in the ancestral sacrifices, as the King

and the Polemarch have, but exclusively in those of later origin. So it is only

at a comparatively late date that the office of Archon has become of great

importance,  through  the  dignity  conferred  by  these  later  additions.  The

Thesmothetae were many years afterwards, when these offices had already

become  annual,  with  the  object  that  they  might  publicly  record  all  legal

decisions, and act as guardians of them with a view to determining the issues

between litigants. Accordingly their office, alone of those which have been

mentioned, was never of more than annual duration.

  Such, then, is the relative chronological precedence of these offices. At that

time  the  nine  Archons  did  not  all  live  together.  The  King  occupied  the

building now known as the Boculium, near the Prytaneum, as may be seen

from the fact that even to the present day the marriage of the King’s wife to

Dionysus  takes  place  there.  The  Archon  lived  in  the  Prytaneum,  the

Polemarch  in  the  Epilyceum.  The  latter  building  was  formerly  called  the

Polemarcheum, but after Epilycus, during his term of office as Polemarch,

had rebuilt it and fitted it up, it was called the Epilyceum. The Thesmothetae

occupied the Thesmotheteum. In the time of Solon, however, they all came

together into the Thesmotheteum. They had power to decide cases finally on

their own authority, not, as now, merely to hold a preliminary hearing. Such

then was the arrangement of the magistracies. The Council of Areopagus had

as its constitutionally assigned duty the protection of the laws; but in point of

fact it administered the greater and most important part of the government ofthe state, and inflicted personal punishments and fines summarily upon all

who misbehaved themselves. This was the natural consequence of the facts

that the Archons were elected under qualifications of birth and wealth, and

that the Areopagus was composed of those who had served as Archons; for

which latter reason the membership of the Areopagus is the only office which

has continued to be a life-magistracy to the present day.


4


  Such  was,  in  outline,  the  first  constitution,  but  not  very  long  after  the

events above recorded, in the archonship of Aristaichmus, Draco enacted his

ordinances. Now his constitution had the following form. The franchise was

given to all who could furnish themselves with a military equipment. The

nine Archons and the Treasurers were elected by this body from persons

possessing an unencumbered property of not less than ten minas, the less

important officials from those who could furnish themselves with a military

equipment,  and  the  generals  [Strategi]  and  commanders  of  the  cavalry

[Hipparchi] from those who could show an unencumbered property of not

less than a hundred minas, and had children born in lawful wedlock over ten

years of age. These officers were required to hold to bail the Prytanes, the

Strategi, and the Hipparchi of the preceding year until their accounts had

been audited, taking four securities of the same class as that to which the

Strategi  and  the  Hipparchi  belonged.  There  was  also  to  be  a  Council,

consisting  of  four  hundred  and  one  members,  elected  by  lot  from  among

those  who  possessed  the  franchise.  Both  for  this  and  for  the  other

magistracies the lot was cast among those who were over thirty years of age;

and no one might hold office twice until every one else had had his turn, after

which they were to cast the lot afresh. If any member of the Council failed to

attend when there was a sitting of the Council or of the Assembly, he paid a

fine, to the amount of three drachmas if he was a Pentacosiomedimnus, two if

he was a Knight, and One if he was a Zeugites. The Council of Areopagus

was guardian of the laws, and kept watch over the magistrates to see that they

executed  their  offices  in  accordance  with  the  laws.  Any  person  who  felt

himself wronged might lay an information before the Council of Areopagus,

on declaring what law was broken by the wrong done to him. But, as has

been said before, loans were secured upon the persons of the debtors, and the

land was in the hands of a few.5


  Since such, then, was the organization of the constitution, and the many

were in slavery to the few, the people rose against the upper class. The strife

was keen, and for a long time the two parties were ranged in hostile camps

against one another, till at last, by common consent, they appointed Solon to

be mediator and Archon, and committed the whole constitution to his hands.

The immediate occasion of his appointment was his poem, which begins with

the words:

<

div class="quote">

I behold, and within my heart deep sadness has claimed its place,

As I mark the oldest home of the ancient Ionian race

Slain by the sword.

In this poem he fights and disputes on behalf of each party in turn against

the other, and finally he advises them to come to terms and put an end to the

quarrel existing between them. By birth and reputation Solon was one of the

foremost men of the day, but in wealth and position he was of the middle

class, as is generally agreed, and is, indeed, established by his own evidence

in these poems, where he exhorts the wealthy not to be grasping.

<

div class="quote">

But ye who have store of good, who are sated and overflow,

Restrain your swelling soul, and still it and keep it low:

Let the heart that is great within you he trained a lowlier way;

Ye shall not have all at your will, and we will not for ever obey.

  Indeed, he constantly fastens the blame of the conflict on the rich; and

accordingly at the beginning of the poem he says that he fears’ the love of

wealth and an overweening mind’, evidently meaning that it was through

these that the quarrel arose.


6


As soon as he was at the head of affairs, Solon liberated the people once

and for all, by prohibiting all loans on the security of the debtor’s person: and

in addition he made laws by which he cancelled all debts, public and private.

This measure is commonly called the Seisachtheia [= removal of burdens],since thereby the people had their loads removed from them. In connexion

with it some persons try to traduce the character of Solon. It so happened

that,  when  he  was  about  to  enact  the  Seisachtheia,  he  communicated  his

intention to some members of the upper class, whereupon, as the partisans of

the popular party say, his friends stole a march on him; while those who wish

to attack his character maintain that he too had a share in the fraud himself.

For these persons borrowed money and bought up a large amount of land,

and so when, a short time afterwards, all debts were cancelled, they became

wealthy;  and  this,  they  say,  was  the  origin  of  the  families  which  were

afterwards looked on as having been wealthy from primeval times. However,

the story of the popular party is by far the most probable. A man who was so

moderate and public-spirited in all his other actions, that when it was within

his power to put his fellow-citizens beneath his feet and establish himself as

tyrant, he preferred instead to incur the hostility of both parties by placing his

honour and the general welfare above his personal aggrandisement, is not

likely to have consented to defile his hands by such a petty and palpable

fraud. That he had this absolute power is, in the first place, indicated by the

desperate condition the country; moreover, he mentions it himself repeatedly

in  his  poems,  and  it  is  universally  admitted.  We  are  therefore  bound  to

consider this accusation to be false.


7


Next  Solon  drew  up  a  constitution  and  enacted  new  laws;  and  the

ordinances of Draco ceased to be used, with the exception of those relating to

murder. The laws were inscribed on the wooden stands, and set up in the

King’s Porch, and all swore to obey them; and the nine Archons made oath

upon the stone, declaring that they would dedicate a golden statue if they

should transgress any of them. This is the origin of the oath to that effect

which they take to the present day. Solon ratified his laws for a hundred

years;  and  the  following  was  the  fashion  in  which  he  organized  the

constitution.  He  divided  the  population  according  to  property  into  four

classes,  just  as  it  had  been  divided  before,  namely,  Pentacosiomedimni,

Knights, Zeugitae, and Thetes. The various magistracies, namely, the nine

Archons, the Treasurers, the Commissioners for Public Contracts (Poletae),

the Eleven, and Clerks (Colacretae), he assigned to the Pentacosiomedimni,

the Knights, and the Zeugitae, giving offices to each class in proportion to thevalue of their rateable property. To who ranked among the Thetes he gave

nothing but a place in the Assembly and in the juries. A man had to rank as a

Pentacosiomedimnus if he made, from his own land, five hundred measures,

whether liquid or solid. Those ranked as Knights who made three hundred

measures,  or,  as  some  say,  those  who  were  able  to  maintain  a  horse.  In

support of the latter definition they adduce the name of the class, which may

be supposed to be derived from this fact, and also some votive offerings of

early  times;  for  in  the  Acropolis  there  is  a  votive  offering,  a  statue  of

Diphilus, bearing this inscription:

<

div class="quote">

The son of Diphilus, Athenion hight,

Raised from the Thetes and become a knight,

Did to the gods this sculptured charger bring,

For his promotion a thank-offering.

And a horse stands in evidence beside the man, implying that this was

what was meant by belonging to the rank of Knight. At the same time it

seems reasonable to suppose that this class, like the Pentacosiomedimni, was

defined by the possession of an income of a certain number of measures.

Those ranked as Zeugitae who made two hundred measures, liquid or solid;

and the rest ranked as Thetes, and were not eligible for any office. Hence it is

that even at the present day, when a candidate for any office is asked to what

class  he  belongs,  no  one  would  think  of  saying  that  he  belonged  to  the

Thetes.


8


The elections to the various offices Solon enacted should be by lot, out of

candidates selected by each of the tribes. Each tribe selected ten candidates

for the nine archonships, and among these the lot was cast. Hence it is still

the custom for each tribe to choose ten candidates by lot, and then the lot is

again cast among these. A proof that Solon regulated the elections to office

according to the property classes may be found in the law still in force with

regard to the Treasurers, which enacts that they shall be chosen from the

Pentacosiomedimni. Such was Solon’s legislation with respect to the nine

Archons;  whereas  in  early  times  the  Council  of  Areopagus  summoned

suitable persons according to its own judgement and appointed them for theyear to the several offices. There were four tribes, as before, and four tribe-

kings.  Each  tribe  was  divided  into  three  Trittyes  [=Thirds],  with  twelve

Naucraries  in  each;  and  the  Naucraries  had  officers  of  their  own,  called

Naucrari,  whose  duty  it  was  to  superintend  the  current  receipts  and

expenditure. Hence, among the laws of Solon now obsolete, it is repeatedly

written that the Naucrari are to receive and to spend out of the Naucraric

fund. Solon also appointed a Council of four hundred, a hundred from each

tribe;  but  he  assigned  to  the  Council  of  the  Areopagus  the  duty  of

superintending the laws, acting as before as the guardian of the constitution in

general.  It  kept  watch  over  the  affairs  of  the  state  in  most  of  the  more

important matters, and corrected offenders, with full powers to inflict either

fines or personal punishment. The money received in fines it brought up into

the Acropolis, without assigning the reason for the mulct. It also tried those

who conspired for the overthrow of the state, Solon having enacted a process

of impeachment to deal with such offenders. Further, since he saw the state

often engaged in internal disputes, while many of the citizens from sheer

indifference accepted whatever might turn up, he made a law with express

reference to such persons, enacting that any one who, in a time civil factions,

did not take up arms with either party, should lose his rights as a citizen and

cease to have any part in the state.


9


  Such, then, was his legislation concerning the magistracies. There are three

points in the constitution of Solon which appear to be its most democratic

features: first and most important, the prohibition of loans on the security of

the debtor’s person; secondly, the right of every person who so willed to

claim redress on behalf of any one to whom wrong was being done; thirdly,

the institution of the appeal to the jurycourts; and it is to this last, they say,

that  the  masses  have  owed  their  strength  most  of  all,  since,  when  the

democracy is master of the voting-power, it is master of the constitution.

Moreover, since the laws were not drawn up in simple and explicit terms (but

like the one concerning inheritances and wards of state), disputes inevitably

occurred, and the courts had to decide in every matter, whether public or

private. Some persons in fact believe that Solon deliberately made the laws

indefinite, in order that the final decision might be in the hands of the people.

This,  however,  is  not  probable,  and  the  reason  no  doubt  was  that  it  isimpossible to attain ideal perfection when framing a law in general terms; for

we must judge of his intentions, not from the actual results in the present day,

but from the general tenor of the rest of his legislation.


10


  These  seem  to  be  the  democratic  features  of  his  laws;  but  in  addition,

before the period of his legislation, he carried through his abolition of debts,

and after it his increase in the standards of weights and measures, and of the

currency.  During  his  administration  the  measures  were  made  larger  than

those of Pheidon, and the mina, which previously had a standard of seventy

drachmas, was raised to the full hundred. The standard coin in earlier times

was the two-drachma piece. He also made weights corresponding with the

coinage, sixty-three minas going to the talent; and the odd three minas were

distributed among the staters and the other values.


11


  When he had completed his organization of the constitution in the manner

that has been described, he found himself beset by people coming to him and

harassing him concerning his laws, criticizing here and questioning there, till,

as he wished neither to alter what he had decided on nor yet to be an object of

ill will to every one by remaining in Athens, he set off on a journey to Egypt,

with the combined objects of trade and travel, giving out that he should not

return for ten years. He considered that there was no call for him to expound

the laws personally, but that every one should obey them just as they were

written. Moreover, his position at this time was unpleasant. Many members

of the upper class had been estranged from him on account of his abolition of

debts, and both parties were alienated through their disappointment at the

condition  of  things  which  he  had  created.  The  mass  of  the  people  had

expected him to make a complete redistribution of all property, and the upper

class hoped he would restore everything to its former position, or, at any rate,

make  but  a  small  change.  Solon,  however,  had  resisted  both  classes.  He

might have made himself a despot by attaching himself to whichever party he

chose, but he preferred, though at the cost of incurring the enmity of both, to

be the saviour of his country and the ideal lawgiver.12


The truth of this view of Solon’s policy is established alike by common

consent, and by the mention he has himself made of the matter in his poems.

Thus:

<

div class="quote">

I gave to the mass of the people such rank as befitted their need,

I took not away their honour, and I granted naught to their greed;

While those who were rich in power, who in wealth were glorious and great,

I bethought me that naught should befall them unworthy their splendour and

state;

So I stood with my shield outstretched, and both were sale in its sight,

And I would not that either should triumph, when the triumph was not with

right.

  Again he declares how the mass of the people ought to be treated:

<

div class="quote">

But thus will the people best the voice of their leaders obey,

When neither too slack is the rein, nor violence holdeth the sway;

For indulgence breedeth a child, the presumption that spurns control,

When riches too great are poured upon men of unbalanced soul.

And  again  elsewhere  he  speaks  about  the  persons  who  wished  to

redistribute the land:

<

div class="quote">

So they came in search of plunder, and their cravings knew no hound,

Every one among them deeming endless wealth would here be found.

And that I with glozing smoothness hid a cruel mind within.

Fondly then and vainly dreamt they; now they raise an angry din,

And they glare askance in anger, and the light within their eyes

Burns with hostile flames upon me. Yet therein no justice lies.

All I promised, fully wrought I with the gods at hand to cheer,

Naught beyond in folly ventured. Never to my soul was dear

With a tyrant’s force to govern, nor to see the good and base

Side by side in equal portion share the rich home of our race.

  Once more he speaks of the abolition of debts and of those who beforewere in servitude, but were released owing to the Seisachtheia:

<

div class="quote">

Of all the aims for which I summoned forth

The people, was there one I compassed not?

Thou, when slow time brings justice in its train,

O mighty mother of the Olympian gods,

Dark Earth, thou best canst witness, from whose breast

I swept the pillars broadcast planted there,

And made thee free, who hadst been slave of yore.

And many a man whom fraud or law had sold

For from his god-built land, an outcast slave,

I brought again to Athens; yea, and some,

Exiles from home through debt’s oppressive load,

Speaking no more the dear ATHENIAN tongue,

But wandering far and wide, I brought again;

And those that here in vilest slavery

Crouched ‘neath a master’s frown, I set them free.

Thus might and right were yoked in harmony,

Since by the force of law I won my ends

And kept my promise. Equal laws I gave

To evil and to good, with even hand

Drawing straight justice for the lot of each.

But had another held the goad as

One in whose heart was guile and greediness,

He had not kept the people back from strife.

For had I granted, now what pleased the one,

Then what their foes devised in counterpoise,

Of many a man this state had been bereft.

Therefore I showed my might on every side,

Turning at bay like wolf among the hounds.

And again he reviles both parties for their grumblings in the times that

followed:

<

div class="quote">

  Nay, if one must lay blame where blame is due,

Wer’t not for me, the people ne’er had setTheir eyes upon these blessings e’en in dreams:-

While greater men, the men of wealthier life,

Should praise me and should court me as their friend.

For had any other man, he says, received this exalted post,

<

div class="quote">

He had not kept the people back, nor ceased

Til he had robbed the richness of the milk.

But I stood forth a landmark in the midst,

And barred the foes from battle.


13


  Such then, were Solon’s reasons for his departure from the country. After

his retirement the city was still torn by divisions. For four years, indeed, they

lived  in  peace;  but  in  the  fifth  year  after  Solon’s  government  they  were

unable to elect an Archon on account of their dissensions, and again four

years later they elected no Archon for the same reason. Subsequently, after a

similar period had elapsed, Damasias was elected Archon; and he governed

for two years and two months, until he was forcibly expelled from his office.

After this, it was agreed, as a compromise, to elect ten Archons, five from the

Eupatridae, three from the Agroeci, and two from the Demiurgi, and they

ruled for the year following Damasias. It is clear from this that the Archon

was at the time the magistrate who possessed the greatest power, since it is

always  in  connexion  with  this  office  that  conflicts  are  seen  to  arise.  But

altogether they were in a continual state of internal disorder. Some found the

cause and justification of their discontent in the abolition of debts, because

thereby they had been reduced to poverty; others were dissatisfied with the

political constitution, because it had undergone a revolutionary change; while

with others the motive was found in personal rivalries among themselves.

The parties at this time were three in number. First there was the party of the

Shore, led by Megacles the son of Alcmeon, which was considered to aim at

a moderate form of government; then there were the men of the Plain, who

desired an oligarchy and were led by Lycurgus; and thirdly there were the

men of the Highlands, at the head of whom was Pisistratus, who was looked

on as an extreme democrat. This latter party was reinforced by those who had

been deprived of the debts due to them, from motives of poverty, and bythose who were not of pure descent, from motives of personal apprehension.

A proof of this is seen in the fact that after the tyranny was overthrown a

revision was made of the citizen-roll, on the ground that many persons were

partaking in the franchise without having a right to it. The names given to the

respective parties were derived from the districts in which they held their

lands.


14


  Pisistratus had the reputation of being an extreme democrat, and he also

had distinguished himself greatly in the war with Megara. Taking advantage

of this, he wounded himself, and by representing that his injuries had been

inflicted on him by his political rivals, he persuaded the people, through a

motion proposed by Aristion, to grant him a bodyguard. After he had got

these ‘club-bearers’, as they were called, he made an attack with them on the

people and seized the Acropolis. This happened in the archonship of Comeas,

thirty-one  years  after  the  legislation  of  Solon.  It  is  related  that,  when

Pisistratus asked for his bodyguard, Solon opposed the request, and declared

that in so doing he proved himself wiser than half the people and braver than

the rest,-wiser than those who did not see that Pisistratus designed to make

himself tyrant, and braver than those who saw it and kept silence. But when

all his words availed nothing he carried forth his armour and set it up in front

of his house, saying that he had helped his country so far as lay in his power

(he was already a very old man), and that he called on all others to do the

same.  Solon’s  exhortations,  however,  proved  fruitless,  and  Pisistratus

assumed the sovereignty. His administration was more like a constitutional

government  than  the  rule  of  a  tyrant;  but  before  his  power  was  firmly

established, the adherents of Megacles and Lycurgus made a coalition and

drove him out. This took place in the archonship of Hegesias, five years after

the  first  establishment  of  his  rule.  Eleven  years  later  Megacles,  being  in

difficulties  in  a  party  struggle,  again  opened-negotiations  with  Pisistratus,

proposing that the latter should marry his daughter; and on these terms he

brought him back to Athens, by a very primitive and simple-minded device.

He first spread abroad a rumour that Athena was bringing back Pisistratus,

and then, having found a woman of great stature and beauty, named Phye

(according to Herodotus, of the deme of Paeania, but as others say a Thracian

flower-seller of the deme of Collytus), he dressed her in a garb resemblingthat of the goddess and brought her into the city with Pisistratus. The latter

drove in on a chariot with the woman beside him, and the inhabitants of the

city, struck with awe, received him with adoration.


15


In this manner did his first return take place. He did not, however, hold his

power long, for about six years after his return he was again expelled. He

refused to treat the daughter of Megacles as his wife, and being afraid, in

consequence, of a combination of the two opposing parties, he retired from

the country. First he led a colony to a place called Rhaicelus, in the region of

the Thermaic gulf; and thence he passed to the country in the neighbourhood

of Mt. Pangaeus. Here he acquired wealth and hired mercenaries; and not till

ten years had elapsed did he return to Eretria and make an attempt to recover

the government by force. In this he had the assistance of many allies, notably

the Thebans and Lygdamis of Naxos, and also the Knights who held the

supreme power in the constitution of Eretria. After his victory in the battle at

Pallene he captured Athens, and when he had disarmed the people he at last

had his tyranny securely established, and was able to take Naxos and set up

Lygdamis as ruler there. He effected the disarmament of the people in the

following manner. He ordered a parade in full armour in the Theseum, and

began to make a speech to the people. He spoke for a short time, until the

people called out that they could not hear him, whereupon he bade them

come up to the entrance of the Acropolis, in order that his voice might be

better heard. Then, while he continued to speak to them at great length, men

whom he had appointed for the purpose collected the arms and locked them

up in the chambers of the Theseum hard by, and came and made a signal to

him that it was done. Pisistratus accordingly, when he had finished the rest of

what he had to say, told the people also what had happened to their arms;

adding that they were not to be surprised or alarmed, but go home and attend

to their private affairs, while he would himself for the future manage all the

business of the state.


16


  Such was the origin and such the vicissitudes of the tyranny of Pisistratus.His administration was temperate, as has been said before, and more like

constitutional government than a tyranny. Not only was he in every respect

humane and mild and ready to forgive those who offended, but, in addition,

he advanced money to the poorer people to help them in their labours, so that

they might make their living by agriculture. In this he had two objects, first

that they might not spend their time in the city but might be scattered over all

the face of the country, and secondly that, being moderately well off and

occupied with their own business, they might have neither the wish nor the

time to attend to public affairs. At the same time his revenues were increased

by the thorough cultivation of the country, since he imposed a tax of one

tenth on all the produce. For the same reasons he instituted the local justices,’

and often made expeditions in person into the country to inspect it and to

settle disputes between individuals, that they might not come into the city and

neglect their farms. It was in one of these progresses that, as the story goes,

Pisistratus had his adventure with the man of Hymettus, who was cultivating

the spot afterwards known as ‘Tax-free Farm’. He saw a man digging and

working at a very stony piece of ground, and being surprised he sent his

attendant to ask what he got out of this plot of land. ‘Aches and pains’, said

the man; ‘and that’s what Pisistratus ought to have his tenth of’. The man

spoke without knowing who his questioner was; but Pisistratus was so leased

with his frank speech and his industry that he granted him exemption from all

taxes. And so in matters in general he burdened the people as little as possible

with  his  government,  but  always  cultivated  peace  and  kept  them  in  all

quietness. Hence the tyranny of Pisistratus was often spoken of proverbially

as  ‘the  age  of  gold’;  for  when  his  sons  succeeded  him  the  government

became  much  harsher.  But  most  important  of  all  in  this  respect  was  his

popular and kindly disposition. In all things he was accustomed to observe

the laws, without giving himself any exceptional privileges. Once he was

summoned on a charge of homicide before the Areopagus, and he appeared in

person to make his defence; but the prosecutor was afraid to present himself

and abandoned the case. For these reasons he held power long, and whenever

he was expelled he regained his position easily. The majority alike of the

upper class and of the people were in his favour; the former he won by his

social intercourse with them, the latter by the assistance which he gave to

their  private  purses,  and  his  nature  fitted  him  to  win  the  hearts  of  both.

Moreover, the laws in reference to tyrants at that time in force at Athens were

very  mild,  especially  the  one  which  applies  more  particularly  to  theestablishment of a tyranny. The law ran as follows: ‘These are the ancestral

statutes  of  the  ATHENIANs;  if  any  persons  shall  make  an  attempt  to

establish a tyranny, or if any person shall join in setting up a tyranny, he shall

lose his civic rights, both himself and his whole house.’


17


  Thus did Pisistratus grow old in the possession of power, and he died a

natural death in the archonship of Philoneos, three and thirty years from the

time at which he first established himself as tyrant, during nineteen of which

he was in possession of power; the rest he spent in exile. It is evident from

this that the story is mere gossip which states that Pisistratus was the youthful

favourite  of  Solon  and  commanded  in  the  war  against  Megara  for  the

recovery of Salamis. It will not harmonize with their respective ages, as any

one may see who will reckon up the years of the life of each of them, and the

dates at which they died. After the death of Pisistratus his sons took up the

government, and conducted it on the same system. He had two sons by his

first and legitimate wife, Hippias and Hipparchus, and two by his Argive

consort,  Iophon  and  Hegesistratus,  who  was  surnamed  Thessalus.  For

Pisistratus took a wife from Argos, Timonassa, the daughter of a man of

Argos, named Gorgilus; she had previously been the wife of Archinus of

Ambracia, one of the descendants of Cypselus. This was the origin of his

friendship with the Argives, on account of which a thousand of them were

brought over by Hegesistratus and fought on his side in the battle at Pallene.

Some authorities say that this marriage took place after his first expulsion

from Athens, others while he was in possession of the government.


18


  Hippias and Hipparchus assumed the control of affairs on grounds alike of

standing and of age; but Hippias, as being also naturally of a statesmanlike

and shrewd disposition, was really the head of the government. Hipparchus

was youthful in disposition, amorous, and fond of literature (it was he who

invited to Athens Anacreon, Simonides, and the other poets), while Thessalus

was much junior in age, and was violent and headstrong in his behaviour. It

was from his character that all the evils arose which befell the house. Hebecame enamoured of Harmodius, and, since he failed to win his affection, he

lost all restraint upon his passion, and in addition to other exhibitions of rage

he finally prevented the sister of Harmodius from taking the part of a basket-

bearer in the Panathenaic procession, alleging as his reason that Harmodius

was a person of loose life. Thereupon, in a frenzy of wrath, Harmodius and

Aristogeiton  did  their  celebrated  deed,  in  conjunction  with  a  number  of

confederates. But while they were lying in wait for Hippias in the Acropolis

at the time of the Panathenaea (Hippias, at this moment, was awaiting the

arrival of the procession, while Hipparchus was organizing its dispatch) they

saw one of the persons privy to the plot talking familiarly with him. Thinking

that he was betraying them, and desiring to do something before they were

arrested, they rushed down and made their attempt without waiting for the

rest  of  their  confederates.  They  succeeded  in  killing  Hipparchus  near  the

Leocoreum while he was engaged in arranging the procession, but ruined the

design as a whole; of the two leaders, Harmodius was killed on the spot by

the guards, while Aristogeiton was arrested, and perished later after suffering

long  tortures.  While  under  the  torture  he  accused  many  persons  who

belonged by birth to the most distinguished families and were also personal

friends  of  the  tyrants.  At  first  the  government  could  find  no  clue  to  the

conspiracy; for the current story, that Hippias made all who were taking part

in the procession leave their arms, and then detected those who were carrying

secret daggers, cannot be true, since at that time they did not bear arms in the

processions, this being a custom instituted at a later period by the democracy.

According to the story of the popular party, Aristogeiton accused the friends

of the tyrants with the deliberate intention that the latter might commit an

impious act, and at the same time weaken themselves, by putting to death

innocent  men  who  were  their  own  friends;  others  say  that  he  told  no

falsehood, but was betraying the actual accomplices. At last, when for all his

efforts  he  could  not  obtain  release  by  death,  he  promised  to  give  further

information against a number of other persons; and, having induced Hippias

to give him his hand to confirm his word, as soon as he had hold of it he

reviled him for giving his hand to the murderer of his brother, till Hippias, in

a frenzy of rage, lost control of himself and snatched out his dagger and

dispatched him.


19  After this event the tyranny became much harsher. In consequence of his

vengeance for his brother, and of the execution and banishment of a large

number  of  persons,  Hippias  became  a  distrusted  and  an  embittered  man.

About three years after the death of Hipparchus, finding his position in the

city  insecure,  he  set  about  fortifying  Munichia,  with  the  intention  of

establishing himself there. While he was still engaged on this work, however,

he was expelled by Cleomenes, king of Lacedaemon, in consequence of the

Spartans being continually incited by oracles to overthrow the tyranny. These

oracles were obtained in the following way. The Athenian exiles, headed by

the Alcmeonidae, could not by their own power effect their return, but failed

continually in their attempts. Among their other failures, they fortified a post

in  Attica,  Lipsydrium,  above  Mt.  Parnes,  and  were  there  joined  by  some

partisans from the city; but they were besieged by the tyrants and reduced to

surrender. After this disaster the following became a popular drinking song:

<

div class="quote">

Ah! Lipsydrium, faithless friend!

Lo, what heroes to death didst send,

Nobly born and great in deed!

Well did they prove themselves at need

Of noble sires a noble seed.

  Having  failed,  then,  in  very  other  method,  they  took  the  contract  for

rebuilding the temple at Delphi, thereby obtaining ample funds, which they

employed to secure the help of the Lacedaemonians. All this time the Pythia

kept continually enjoining on the Lacedaemonians who came to consult the

oracle, that they must free Athens; till finally she succeeded in impelling the

Spartans to that step, although the house of Pisistratus was connected with

them  by  ties  of  hospitality.  The  resolution  of  the  Lacedaemonians  was,

however,  at  least  equally  due  to  the  friendship  which  had  been  formed

between  the  house  of  Pisistratus  and  Argos.  Accordingly  they  first  sent

Anchimolus by sea at the head of an army; but he was defeated and killed,

through the arrival of Cineas of Thessaly to support the sons of Pisistratus

with a force of a thousand horsemen. Then, being roused to anger by this

disaster, they sent their king, Cleomenes, by land at the head of a larger force;

and  he,  after  defeating  the  Thessalian  cavalry  when  they  attempted  to

intercept his march into Attica, shut up Hippias within what was known as

the  Pelargic  wall  and  blockaded  him  there  with  the  assistance  of  theAthenians. While he was sitting down before the place, it so happened that

the sons of the Pisistratidae were captured in an attempt to slip out; upon

which the tyrants capitulated on condition of the safety of their children, and

surrendered  the  Acropolis  to  the  Athenians,  five  days  being  first  allowed

them  to  remove  their  effects.  This  took  place  in  the  archonship  of

Harpactides, after they had held the tyranny for about seventeen years since

their father’s death, or in all, including the period of their father’s rule, for

nine-and-forty years.


20


  After  the  overthrow  of  the  tyranny,  the  rival  leaders  in  the  state  were

Isagoras  son  of  Tisander,  a  partisan  of  the  tyrants,  and  Cleisthenes,  who

belonged to the family of the Alcmeonidae. Cleisthenes, being beaten in the

political clubs, called in the people by giving the franchise to the masses.

Thereupon  Isagoras,  finding  himself  left  inferior  in  power,  invited

Cleomenes, who was united to him by ties of hospitality, to return to Athens,

and persuaded him to ‘drive out the pollution’, a plea derived from the fact

that the Alcmeonidae were suppposed to be under the curse of pollution. On

this  Cleisthenes  retired  from  the  country,  and  Cleomenes,  entering  Attica

with a small force, expelled, as polluted, seven hundred Athenian families.

Having effected this, he next attempted to dissolve the Council, and to set up

Isagoras and three hundred of his partisans as the supreme power in the state.

The  Council,  however,  resisted,  the  populace  flocked  together,  and

Cleomenes and Isagoras, with their adherents, took refuge in the Acropolis.

Here the people sat down and besieged them for two days; and on the third

they  agreed  to  let  Cleomenes  and  all  his  followers  de  art,  while  they

summoned Cleisthenes and the other exiles back to Athens. When the people

had thus obtained the command of affairs, Cleisthenes was their chief and

popular leader. And this was natural; for the Alcmeonidae were perhaps the

chief cause of the expulsion of the tyrants, and for the greater part of their

rule were at perpetual war with them. But even earlier than the attempts of

the Alcmeonidae, one Cedon made an attack on the tyrants; when there came

another popular drinking song, addressed to him:

<

div class="quote">

  Pour a health yet again, boy, to Cedon; forget not this duty to do,If a health is an honour befitting the name of a good man and true.


21


The people, therefore, had good reason to place confidence in Cleisthenes.

Accordingly,  now  that  he  was  the  popular  leader,  three  years  after  the

expulsion of the tyrants, in the archonship of Isagoras, his first step was to

distribute the whole population into ten tribes in place of the existing four,

with the object of intermixing the members of the different tribes, and so

securing that more persons might have a share in the franchise. From this

arose the saying ‘Do not look at the tribes’, addressed to those who wished to

scrutinize the lists of the old families. Next he made the Council to consist of

five hundred members instead of four hundred, each tribe now contributing

fifty, whereas formerly each had sent a hundred. The reason why he did not

organize the people into twelve tribes was that he might not have to use the

existing division into trittyes; for the four tribes had twelve trittyes, so that he

would not have achieved his object of redistributing the population in fresh

combinations. Further, he divided the country into thirty groups of demes, ten

from the districts about the city, ten from the coast, and ten from the interior.

These he called trittyes; and he assigned three of them by lot to each tribe, in

such a way that each should have one portion in each of these three localities.

All who lived in any given deme he declared fellow-demesmen, to the end

that the new citizens might not be exposed by the habitual use of family

names,  but  that  men  might  be  officially  described  by  the  names  of  their

demes; and accordingly it is by the names of their demes that the Athenians

speak of one another. He also instituted Demarchs, who had the same duties

as the previously existing Naucrari,-the demes being made to take the place

of the naucraries. He gave names to the demes, some from the localities to

which they belonged, some from the persons who founded them, since some

of the areas no longer corresponded to localities possessing names. On the

other hand he allowed every one to retain his family and clan and religious

rites according to ancestral custom. The names given to the tribes were the

ten which the Pythia appointed out of the hundred selected national heroes.


22By these reforms the constitution became much more democratic than that

of Solon. The laws of Solon had been obliterated by disuse during the period

of the tyranny, while Cleisthenes substituted new ones with the object of

securing the goodwill of the masses. Among these was the law concerning

ostracism. Four year after the establishment of this system, in the archonship

of Hermocreon, they first imposed upon the Council of Five Hundred the

oath which they take to the present day. Next they began to elect the generals

by tribes, one from each tribe, while the Polemarch was the commander of

the whole army. Then, eleven years later, in the archonship of Phaenippus

they won the battle of Marathon; and two years after this victory, when the

people had now gained self-confidence, they for the first time made use of

the law of ostracism. This had originally been passed as a precaution against

men in high office, because Pisistratus took advantage of his position as a

popular  leader  and  general  to  make  himself  tyrant;  and  the  first  person

ostracized was one of his relatives, Hipparchus son of Charmus, of the deme

of Collytus, the very person on whose account especially Cleisthenes had

enacted the law, as he wished to get rid of him. Hitherto, however, he had

escaped;  for  the  Athenians,  with  the  usual  leniency  of  the  democracy,

allowed all the partisans of the tyrants, who had not joined in their evil deeds

in the time of the troubles to remain in the city; and the chief and leader of

these  was  Hipparchus.  Then  in  the  very  next  year,  in  the  archonship  of

Telesinus, they for the first time since the tyranny elected, tribe by tribe, the

nine Archons by lot out of the five hundred candidates selected by the demes,

all  the  earlier  ones  having  been  elected  by  vote;  and  in  the  same  year

Megacles son of Hippocrates, of the deme of Alopece, was ostracized.

  Thus for three years they continued to ostracize the friends of the tyrants,

on whose account the law had been passed; but in the following year they

began to remove others as well, including any one who seemed to be more

powerful than was expedient. The first person unconnected with the tyrants

who was ostracized was Xanthippus son of Ariphron. Two years later, in the

archonship of Nicodemus, the mines of Maroneia were discovered, and the

state made a profit of a hundred talents from the working of them. Some

persons  advised  the  people  to  make  a  distribution  of  the  money  among

themselves, but this was prevented by Themistocles. He refused to say on

what  he  proposed  to  spend  the  money,  but  he  bade  them  lend  it  to  the

hundred richest men in Athens, one talent to each, and then, if the manner in

which it was employed pleased the people, the expenditure should be chargedto the state, but otherwise the state should receive the sum back from those to

whom it was lent. On these terms he received the money and with it he had a

hundred triremes built, each of the hundred individuals building one; and it

was  with  these  ships  that  they  fought  the  battle  of  Salamis  against  the

barbarians. About this time Aristides the son of Lysimachus was ostracized.

Three  years  later,  however,  in  the  archonship  of  Hypsichides,  all  the

ostracized persons were recalled, on account of the advance of the army of

Xerxes; and it was laid down for the future that persons under sentence of

ostracism must live between Geraestus and Scyllaeum, on pain of losing their

civic rights irrevocably.


23


So far, then, had the city progressed by this time, growing gradually with

the  growth  of  the  democracy;  but  after  the  Persian  wars  the  Council  of

Areopagus  once  more  developed  strength  and  assumed  the  control  of  the

state. It did not acquire this supremacy by virtue of any formal decree, but

because it had been the cause of the battle of Salamis being fought. When the

generals were utterly at a loss how to meet the crisis and made proclamation

that  every  one  should  see  to  his  own  safety,  the  Areopagus  provided  a

donation of money, distributing eight drachmas to each member of the ships’

crews, and so prevailed on them to go on board. On these grounds people

bowed to its prestige; and during this period Athens was well administered.

At this time they devoted themselves to the prosecution of the war and were

in high repute among the Greeks, so that the command by sea was conferred

upon them, in spite of the opposition of the Lacedaemonians. The leaders of

the  people  during  this  period  were  Aristides,  of  Lysimachus,  and

Themistocles,  son  of  Lysimachus,  and  Themistocles,  son  of  Neocles,  of

whom the latter appeared to devote himself to the conduct of war, while the

former had the reputation of being a clever statesman and the most upright

man of his time. Accordingly the one was usually employed as general, the

other as political adviser. The rebuilding of the fortifications they conducted

in combination, although they were political opponents; but it was Aristides

who,  seizing  the  opportunity  afforded  by  the  discredit  brought  upon  the

Lacedaemonians by Pausanias, guided the public policy in the matter of the

defection of the Ionian states from the alliance with Sparta. It follows that it

was he who made the first assessment of tribute from the various allied states,two years after the battle of Salamis, in the archonship of Timosthenes; and it

was  he  who  took  the  oath  of  offensive  and  defensive  alliance  with  the

Ionians, on which occasion they cast the masses of iron into the sea.


24


  After  this,  seeing  the  state  growing  in  confidence  and  much  wealth

accumulated,  he  advised  the  people  to  lay  hold  of  the  leadership  of  the

league, and to quit the country districts and settle in the city. He pointed out

to them that all would be able to gain a living there, some by service in the

army, others in the garrisons, others by taking a part in public affairs; and in

this way they would secure the leadership. This advice was taken; and when

the people had assumed the supreme control they proceeded to treat their

allies  in  a  more  imperious  fashion,  with  the  exception  of  the  Chians,

Lesbians,  and  Samians.  These  they  maintained  to  protect  their  empire,

leaving their constitutions untouched, and allowing them to retain whatever

dominion they then possessed. They also secured an ample maintenance for

the mass of the population in the way which Aristides had pointed out to

them. Out of the proceeds of the tributes and the taxes and the contributions

of the allies more than twenty thousand persons were maintained. There were

6,000 jurymen, 1,600 bowmen, 1,200 Knights, 500 members of the Council,

500 guards of the dockyards, besides fifty guards in the Acropolis. There

were some 700 magistrates at home, and some 700 abroad. Further, when

they subsequently went to war, there were in addition 2,500 heavy-armed

troops, twenty guard-ships, and other ships which collected the tributes, with

crews amounting to 2,000 men, selected by lot; and besides these there were

the persons maintained at the Prytaneum, and orphans, and gaolers, since all

these were supported by the state.


25


  Such  was  the  way  in  which  the  people  earned  their  livelihood.  The

supremacy  of  the  Areopagus  lasted  for  about  seventeen  years  after  the

Persian wars, although gradually declining. But as the strength of the masses

increased,  Ephialtes,  son  of  Sophonides,  a  man  with  a  reputation  for

incorruptibility and public virtue, who had become the leader of the people,made an attack upon that Council. First of all he ruined many of its members

by bringing actions against them with reference to their administration. Then,

in  the  archonship  of  Conon,  he  stripped  the  Council  of  all  the  acquired

prerogatives from which it derived its guardianship of the constitution, and

assigned some of them to the Council of Five Hundred, and others to the

Assembly  and  the  law-courts.  In  this  revolution  he  was  assisted  by

Themistocles,  who  was  himself  a  member  of  the  Areopagus,  but  was

expecting to be tried before it on a charge of treasonable dealings with Persia.

This made him anxious that it should be overthrown, and accordingly he

warned Ephialtes that the Council intended to arrest him, while at the same

time  he  informed  the  Areopagites  that  he  would  reveal  to  them  certain

persons who were conspiring to subvert the constitution. He then conducted

the representatives delegated by the Council to the residence of Ephialtes,

promising  to  show  them  the  conspirators  who  assembled  there,  and

proceeded to converse with them in an earnest manner. Ephialtes, seeing this,

was seized with alarm and took refuge in suppliant guise at the altar. Every

one was astounded at the occurrence, and presently, when the Council of Five

Hundred met, Ephialtes and Themistocles together proceeded to denounce

the  Areopagus  to  them.  This  they  repeated  in  similar  fashion  in  the

Assembly,  until  they  succeeded  in  depriving  it  of  its  power.  Not  long

afterwards, however, Ephialtes was assassinated by Aristodicus of Tanagra.

In this way was the Council of Areopagus deprived of its guardianship of the

state.


26


  After this revolution the administration of the state became more and more

lax, in consequence of the eager rivalry of candidates for popular favour.

During this period the moderate party, as it happened, had no real chief, their

leader being Cimon son of Miltiades, who was a comparatively young man,

and had been late in entering public life; and at the same time the general

populace suffered great losses by war. The soldiers for active service were

selected at that time from the roll of citizens, and as the generals were men of

no  military  experience,  who  owed  their  position  solely  to  their  family

standing,  it  continually  happened  that  some  two  or  three  thousand  of  the

troops perished on an expedition; and in this way the best men alike of the

lower and the upper classes were exhausted. Consequently in most matters ofadministration less heed was paid to the laws than had formerly been the

case. No alteration, however, was made in the method of election of the nine

Archons, except that five years after the death of Ephialtes it was decided that

the candidates to be submitted to the lot for that office might be selected from

the Zeugitae as well as from the higher classes. The first Archon from that

class was Mnesitheides. Up to this time all the Archons had been taken from

the Pentacosiomedimni and Knights, while the Zeugitae were confined to the

ordinary  magistracies,  save  where  an  evasion  of  the  law  was  overlooked.

Four years later, in the archonship of Lysicrates, thirty ‘local justices’, as they

as they were called, were re-established; and two years afterwards, in the

archonship of Antidotus, consequence of the great increase in the number of

citizens,  it  was  resolved,  on  the  motion  of  Pericles,  that  no  one  should

admitted to the franchise who was not of citizen birth by both parents.


27


  After  this  Pericles  came  forward  as  popular  leader,  having  first

distinguished himself while still a young man by prosecuting Cimon on the

audit of his official accounts as general. Under his auspices the constitution

became still more democratic. He took away some of the privileges of the

Areopagus, and, above all, he turned the policy of the state in the direction of

sea power, which caused the masses to acquire confidence in themselves and

consequently to take the conduct of affairs more and more into their own

hands.  Moreover,  forty-eight  years  after  the  battle  of  Salamis,  in  the

archonship of Pythodorus, the Peloponnesian war broke out, during which the

populace  was  shut  up  in  the  city  and  became  accustomed  to  gain  its

livelihood  by  military  service,  and  so,  partly  voluntarily  and  partly

involuntarily,  determined  to  assume  the  administration  of  the  state  itself.

Pericles was also the first to institute pay for service in the law-courts, as a

bid for popular favour to counterbalance the wealth of Cimon. The latter,

having private possessions on a regal scale, not only performed the regular

public  services  magnificently,  but  also  maintained  a  large  number  of  his

fellow-demesmen. Any member of the deme of Laciadae could go every day

to Cimon’s house and there receive a reasonable provision; while his estate

was guarded by no fences, so that any one who liked might help himself to

the  fruit  from  it.  Pericles’  private  property  was  quite  unequal  to  this

magnificence and accordingly he took the advice of Damonides of Oia (whowas commonly supposed to be the person who prompted Pericles in most of

his measures, and was therefore subsequently ostracized), which was that, as

he was beaten in the matter of private possessions, he should make gifts to

the people from their own property; and accordingly he instituted pay for the

members  of  the  juries.  Some  critics  accuse  him  of  thereby  causing  a

deterioration in the character of the juries, since it was always the common

people who put themselves forward for selection as jurors, rather than the

men of better position. Moreover, bribery came into existence after this, the

first person to introduce it being Anytus, after his command at Pylos. He was

prosecuted by certain individuals on account of his loss of Pylos, but escaped

by bribing the jury.


28


So  long,  however,  as  Pericles  was  leader  of  the  people,  things  went

tolerably well with the state; but when he was dead there was a great change

for the worse. Then for the first time did the people choose a leader who was

of no reputation among men of good standing, whereas up to this time such

men had always been found as leaders of the democracy. The first leader of

the people, in the very beginning of things, was Solon, and the second was

Pisistratus, both of them men of birth and position. After the overthrow of the

tyrants there was Cleisthenes, a member of the house of the Alcmeonidae;

and  he  had  no  rival  opposed  to  him  after  the  expulsion  of  the  party  of

Isagoras. After this Xanthippus was the leader of the people, and Miltiades of

the  upper  class.  Then  came  Themistocles  and  Aristides,  and  after  them

Ephialtes as leader of the people, and Cimon son of Miltiades of the wealthier

class. Pericles followed as leader of the people, and Thucydides, who was

connected by marriage with Cimon, of the opposition. After the death of

Pericles, Nicias, who subsequently fell in Sicily, appeared as leader of the

aristocracy, and Cleon son of Cleaenetus of the people. The latter seems,

more  than  any  one  else,  to  have  been  the  cause  of  the  corruption  of  the

democracy by his wild undertakings; and he was the first to use unseemly

shouting and coarse abuse on the Bema, and to harangue the people with his

cloak  girt  up  short  about  him,  whereas  all  his  predecessors  had  spoken

decently and in order. These were succeeded by Theramenes son of Hagnon

as leader of the one party, and the lyre-maker Cleophon of the people. It was

Cleophon  who  first  granted  the  twoobol  donation  for  the  theatricalperformances, and for some time it continued to be given; but then Callicrates

of Paeania ousted him by promising to add a third obol to the sum. Both of

these persons were subsequently condemned to death; for the people, even if

they are deceived for a time, in the end generally come to detest those who

have beguiled them into any unworthy action. After Cleophon the popular

leadership  was  occupied  successively  by  the  men  who  chose  to  talk  the

biggest and pander the most to the tastes of the majority, with their eyes fixed

only on the interests of the moment. The best statesmen at Athens, after those

of early times, seem to have been Nicias, Thucydides, and Theramenes. As to

Nicias and Thucydides, nearly every one agrees that they were not merely

men of birth and character, but also statesmen, and that they ruled the state

with paternal care. On the merits of Theramenes opinion is divided, because

it so happened that in his time public affairs were in a very stormy state. But

those who give their opinion deliberately find him, not, as his critics falsely

assert, overthrowing every kind of constitution, but supporting every kind so

long as it did not transgress laws; thus showing that he was able, as every

good  citizen  should  be,  to  live  under  any  form  of  constitution,  while  he

refused to countenance illegality and was its constant enemy.


29


So long as the fortune of the war continued even, the Athenians preserved

the democracy; but after the disaster in Sicily, when the Lacedaemonians had

gained the upper hand through their alliance with the king of Persia, they

were  compelled  to  abolish  the  democracy  and  establish  in  its  place  the

constitution  of  the  Four  Hundred.  The  speech  recommending  this  course

before the vote was made by Melobius, and the motion was proposed by

Pythodorus  of  Anaphlystus;  but  the  real  argument  which  persuaded  the

majority was the belief that the king of Persia was more likely to form an

alliance  with  them  if  the  constitution  were  on  an  oligarchical  basis.  The

motion of Pythodorus was to the following effect. The popular Assembly was

to elect twenty persons, over forty years of age, who, in conjunction with the

existing ten members of the Committee of Public Safety, after taking an oath

that  they  would  frame  such  measures  as  they  thought  best  for  the  state,

should then prepare proposals for the public. safety. In addition, any other

person might make proposals, so that of all the schemes before them the

people  might  choose  the  best.  Cleitophon  concurred  with  the  motion  ofPythodorus, but moved that the committee should also investigate the ancient

laws enacted by Cleisthenes when he created the democracy, in order that

they might have these too before them and so be in a position to decide

wisely;  his  suggestion  being  that  the  constitution  of  Cleisthenes  was  not

really democratic, but closely akin to that of Solon. When the committee was

elected, their first proposal was that the Prytanes should be compelled to put

to the vote any motion that was offered on behalf of the public safety. Next

they abolished all indictments for illegal proposals, all impeachments and

pubic prosecutions, in order that every Athenian should be free to give his

counsel on the situation, if he chose; and they decreed that if any person

imposed a fine on any other for his acts in this respect, or prosecuted him or

summoned him before the courts, he should, on an information being laid

against  him,  be  summarily  arrested  and  brought  before  the  generals,  who

should deliver him to the Eleven to be put to death. After these preliminary

measures,  they  drew  up  the  constitution  in  the  following  manner.  The

revenues of the state were not to be spent on any purpose except the war. All

magistrates  should  serve  without  remuneration  for  the  period  of  the  war,

except the nine Archons and the Prytanes for the time being, who should each

receive three obols a day. The whole of the rest of the administration was to

be committed, for the period of the war, to those Athenians who were most

capable of serving the state personally or pecuniarily, to the number of not

less than five thousand. This body was to have full powers, to the extent even

of  making  treaties  with  whomsoever  they  willed;  and  ten  representatives,

over forty years of age, were to be elected from each tribe to draw up the list

of the Five Thousand, after taking an oath on a full and perfect sacrifice.


30


  These were the recommendations of the committee; and when they had

been ratified the Five Thousand elected from their own number a hundred

commissioners to draw up the constitution. They, on their appointment, drew

up and produced the following recommendations. There should be a Council,

holding office for a year, consisting of men over thirty years of age, serving

without pay. To this body should belong the Generals, the nine Archons, the

Amphictyonic Registrar (Hieromnemon), the Taxiarchs, the Hipparchs, the

Phylarch, the commanders of garrisons, the Treasurers of Athena and the

other  gods,  ten  in  number,  the  Hellenic  Treasurers  (Hellenotamiae),  theTreasurers of the other non-sacred moneys, to the number of twenty, the ten

Commissioners of Sacrifices (Hieropoei), and the ten Superintendents of the

mysteries.  All  these  were  to  be  appointed  by  the  Council  from  a  larger

number of selected candidates, chosen from its members for the time being.

The other offices were all to be filled by lot, and not from the members of the

Council. The Hellenic Treasurers who actually administered the funds should

not sit with the Council. As regards the future, four Councils were to be

created, of men of the age already mentioned, and one of these was to be

chosen by lot to take office at once, while the others were to receive it in turn,

in the order decided by the lot. For this purpose the hundred commissioners

were to distribute themselves and all the rest as equally as possible into four

parts, and cast lots for precedence, and the selected body should hold office

for a year. They were to administer that office as seemed to them best, both

with reference to the safe custody and due expenditure of the finances, and

generally with regard to all other matters to the best of their ability. If they

desired to take a larger number of persons into counsel, each member might

call in one assistant of his own choice, subject to the same qualification of

age. The Council was to sit once every five days, unless there was any special

need for more frequent sittings. The casting of the lot for the Council was to

be held by the nine Archons; votes on divisions were to be counted by five

tellers chosen by lot from the members of the Council, and of these one was

to be selected by lot every day to act as president. These five persons were to

cast lots for precedence between the parties wishing to appear before the

Council, giving the first place to sacred matters, the second to heralds, the

third to embassies, and the fourth to all other subjects; but matters concerning

the war might be dealt with, on the motion of the generals, whenever there

was need, without balloting. Any member of the Council who did not enter

the Council-house at the time named should be fined a drachma for each day,

unless he was away on leave of absence from the Council.


31


  Such was the constitution which they drew up for the time to come, but for

the immediate present they devised the following scheme. There should be a

Council of Four Hundred, as in the ancient constitution, forty from each tribe,

chosen out of candidates of more than thirty years of age, selected by the

members of the tribes. This Council should appoint the magistrates and drawup the form of oath which they were to take; and in all that concerned the

laws, in the examination of official accounts, and in other matters generally,

they might act according to their discretion. They must, however, observe the

laws that might be enacted with reference to the constitution of the state, and

had  no  power  to  alter  them  nor  to  pass  others.  The  generals  should  be

provisionally elected from the whole body of the Five Thousand, but so soon

as the Council came into existence it was to hold an examination of military

equipments, and thereon elect ten persons, together with a secretary, and the

persons  thus  elected  should  hold  office  during  the  coming  year  with  full

powers, and should have the right, whenever they desired it, of joining in the

deliberations of the Council. The Five thousand was also to elect a single

Hipparch and ten Phylarchs; but for the future the Council was to elect these

officers according to the regulations above laid down. No office, except those

of member of the Council and of general, might be held more than once,

either by the first occupants or by their successors. With reference to the

future distribution of the Four Hundred into the four successive sections, the

hundred commissioners must divide them whenever the time comes for the

citizens to join in the Council along with the rest.


32


The hundred commissioners appointed by the Five Thousand drew up the

constitution as just stated; and after it had been ratified by the people, under

the  presidency  of  Aristomachus,  the  existing  Council,  that  of  the  year  of

Callias,  was  dissolved  before  it  had  completed  its  term  of  office.  It  was

dissolved  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  month  Thargelion,  and  the  Four

Hundred entered into office on the twenty-first; whereas the regular Council,

elected  by  lot,  ought  to  have  entered  into  office  on  the  fourteenth  of

Scirophorion.  Thus  was  the  oligarchy  established,  in  the  archonship  of

Callias, just about a hundred years after the expulsion of the tyrants. The

chief promoters of the revolution were Pisander, Antiphon, and Theramenes,

all  of  them  men  of  good  birth  and  with  high  reputations  for  ability  and

judgement. When, however, this constitution had been established, the Five

Thousand were only nominally selected, and the Four Hundred, together with

the  ten  officers  on  whom  full  powers  had  been  conferred,  occupied  the

Council-house  and  really  administered  the  government.  They  began  by

sending ambassadors to the Lacedaemonians proposing a cessation of the waron the basis of the existing Position; but as the Lacedaemonians refused to

listen to them unless they would also abandon the command of the sea, they

broke off the negotiations.


33


For about four months the constitution of the Four Hundred lasted, and

Mnasilochus held office as Archon of their nomination for two months of the

year of Theopompus, who was Archon for the remaining ten. On the loss of

the naval battle of Eretria, however, and the revolt of the whole of Euboea

except Oreum, the indignation of the people was greater than at any of the

earlier disasters, since they drew far more supplies at this time from Euboea

than  from  Attica  itself.  Accordingly  they  deposed  the  Four  Hundred  and

committed the management of affairs to the Five Thousand, consisting of

persons Possessing a military equipment. At the same time they voted that

pay should not be given for any public office. The persons chiefly responsible

for the revolution were Aristocrates and Theramenes, who disapproved of the

action of the Four Hundred in retaining the direction of affairs entirely in

their own hands, and referring nothing to the Five Thousand. During this

period the constitution of the state seems to have been admirable, since it was

a time of war and the franchise was in the hands of those who possessed a

military equipment.


34


The people, however, in a very short time deprived the Five Thousand of

their monopoly of the government. Then, six years after the overthrow of the

Four Hundred, in the archonship of Callias of Angele, battle of Arginusae

took place, of which the results were, first, that the ten generals who had

gained the victory were all condemned by a single decision, owing to the

people being led astray by persons who aroused their indignation; though, as

a matter of fact, some of the generals had actually taken no part in the battle,

and others were themselves picked up by other vessels. Secondly, when the

Lacedaemonians proposed to evacuate Decelea and make peace on the basis

of  the  existing  position,  although  some  of  the  Athenians  supported  this

proposal, the majority refused to listen to them. In this they were led astrayby  Cleophon,  who  appeared  in  the  Assembly  drunk  and  wearing  his

breastplate, and prevented peace being made, declaring that he would never

accept peace unless the Lacedaemonians abandoned their claims on all the

cities allied with them. They mismanaged their opportunity then, and in a

very short time they learnt their mistake. The next year, in the archonship of

Alexias, they suffered the disaster of Aegospotami, the consequence of which

was that Lysander became master of the city, and set up the Thirty as its

governors. He did so in the following manner. One of the terms of peace

stipulated  that  the  state  should  be  governed  according  to  ‘the  ancient

constitution’. Accordingly the popular party tried to preserve the democracy,

while  that  part  of  the  upper  class  which  belonged  to  the  political  clubs,

together  with  the  exiles  who  had  returned  since  the  peace,  aimed  at  an

oligarchy, and those who were not members of any club, though in other

respects  they  considered  themselves  as  good  as  any  other  citizens,  were

anxious to restore the ancient constitution. The latter class included Archinus,

Anytus, Cleitophon, Phormisius, and many others, but their most prominent

leader was Theramenes. Lysander, however, threw his influence on the side

of the oligarchical party, and the popular Assembly was compelled by sheer

intimidation  to  pass  a  vote  establishing  the  oligarchy.  The  motion  to  this

effect was proposed by Dracontides of Aphidna.


35


In this way were the Thirty established in power, in the archonship of

Pythodorus. As soon, however, as they were masters of the city, they ignored

all the resolutions which had been passed relating to the organization of the

constitution, but after appointing a Council of Five Hundred and the other

magistrates  out  of  a  thousand  selected  candidates,  and  associating  with

themselves ten Archons in Piraeus, eleven superintendents of the prison, and

three hundred ‘lash-bearers’ as attendants, with the help of these they kept the

city under their own control. At first, indeed, they behaved with moderation

towards the citizens and pretended to administer the state according to the

ancient constitution. In pursuance of this policy they took down from the hill

of  Areopagus  the  laws  of  Ephialtes  and  Archestratus  relating  to  the

Areopagite Council; they also repealed such of the statutes of Solon as were

obscure, and abolished the supreme power of the law-courts. In this they

claimed to be restoring the constitution and freeing it from obscurities; as, forinstance, by making the testator free once for all to leave his property as he

pleased, and abolishing the existing limitations in cases of insanity, old age,

and  undue  female  influence,  in  order  that  no  opening  might  be  left  for

professional accusers. In other matters also their conduct was similar. At first,

then, they acted on these lines, and they destroyed the professional accusers

and those mischievous and evil-minded persons who, to the great detriment

of the democracy, had attached themselves to it in order to curry favour with

it. With all of this the city was much pleased, and thought that the Thirty

were doing it with the best of motives. But so soon as they had got a firmer

hold on the city, they spared no class of citizens, but put to death any persons

who were eminent for wealth or birth or character. Herein they aimed at

removing all whom they had reason to fear, while they also wished to lay

hands on their possessions; and in a short time they put to death not less than

fifteen hundred persons.


36


  Theramenes, however, seeing the city thus falling into ruin, was displeased

with  their  proceedings,  and  counselled  them  to  cease  such  unprincipled

conduct and let the better classes have a share in the government. At first they

resisted his advice, but when his proposals came to be known abroad, and the

masses began to associate themselves with him, they were seized with alarm

lest  he  should  make  himself  the  leader  of  the  people  and  destroy  their

despotic power. Accordingly they drew up a list of three thousand citizens, to

whom  they  announced  that  they  would  give  a  share  in  the  constitution.

Theramenes, however, criticized this scheme also, first on the ground that,

while proposing to give all respectable citizens a share in the constitution,

they were actually giving it only to three thousand persons, as though all

merit were confined within that number; and secondly because they were

doing two inconsistent things, since they made the government rest on the

basis  of  force,  and  yet  made  the  governors  inferior  in  strength  to  the

governed. However, they took no notice of his criticisms, and for a long time

put  off  the  publication  of  the  list  of  the  Three  Thousand  and  kept  to

themselves the names of those who had been placed upon it; and every time

they did decide to publish it they proceeded to strike out some of those who

had been included in it, and insert others who had been omitted.37


Now when winter had set in, Thrasybulus and the exiles occupied Phyle,

and the force which the Thirty led out to attack them met with a reverse.

Thereupon the Thirty decided to disarm the bulk of the population and to get

rid of Theramenes; which they did in the following way. They introduced two

laws into the Council, which they commanded it to pass; the first of them

gave  the  Thirty  absolute  power  to  put  to  death  any  citizen  who  was  not

included in the list of the Three Thousand, while the second disqualified all

persons from participation in the franchise who should have assisted in the

demolition of the fort of Eetioneia, or have acted in any way against the Four

Hundred who had organized the previous oligarchy. Theramenes had done

both, and accordingly, when these laws were ratified, he became excluded

from  the  franchise  and  the  Thirty  had  full  power  to  put  him  to  death.

Theramenes having been thus removed, they disarmed all the people except

the Three Thousand, and in every respect showed a great advance in cruelty

and  crime.  They  also  sent  ambassadors  to  Lacedaemonian  to  blacken  the

character of Theramenes and to ask for help; and the Lacedaemonians, in

answer to their appeal, sent Callibius as military governor with about seven

hundred troops, who came and occupied the Acropolis.


38


  These events were followed by the occupation of Munichia by the exiles

from Phyle, and their victory over the Thirty and their partisans. After the

fight the party of the city retreated, and next day they held a meeting in the

marketplace and deposed the Thirty, and elected ten citizens with full powers

to bring the war to a termination. When, however, the Ten had taken over the

government they did nothing towards the object for which they were elected,

but sent envoys to Lacedaemonian to ask for help and to borrow money.

Further, finding that the citizens who possessed the franchise were displeased

at  their  proceedings,  they  were  afraid  lest  they  should  be  deposed,  and

consequently,  in  order  to  strike  terror  into  them  (in  which  design  they

succeeded), they arrested Demaretus, one of the most eminent citizens, and

put him to death. This gave them a firm hold on the government, and they

also  had  the  support  of  Callibius  and  his  Peloponnesians,  together  with

several of the Knights; for some of the members of this class were the mostzealous among the citizens to prevent the return of the exiles from Phyle.

When, however, the party in Piraeus and Munichia began to gain the upper

hand in the war, through the defection of the whole populace to them, the

party in the city deposed the original Ten, and elected another Ten, consisting

of men of the highest repute. Under their administration, and with their active

and  zealous  cooperation,  the  treaty  of  reconciliation  was  made  and  the

populace returned to the city. The most prominent members of this board

were Rhinon of Paeania and Phayllus of Acherdus, who, even before the

arrival of Pausanias, opened negotiations with the party in Piraeus, and after

his arrival seconded his efforts to bring about the return of the exiles. For it

was Pausanias, the king of the Lacedaemonians, who brought the peace and

reconciliation to a fulfillment, in conjunction with the ten commissioners of

arbitration who arrived later from Lacedaemonian, at his own earnest request.

Rhinon and his colleagues received a vote of thanks for the goodwill shown

by  them  to  the  people,  and  though  they  received  their  charge  under  an

oligarchy and handed in their accounts under a democracy, no one, either of

the party that had stayed in the city or of the exiles that had returned from the

Piraeus, brought any complaint against them. On the contrary, Rhinon was

immediately elected general on account of his conduct in this office.


39


This  reconciliation  was  effected  in  the  archonship  of  Eucleides,  on  the

following terms. All persons who, having remained in the city during the

troubles, were now anxious to leave it, were to be free to settle at Eleusis,

retaining their civil rights and possessing full and independent powers of self-

government, and with the free enjoyment of their own personal property. The

temple at Eleusis should be common ground for both parties, and should be

under the superintendence of the Ceryces, and the Eumolpidae, according to

primitive  custom.  The  settlers  at  Eleusis  should  not  be  allowed  to  enter

Athens, nor the people of Athens to enter Eleusis, except at the season of the

mysteries,  when  both  parties  should  be  free  from  these  restrictions.  The

secessionists should pay their share to the fund for the common defence out

of their revenues, just like all the other Athenians. If any of the seceding

party wished to take a house in Eleusis, the people would help them to obtain

the consent of the owner; but if they could not come to terms, they should

appoint three valuers on either side, and the owner should receive whateverprice  they  should  appoint.  Of  the  inhabitants  of  Eleusis,  those  whom  the

secessionists wished to remain should be allowed to do so. The list of those

who desired to secede should be made up within ten days after the taking of

the  oaths  in  the  case  of  persons  already  in  the  country,  and  their  actual

departure should take place within twenty days; persons at present out of the

country should have the same terms allowed to them after their return. No

one who settled at Eleusis should be capable of holding any office in Athens

until he should again register himself on the roll as a resident in the city.

Trials for homicide, including all cases in which one party had either killed or

wounded another, should be conducted according to ancestral practice. There

should  be  a  general  amnesty  concerning  past  events  towards  all  persons

except the Thirty, the Ten, the Eleven, and the magistrates in Piraeus; and

these too should be included if they should submit their accounts in the usual

way. Such accounts should be given by the magistrates in Piraeus before a

court of citizens rated in Piraeus, and by the magistrates in the city before a

court of those rated in the city. On these terms those who wished to do so

might secede. Each party was to repay separately the money which it had

borrowed for the war.


40


  When the reconciliation had taken place on these terms, those who had

fought on the side of the Thirty felt considerable apprehensions, and a large

number intended to secede. But as they put off entering their names till the

last moment, as people will do, Archinus, observing their numbers, and being

anxious to retain them as citizens, cut off the remaining days during which

the  list  should  have  remained  open;  and  in  this  way  many  persons  were

compelled  to  remain,  though  they  did  so  very  unwillingly  until  they

recovered confidence. This is one point in which Archinus appears to have

acted  in  a  most  statesmanlike  manner,  and  another  was  his  subsequent

prosecution of Thrasybulus on the charge of illegality, for a motion by which

he proposed to confer the franchise on all who had taken part in the return

from Piraeus, although some of them were notoriously slaves. And yet a third

such action was when one of the returned exiles began to violate the amnesty,

whereupon Archinus haled him to the Council and persuaded them to execute

him without trial, telling them that now they would have to show whether

they wished to preserve the democracy and abide by the oaths they had taken;for if they let this man escape they would encourage others to imitate him,

while if they executed him they would make an example for all to learn by.

And this was exactly what happened; for after this man had been put to death

no one ever again broke the amnesty. On the contrary, the Athenians seem,

both in public and in private, to have behaved in the most unprecedentedly

admirable and public-spirited way with reference to the preceding troubles.

Not only did they blot out all memory of former offences, but they even

repaid to the Lacedaemonians out of the public purse the money which the

Thirty had borrowed for the war, although the treaty required each party, the

party of the city and the party of Piraeus, to pay its own debts separately. This

they did because they thought it was a necessary first step in the direction of

restoring harmony; but in other states, so far from the democratic parties

making advances from their own possessions, they are rather in the habit of

making a general redistribution of the land. A final reconciliation was made

with  the  secessionists  at  Eleusis  two  years  after  the  secession,  in  the

archonship of Xenaenetus.


41


This, however, took place at a later date; at the time of which we are

speaking the people, having secured the control of the state, established the

constitution which exists at the present day. Pythodorus was Archon at the

time, but the democracy seems to have assumed the supreme power with

perfect justice, since it had effected its own return by its own exertions. This

was the eleventh change which had taken place in the constitution of Athens.

The first modification of the primaeval condition of things was when Ion and

his companions brought the people together into a community, for then the

people was first divided into the four tribes, and the tribe-kings were created.

Next, and first after this, having now some semblance of a constitution, was

that which took place in the reign of Theseus, consisting in a slight deviation

from  absolute  monarchy.  After  this  came  the  constitution  formed  under

Draco, when the first code of laws was drawn up. The third was that which

followed the civil war, in the time of Solon; from this the democracy took its

rise. The fourth was the tyranny of Pisistratus; the fifth the constitution of

Cleisthenes,  after  the  overthrow  of  the  tyrants,  of  a  more  democratic

character  than  that  of  Solon.  The  sixth  was  that  which  followed  on  the

Persian wars, when the Council of Areopagus had the direction of the state.The seventh, succeeding this, was the constitution which Aristides sketched

out,  and  which  Ephialtes  brought  to  completion  by  overthrowing  the

Areopagite Council; under this the nation, misled by the demagogues, made

the most serious mistakes in the interest of its maritime empire. The eighth

was  the  establishment  of  the  Four  Hundred,  followed  by  the  ninth,  the

restored democracy. The tenth was the tyranny of the Thirty and the Ten. The

eleventh was that which followed the return from Phyle and Piraeus; and this

has continued from that day to this, with continual accretions of power to the

masses. The democracy has made itself master of everything and administers

everything by its votes in the Assembly and by the law-courts, in which it

holds the supreme power. Even the jurisdiction of the Council has passed into

the hands of the people at large; and this appears to be a judicious change,

since small bodies are more open to corruption, whether by actual money or

influence,  than  large  ones.  At  first  they  refused  to  allow  payment  for

attendance at the Assembly; but the result was that people did not attend.

Consequently, after the Prytanes had tried many devices in vain in order to

induce  the  populace  to  come  and  ratify  the  votes,  Agyrrhius,  in  the  first

instance,  made  a  provision  of  one  obol  a  day,  which  Heracleides  of

Clazomenae, nicknamed ‘the king’, increased to two obols, and Agyrrhius

again to three.


42


The present state of the constitution is as follows. The franchise is open to

all who are of citizen birth by both parents. They are enrolled among the

demesmen at the age of eighteen. On the occasion of their enrollment the

demesmen give their votes on oath, first whether the candidates appear to be

of the age prescribed by the law (if not, they are dismissed back into the

ranks of the boys), and secondly whether the candidate is free born and of

such parentage as the laws require. Then if they decide that he is not a free

man, he appeals to the law-courts, and the demesmen appoint five of their

own number to act as accusers; if the court decides that he has no right to be

enrolled, he is sold by the state as a slave, but if he wins his case he has a

right to be enrolled among the demesmen without further question. After this

the Council examines those who have been enrolled, and if it comes to the

conclusion that any of them is less than eighteen years of age, it fines the

demesmen who enrolled him. When the youths (Ephebi) have passed thisexamination, their fathers meet by their tribes, and appoint on oath three of

their fellow tribesmen, over forty years of age, who, in their opinion, are the

best and most suitable persons to have charge of the youths; and of these the

Assembly elects one from each tribe as guardian, together with a director,

chosen from the general body of Athenians, to control the while. Under the

charge of these persons the youths first of all make the circuit of the temples;

then they proceed to Piraeus, and some of them garrison Munichia and some

the  south  shore.  The  Assembly  also  elects  two  trainers,  with  subordinate

instructors, who teach them to fight in heavy armour, to use the bow and

javelin, and to discharge a catapult. The guardians receive from the state a

drachma  apiece  for  their  keep,  and  the  youths  four  obols  apiece.  Each

guardian receives the allowance for all the members of his tribe and buys the

necessary provisions for the common stock (they mess together by tribes),

and generally superintends everything. In this way they spend the first year.

The next year, after giving a public display of their military evolutions, on the

occasion when the Assembly meets in the theatre, they receive a shield and

spear from the state; after which they patrol the country and spend their time

in the forts. For these two years they are on garrison duty, and wear the

military cloak, and during this time they are exempt from all taxes. They also

can neither bring an action at law, nor have one brought against them, in

order that they may have no excuse for requiring leave of absence; though

exception is made in cases of actions concerning inheritances and wards of

state, or of any sacrificial ceremony connected with the family. When the two

years  have  elapsed  they  thereupon  take  their  position  among  the  other

citizens. Such is the manner of the enrollment of the citizens and the training

of the youths.


43


All  the  magistrates  that  are  concerned  with  the  ordinary  routine  of

administration  are  elected  by  lot,  except  the  Military  Treasurer,  the

Commissioners  of  the  Theoric  fund,  and  the  Superintendent  of  Springs.

These are elected by vote, and hold office from one Panathenaic festival to

the next. All military officers are also elected by vote.

The Council of Five Hundred is elected by lot, fifty from each tribe. Each

tribe holds the office of Prytanes in turn, the order being determined by lot;

the first four serve for thirty-six days each, the last six for thirty-five, sincethe reckoning is by lunar years. The Prytanes for the time being, in the first

place, mess together in the Tholus, and receive a sum of money from the state

for  their  maintenance;  and,  secondly,  they  convene  the  meetings  of  the

Council and the Assembly. The Council they convene every day, unless it is a

holiday, the Assembly four times in each prytany. It is also their duty to draw

up the programme of the business of the Council and to decide what subjects

are to be dealt with on each particular da, and where the sitting is to be held.

They also draw up the programme for the meetings of the Assembly. One of

these in each prytany is called the ‘sovereign’ Assembly; in this the people

have  to  ratify  the  continuance  of  the  magistrates  in  office,  if  they  are

performing their duties properly, and to consider the supply of corn and the

defence of the country. On this day, too, impeachments are introduced by

those who wish to do so, the lists of property confiscated by the state are

read, and also applications for inheritances and wards of state, so that nothing

may pass unclaimed without the cognizance of any person concerned. In the

sixth prytany, in addition to the business already stated, the question is put to

the  vote  whether  it  is  desirable  to  hold  a  vote  of  ostracism  or  not;  and

complaints  against  professional  accusers,  whether  Athenian  or  aliens

domiciled in Athens, are received, to the number of not more than three of

either  class,  together  with  cases  in  which  an  individual  has  made  some

promise to the people and has not performed it. Another Assembly in each

prytany is assigned to the hearing of petitions, and at this meeting any one is

free,  on  depositing  the  petitioner’s  olive-branch,  to  speak  to  the  people

concerning any matter, public or private. The two remaining meetings are

devoted to all other subjects, and the laws require them to deal with three

questions  connected  with  religion,  three  connected  with  heralds  and

embassies, and three on secular subjects. Sometimes questions are brought

forward  without  a  preliminary  vote  of  the  Assembly  to  take  them  into

consideration.

  Heralds and envoys appear first before the Prytanes, and the bearers of

dispatches also deliver them to the same officials.


44


  There is a single President of the Prytanes, elected by lot, who presides for

a night and a day; he may not hold the office for more than that time, nor may

the same individual hold it twice. He keeps the keys of the sanctuaries inwhich the treasures and public records of the state are preserved, and also the

public seal; and he is bound to remain in the Tholus, together with one-third

of the Prytanes, named by himself. Whenever the Prytanes convene a meeting

of the Council or Assembly, he appoints by lot nine Proedri, one from each

tribe except that which holds the office of Prytanes for the time being; and

out of these nine he similarly appoints one as President, and hands over the

programme for the meeting to them. They take it and see to the preservation

of order, put forward the various subjects which are to be considered, decide

the results of the votings, and direct the proceedings generally. They also

have power to dismiss the meeting. No one may act as President more than

once in the year, but he may be a Proedrus once in each prytany.

  Elections to the offices of General and Hipparch and all other military

commands are held in the Assembly, in such manner as the people decide;

they are held after the sixth prytany by the first board of Prytanes in whose

term  of  office  the  omens  are  favourable.  There  has,  however,  to  be  a

preliminary consideration by the Council in this case also.


45


In  former  times  the  Council  had  full  powers  to  inflict  fines  and

imprisonment  and  death;  but  when  it  had  consigned  Lysimachus  to  the

executioner,  and  he  was  sitting  in  the  immediate  expectation  of  death,

Eumelides of Alopece rescued him from its hands, maintaining that no citizen

ought to be put to death except on the decision of a court of law. Accordingly

a  trial  was  held  in  a  law-court,  and  Lysimachus  was  acquitted,  receiving

henceforth the nickname of ‘the man from the drum-head’; and the people

deprived  the  Council  thenceforward  of  the  power  to  inflict  death  or

imprisonment or fine, passing a law that if the Council condemn any person

for an offence or inflict a fine, the Thesmothetae shall bring the sentence or

fine before the law-court, and the decision of the jurors shall be the final

judgement in the matter.

The Council passes judgement on nearly all magistrates, especially those

who have the control of money; its judgement, however, is not final, but is

subject to an appeal to the lawcourts. Private individuals, also, may lay an

information against any magistrate they please for not obeying the laws, but

here too there is an appeal to the law-courts if the Council declare the charge

proved. The Council also examines those who are to be its members for theensuing year, and likewise the nine Archons. Formerly the Council had full

power to reject candidates for office as unsuitable, but now they have an

appeal to the law-courts. In all these matters, therefore, the Council has no

final jurisdiction. It takes, however, preliminary cognizance of all matters

brought before the Assembly, and the Assembly cannot vote on any question

unless  it  has  first  been  considered  by  the  Council  and  placed  on  the

programme  by  the  Prytanes;  since  a  person  who  carries  a  motion  in  the

Assembly is liable to an action for illegal proposal on these grounds.


46


The Council also superintends the triremes that are already in existence,

with  their  tackle  and  sheds,  and  builds  new  triremes  or  quadriremes,

whichever  the  Assembly  votes,  with  tackle  and  sheds  to  match.  The

Assembly appoints master-builders for the ships by vote; and if they do not

hand  them  over  completed  to  the  next  Council,  the  old  Council  cannot

receive  the  customary  donation-that  being  normally  given  to  it  during  its

successor’s term of office. For the building of the triremes it appoints ten

commissioners, chosen from its own members. The Council also inspects all

public buildings, and if it is of opinion that the state is being defrauded, it

reports the culprit to the Assembly, and on condemnation hands him over to

the law-courts.


47


The Council also co-operates with other magistrates in most of their duties.

First there are the treasurers of Athena, ten in number, elected by lot, one

from each tribe. According to the law of Solon-which is still in force-they

must be Pentacosiomedimni, but in point of fact the person on whom the lot

falls holds the office even though he be quite a poor man. These officers take

over charge of the statue of Athena, the figures of Victory, and all the other

ornaments of the temple, together with the money, in the presence of the

Council. Then there are the Commissioners for Public Contracts (Poletae),

ten in number, one chosen by lot from each tribe, who farm out the public

contracts. They lease the mines and taxes, in conjunction with the Military

Treasurer and the Commissioners of the Theoric fund, in the presence of theCouncil, and grant, to the persons indicated by the vote of the Council, the

mines which are let out by the state, including both the workable ones, which

are let for three years, and those which are let under special agreements years.

They also sell, in the presence of the Council, the property of those who have

gone into exile from the court of the Areopagus, and of others whose goods

have been confiscated, and the nine Archons ratify the contracts. They also

hand over to the Council lists of the taxes which are farmed out for the year,

entering on whitened tablets the name of the lessee and the amount paid.

They make separate lists, first of those who have to pay their instalments in

each prytany, on ten several tablets, next of those who pay thrice in the year,

with a separate tablet for each instalment, and finally of those who pay in the

ninth prytany. They also draw up a list of farms and dwellings which have

been confiscated and sold by order of the courts; for these too come within

their province. In the case of dwellings the value must be paid up in five

years,  and  in  that  of  farms,  in  ten.  The  instalments  are  paid  in  the  ninth

prytany. Further, the King-archon brings before the Council the leases of the

sacred enclosures, written on whitened tablets. These too are leased for ten

years, and the instalments are paid in the prytany; consequently it is in this

prytany that the greatest amount of money is collected. The tablets containing

the lists of the instalments are carried into the Council, and the public clerk

takes charge of them. Whenever a payment of instalments is to be made he

takes from the pigeon-holes the precise list of the sums which are to be paid

and struck off on that day, and delivers it to the Receivers-General. The rest

are kept apart, in order that no sum may be struck off before it is paid.


48


  There  are  ten  Receivers-General  (Apodectae),  elected  by  lot,  one  from

each tribe. These officers receive the tablets, and strike off the instalments as

they are paid, in the presence of the Council in the Council-chamber, and

give the tablets back to the public clerk. If any one fails to pay his instalment,

a note is made of it on the tablet; and he is bound to pay double the amount of

the deficiency, or, in default, to be imprisoned. The Council has full power by

the  laws  to  exact  these  payments  and  to  inflict  this  imprisonment.  They

receive all the instalments, therefore, on one day, and portion the money out

among the magistrates; and on the next day they bring up the report of the

apportionment,  written  on  a  wooden  notice-board,  and  read  it  out  in  theCouncil-chamber, after which they ask publicly in the Council whether any

one knows of any malpractice in reference to the apportionment, on the part

of either a magistrate or a private individual, and if any one is charged with

malpractice they take a vote on it.

The  Council  also  elects  ten  Auditors  (Logistae)  by  lot  from  its  own

members, to audit the accounts of the magistrates for each prytany. They also

elect one Examiner of Accounts (Euthunus) by lot from each tribe, with two

assessors (Paredri) for each examiner, whose duty it is to sit at the ordinary

market hours, each opposite the statue of the eponymous hero of his tribe;

and if any one wishes to prefer a charge, on either public or private grounds,

against any magistrate who has passed his audit before the law-courts, within

three days of his having so passed, he enters on a whitened tablet his own

name and that of the magistrate prosecuted, together with the malpractice that

is  alleged  against  him.  He  also  appends  his  claim  for  a  penalty  of  such

amount as seems to him fitting, and gives in the record to the Examiner. The

latter takes it, and if after reading it he considers it proved he hands it over, if

a  private  case,  to  the  local  justices  who  introduce  cases  for  the  tribe

concerned,  while  if  it  is  a  public  case  he  enters  it  on  the  register  of  the

Thesmothetae. Then, if the Thesmothetae accept it, they bring the accounts of

this magistrate once more before the law-court, and the decision of the jury

stands as the final judgement.


49


The Council also inspects the horses belonging to the state. If a man who

has a good horse is found to keep it in bad condition, he is mulcted in his

allowance of corn; while those which cannot keep up or which shy and will

not stand steady, it brands with a wheel on the jaw, and the horse so marked

is disqualified for service. It also inspects those who appear to be fit for

service as scouts, and any one whom it rejects is deprived of his horse. It also

examines the infantry who serve among the cavalry, and any one whom it

rejects ceases to receive his pay. The roll of the cavalry is drawn up by the

Commissioners  of  Enrolment  (Catalogeis),  ten  in  number,  elected  by  the

Assembly by open vote. They hand over to the Hipparchs and Phylarchs the

list of those whom they have enrolled, and these officers take it and bring it

up before the Council, and there open the sealed tablet containing the names

of the cavalry. If any of those who have been on the roll previously makeaffidavit  that  they  are  physically  incapable  of  cavalry  service,  they  strike

them out; then they call up the persons newly enrolled, and if any one makes

affidavit  that  he  is  either  physically  or  pecuniarily  incapable  of  cavalry

service they dismiss him, but if no such affidavit is made the Council vote

whether the individual in question is suitable for the purpose or not. If they

vote  in  the  affirmative  his  name  is  entered  on  the  tablet;  if  not,  he  is

dismissed with the others.

  Formerly the Council used to decide on the plans for public buildings and

the contract for making the robe of Athena; but now this work is done by a

jury in the law-courts appointed by lot, since the Council was considered to

have shown favouritism in its decisions. The Council also shares with the

Military Treasurer the superintendence of the manufacture of the images of

Victory and the prizes at the Panathenaic festival.

The  Council  also  examines  infirm  paupers;  for  there  is  a  law  which

provides that persons possessing less than three minas, who are so crippled as

to be unable to do any work, are, after examination by the Council, to receive

two obols a day from the state for their support. A treasurer is appointed by

lot to attend to them.

The Council also, speaking broadly, cooperates in most of the duties of all

the other magistrates; and this ends the list of the functions of that body.


50


  There are ten Commissioners for Repairs of Temples, elected by lot, who

receive  a  sum  of  thirty  minas  from  the  Receivers-General,  and  therewith

carry out the most necessary repairs in the temples.

  There are also ten City Commissioners (Astynomi), of whom five hold

office in Piraeus and five in the city. Their duty is to see that female flute-and

harp-and lute-players are not hired at more than two drachmas, and if more

than one person is anxious to hire the same girl, they cast lots and hire her out

to the person to whom the lot falls. They also provide that no collector of

sewage shall shoot any of his sewage within ten stradia of the walls; they

prevent people from blocking up the streets by building, or stretching barriers

across them, or making drain-pipes in mid-air with a discharge into the street,

or having doors which open outwards; they also remove the corpses of those

who die in the streets, for which purpose they have a body of state slaves

assigned to them.51


  Market Commissioners (Agoranomi) are elected by lot, five for Piraeus,

five for the city. Their statutory duty is to see that all articles offered for sale

in the market are pure and unadulterated.

  Commissioners of Weights and Measures (Metronomi) are elected by lot,

five for the city, and five for Piraeus. They see that sellers use fair weights

and measures.

  Formerly there were ten Corn Commissioners (Sitophylaces), elected by

lot, five for Piraeus, and five for the city; but now there are twenty for the city

and fifteen for Piraeus. Their duties are, first, to see that the unprepared corn

in the market is offered for sale at reasonable prices, and secondly, to see that

the millers sell barley meal at a price proportionate to that of barley, and that

the bakers sell their loaves at a price proportionate to that of wheat, and of

such weight as the Commissioners may appoint; for the law requires them to

fix the standard weight.

  There are ten Superintendents of the Mart, elected by lot, whose duty is to

superintend the Mart, and to compel merchants to bring up into the city two-

thirds of the corn which is brought by sea to the Corn Mart.


52


The Eleven also are appointed by lot to take care of the prisoners in the

state gaol. Thieves, kidnappers, and pickpockets are brought to them, and if

they plead guilty they are executed, but if they deny the charge the Eleven

bring  the  case  before  the  law-courts;  if  the  prisoners  are  acquitted,  they

release them, but if not, they then execute them. They also bring up before

the law-courts the list of farms and houses claimed as state-property; and if it

is decided that they are so, they deliver them to the Commissioners for Public

Contracts. The Eleven also bring up informations laid against magistrates

alleged  to  be  disqualified;  this  function  comes  within  their  province,  but

some such cases are brought up by the Thesmothetae.

  There are also five Introducers of Cases (Eisagogeis), elected by lot, one

for each pair of tribes, who bring up the ‘monthly’ cases to the law-courts.

‘Monthly’ cases are these: refusal to pay up a dowry where a party is bound

to do so, refusal to pay interest on money borrowed at 12 per cent., or where

a  man  desirous  of  setting  up  business  in  the  market  has  borrowed  fromanother man capital to start with; also cases of slander, cases arising out of

friendly loans or partnerships, and cases concerned with slaves, cattle, and

the office of trierarch, or with banks. These are brought up as ‘monthly’ cases

and are introduced by these officers; but the Receivers-General perform the

same function in cases for or against the farmers of taxes. Those in which the

sum concerned is not more than ten drachmas they can decide summarily, but

all above that amount they bring into the law-courts as ‘monthly’ cases.


53


The Forty are also elected by lot, four from each tribe, before whom suitors

bring all other cases. Formerly they were thirty in number, and they went on

circuit through the demes to hear causes; but after the oligarchy of the Thirty

they were increased to forty. They have full powers to decide cases in which

the amount at issue does not exceed ten drachmas, but anything beyond that

value they hand over to the Arbitrators. The Arbitrators take up the case, and,

if they cannot bring the parties to an agreement, they give a decision. If their

decision satisfies both parties, and they abide by it, the case is at an end; but

if either of the parties appeals to the law-courts, the Arbitrators enclose the

evidence, the pleadings, and the laws quoted in the case in two urns, those of

the plaintiff in the one, and those of the defendant in the other. These they

seal up and, having attached to them the decision of the arbitrator, written out

on a tablet, place them in the custody of the four justices whose function it is

to introduce cases on behalf of the tribe of the defendant. These officers take

them and bring up the case before the law-court, to a jury of two hundred and

one members in cases up to the value of a thousand drachmas, or to one of

four hundred and one in cases above that value. No laws or pleadings or

evidence  may  be  used  except  those  which  were  adduced  before  the

Arbitrator, and have been enclosed in the urns.

The Arbitrators are persons in the sixtieth year of their age; this appears

from the schedule of the Archons and the Eponymi. There are two classes of

Eponymi, the ten who give their names to the tribes, and the forty-two of the

years  of  service.  The  youths,  on  being  enrolled  among  the  citizens,  were

formerly registered upon whitened tablets, and the names were appended of

the Archon in whose year they were enrolled, and of the Eponymus who had

been in course in the preceding year; at the present day they are written on a

bronze  pillar,  which  stands  in  front  of  the  Council-chamber,  near  theEponymi of the tribes. Then the Forty take the last of the Eponymi of the

years of service, and assign the arbitrations to the persons belonging to that

year, casting lots to determine which arbitrations each shall undertake; and

every one is compelled to carry through the arbitrations which the lot assigns

to him. The law enacts that any one who does not serve as Arbitrator when he

has arrived at the necessary age shall lose his civil rights, unless he happens

to be holding some other office during that year, or to be out of the country.

These  are  the  only  persons  who  escape  the  duty.  Any  one  who  suffers

injustice at the hands of the Arbitrator may appeal to the whole board of

Arbitrators, and if they find the magistrate guilty, the law enacts that he shall

lose his civil rights. The persons thus condemned have, however, in their turn

an appeal. The Eponymi are also used in reference to military expeditions;

when the men of military age are despatched on service, a notice is put up

stating that the men from such-and such an Archon and Eponymus to such-

and such another Archon and Eponymus are to go on the expedition.


54


The following magistrates also are elected by lot: Five Commissioners of

Roads (Hodopoei), who, with an assigned body of public slaves, are required

to keep the roads in order: and ten Auditors, with ten assistants, to whom all

persons who have held any office must give in their accounts. These are the

only officers who audit the accounts of those who are subject to examination,

and who bring them up for examination before the law-courts. If they detect

any magistrate in embezzlement, the jury condemn him for theft, and he is

obliged to repay tenfold the sum he is declared to have misappropriated. If

they charge a magistrate with accepting bribes and the jury convict him, they

fine him for corruption, and this sum too is repaid tenfold. Or if they convict

him of unfair dealing, he is fined on that charge, and the sum assessed is paid

without increase, if payment is made before the ninth prytany, but otherwise

it is doubled. A tenfold fine is not doubled.

The Clerk of the prytany, as he is called, is also elected by lot. He has the

charge of all public documents, and keeps the resolutions which are passed

by the Assembly, and checks the transcripts of all other official papers and

attends at the sessions of the Council. Formerly he was elected by open vote,

and the most distinguished and trustworthy persons were elected to the post,

as is known from the fact that the name of this officer is appended on thepillars recording treaties of alliance and grants of consulship and citizenship.

Now, however, he is elected by lot. There is, in addition, a Clerk of the Laws,

elected by lot, who attends at the sessions of the Council; and he too checks

the transcript of all the laws. The Assembly also elects by open vote a clerk

to read documents to it and to the Council; but he has no other duty except

that of reading aloud.

The Assembly also elects by lot the Commissioners of Public Worship

(Hieropoei)  known  as  the  Commissioners  for  Sacrifices,  who  offer  the

sacrifices appointed by oracle, and, in conjunction with the seers, take the

auspices whenever there is occasion. It also elects by lot ten others, known as

Annual Commissioners, who offer certain sacrifices and administer all the

quadrennial  festivals  except  the  Panathenaea.  There  are  the  following

quadrennial  festivals:  first  that  of  Delos  (where  there  is  also  a  sexennial

festival), secondly the Brauronia, thirdly the Heracleia, fourthly the Eleusinia,

and fifthly the Panathenaea; and no two of these are celebrated in the same

place. To these the Hephaestia has now been added, in the archonship of

Cephisophon.

An Archon is also elected by lot for Salamis, and a Demarch for Piraeus.

These  officers  celebrate  the  Dionysia  in  these  two  places,  and  appoint

Choregi. In Salamis, moreover, the name of the Archon is publicly recorded.


55


All the foregoing magistrates are elected by lot, and their powers are those

which have been stated. To pass on to the nine Archons, as they are called,

the manner of their appointment from the earliest times has been described

already. At the present day six Thesmothetae are elected by lot, together with

their clerk, and in addition to these an Archon, a King, and a Polemarch. One

is elected from each tribe. They are examined first of all by the Council of

Five Hundred, with the exception of the clerk. The latter is examined only in

the lawcourt, like other magistrates (for all magistrates, whether elected by

lot or by open vote, are examined before entering on their offices); but the

nine Archons are examined both in the Council and again in the law-court.

Formerly no one could hold the office if the Council rejected him, but now

there is an appeal to the law-court, which is the final authority in the matter of

the examination. When they are examined, they are asked, first, ‘Who is your

father, and of what deme? who is your father’s father? who is your mother?who is your mother’s father, and of what deme?’ Then the candidate is asked

whether he possesses an ancestral Apollo and a household Zeus, and where

their sanctuaries are; next if he possesses a family tomb, and where; then if he

treats his parents well, and pays his taxes, and has served on the required

military  expeditions.  When  the  examiner  has  put  these  questions,  he

proceeds,  ‘Call  the  witnesses  to  these  facts’;  and  when  the  candidate  has

produced  his  witnesses,  he  next  asks,  ‘Does  any  one  wish  to  make  any

accusation against this man?’ If an accuser appears, he gives the parties an

opportunity of making their accusation and defence, and then puts it to the

Council to pass the candidate or not, and to the law-court to give the final

vote. If no one wishes to make an accusation, he proceeds at once to the vote.

Formerly a single individual gave the vote, but now all the members are

obliged to vote on the candidates, so that if any unprincipled candidate has

managed to get rid of his accusers, it may still be possible for him to be

disqualified  before  the  law-court.  When  the  examination  has  been  thus

completed, they proceed to the stone on which are the pieces of the victims,

and on which the Arbitrators take oath before declaring their decisions, and

witnesses  swear  to  their  testimony.  On  this  stone  the  Archons  stand,  and

swear to execute their office uprightly and according to the laws, and not to

receive presents in respect of the performance of their duties, or, if they do, to

dedicate a golden statue. When they have taken this oath they proceed to the

Acropolis, and there they repeat it; after this they enter upon their office.


56


The  Archon,  the  King,  and  the  Polemarch  have  each  two  assessors,

nominated by themselves. These officers are examined in the lawcourt before

they begin to act, and give in accounts on each occasion of their acting.

As soon as the Archon enters office, he begins by issuing a proclamation

that whatever any one possessed before he entered into office, that he shall

possess and hold until the end of his term. Next he assigns Choregi to the

tragic poets, choosing three of the richest persons out of the whole body of

Athenians. Formerly he used also to assign five Choregi to the comic poets,

but  now  the  tribes  provide  the  Choregi  for  them.  Then  he  receives  the

Choregi  who  have  been  appointed  by  the  tribes  for  the  men’s  and  boys’

choruses and the comic poets at the Dionysia, and for the men’s and boys’

choruses at the Thargelia (at the Dionysia there is a chorus for each tribe, butat  the  Thargelia  one  between  two  tribes,  each  tribe  bearing  its  share  in

providing it); he transacts the exchanges of properties for them, and reports

any excuses that are tendered, if any one says that he has already borne this

burden, or that he is exempt because he has borne a similar burden and the

period of his exemption has not yet expired, or that he is not of the required

age; since the Choregus of a boys’ chorus must be over forty years of age. He

also appoints Choregi for the festival at Delos, and a chief of the mission for

the thirty-oar boat which conveys the youths thither. He also superintends

sacred processions, both that in honour of Asclepius, when the initiated keep

house,  and  that  of  the  great  Dionysia-the  latter  in  conjunction  with  the

Superintendents of that festival. These officers, ten in number, were formerly

elected by open vote in the Assembly, and used to provide for the expenses of

the procession out of their private means; but now one is elected by lot from

each tribe, and the state contributes a hundred minas for the expenses. The

Archon also superintends the procession at the Thargelia, and that in honour

of Zeus the Saviour. He also manages the contests at the Dionysia and the

Thargelia.

These,  then,  are  the  festivals  which  he  superintends.  The  suits  and

indictments  which  come  before  him,  and  which  he,  after  a  preliminary

inquiry, brings up before the lawcourts, are as follows. Injury to parents (for

bringing these actions the prosecutor cannot suffer any penalty); injury to

orphans (these actions lie against their guardians); injury to a ward of state

(these lie against their guardians or their husbands), injury to an orphan’s

estate  (these  too  lie  against  the  guardians);  mental  derangement,  where  a

party charges another with destroying his own property through unsoundness

of  mind;  for  appointment  of  liquidators,  where  a  party  refuses  to  divide

property  in  which  others  have  a  share;  for  constituting  a  wardship;  for

determining between rival claims to a wardship; for granting inspection of

property  to  which  another  party  lays  claim;  for  appointing  oneself  as

guardian; and for determining disputes as to inheritances and wards of state.

The Archon also has the care of orphans and wards of state, and of women

who, on the death of their husbands, declare themselves to be with child; and

he has power to inflict a fine on those who offend against the persons under

his charge, or to bring the case before the law-courts. He also leases the

houses of orphans and wards of state until they reach the age of fourteen, and

takes mortgages on them; and if the guardians fail to provide the necessary

food for the children under their charge, he exacts it from them. Such are theduties of the Archon.


57


The King in the first place superintends the mysteries, in conjunction with

the Superintendents of Mysteries. The latter are elected in the Assembly by

open  vote,  two  from  the  general  body  of  Athenians,  one  from  the

Eumolpidae, and one from the Ceryces. Next, he superintends the Lenaean

Dionysia, which consists of a procession and a contest. The procession is

ordered by the King and the Superintendents in conjunction; but the contest is

managed by the King alone. He also manages all the contests of the torch-

race;  and  to  speak  broadly,  he  administers  all  the  ancestral  sacrifices.

Indictments for impiety come before him, or any disputes between parties

concerning priestly rites; and he also determines all controversies concerning

sacred rites for the ancient families and the priests. All actions for homicide

come before him, and it is he that makes the proclamation requiring polluted

persons  to  keep  away  from  sacred  ceremonies.  Actions  for  homicide  and

wounding  are  heard,  if  the  homicide  or  wounding  be  willful,  in  the

Areopagus; so also in cases of killing by poison, and of arson. These are the

only  cases  heard  by  that  Council.  Cases  of  unintentional  homicide,  or  of

intent to kill, or of killing a slave or a resident alien or a foreigner, are heard

by the court of Palladium. When the homicide is acknowledged, but legal

justification is pleaded, as when a man takes an adulterer in the act, or kills

another by mistake in battle, or in an athletic contest, the prisoner is tried in

the court of Delphinium. If a man who is in banishment for a homicide which

admits of reconcilliation incurs a further charge of killing or wounding, he is

tried in Phreatto, and he makes his defence from a boat moored near the

shore. All these cases, except those which are heard in the Areopagus, are

tried by the Ephetae on whom the lot falls. The King introduces them, and the

hearing is held within sacred precincts and in the open air. Whenever the

King hears a case he takes off his crown. The person who is charged with

homicide is at all other times excluded from the temples, nor is it even lawful

for him to enter the market-place; but on the occasion of his trial he enters the

temple and makes his defence. If the actual offender is unknown, the writ

runs against ‘the doer of the deed’. The King and the tribe-kings also hear the

cases in which the guilt rests on inanimate objects and the lower animal.58


The  Polemarch  performs  the  sacrifices  to  Artemis  the  huntress  and  to

Enyalius, and arranges the contest at the funeral of those who have fallen in

war,  and  makes  offerings  to  the  memory  of  Harmodius  and  Aristogeiton.

Only private actions come before him, namely those in which resident aliens,

both ordinary and privileged, and agents of foreign states are concerned. It is

his duty to receive these cases and divide them into ten groups, and assign to

each tribe the group which comes to it by lot; after which the magistrates who

introduce  cases  for  the  tribe  hand  them  over  to  the  Arbitrators.  The

Polemarch, however, brings up in person cases in which an alien is charged

with deserting his patron or neglecting to provide himself with one, and also

of inheritances and wards of state where aliens are concerned; and in fact,

generally,  whatever  the  Archon  does  for  citizens,  the  Polemarch  does  for

aliens.


59


The Thesmothetae in the first place have the power of prescribing on what

days  the  lawcourts  are  to  sit,  and  next  of  assigning  them  to  the  several

magistrates;  for  the  latter  must  follow  the  arrangement  which  the

Thesmothetae  assign.  Moreover  they  introduce  impeachments  before  the

Assembly, and bring up all votes for removal from office, challenges of a

magistrate’s conduct before the Assembly, indictments for illegal proposals,

or  for  proposing  a  law  which  is  contrary  to  the  interests  of  the  state,

complaints against Proedri or their president for their conduct in office, and

the  accounts  presented  by  the  generals.  All  indictments  also  come  before

them  in  which  a  deposit  has  to  be  made  by  the  prosecutor,  namely,

indictments for concealment of foreign origin, for corrupt evasion of foreign

origin (when a man escapes the disqualification by bribery), for blackmailing

accusations, bribery, false entry of another as a state debtor, false testimony

to the service of a summons, conspiracy to enter a man as a state debtor,

corrupt removal from the list of debtors, and adultery. They also bring up the

examinations  of  all  magistrates,  and  the  rejections  by  the  demes  and  the

condemnations by the Council. Moreover they bring up certain private suits

in cases of merchandise and mines, or where a slave has slandered a free

man.  It  is  they  also  who  cast  lots  to  assign  the  courts  to  the  variousmagistrates,  whether  for  private  or  public  cases.  They  ratify  commercial

treaties, and bring up the cases which arise out of such treaties; and they also

bring up cases of perjury from the Areopagus. The casting of lots for the

jurors  is  conducted  by  all  the  nine  Archons,  with  the  clerk  to  the

Thesmothetae as the tenth, each performing the duty for his own tribe. Such

are the duties of the nine Archons.


60


  There are also ten Commissioners of Games (Athlothetae), elected by lot,

one from each tribe. These officers, after passing an examination, serve for

four years; and they manage the Panathenaic procession, the contest in music

and  that  in  gymnastic,  and  the  horse-race;  they  also  provide  the  robe  of

Athena and, in conjunction with the Council, the vases, and they present the

oil to the athletes. This oil is collected from the sacred olives. The Archon

requisitions it from the owners of the farms on which the sacred olives grow,

at the rate of three-quarters of a pint from each plant. Formerly the state used

to sell the fruit itself, and if any one dug up or broke down one of the sacred

olives, he was tried by the Council of Areopagus, and if he was condemned,

the penalty was death. Since, however, the oil has been paid by the owner of

the farm, the procedure has lapsed, though the law remains; and the oil is a

state charge upon the property instead of being taken from the individual

plants. When, then, the Archon has collected the oil for his year of office, he

hands it over to the Treasurers to preserve in the Acropolis, and he may not

take his seat in the Areopagus until he has paid over to the Treasurers the full

amount. The Treasurers keep it in the Acropolis until the Panathenaea, when

they measure it out to the Commissioners of Games, and they again to the

victorious  competitors.  The  prizes  for  the  victors  in  the  musical  contest

consist of silver and gold, for the victors in manly vigour, of shields, and for

the victors in the gymnastic contest and the horse-race, of oil.


61


All officers connected with military service are elected by open vote. In the

first place, ten Generals (Strategi), who were formerly elected one from each

tribe, but now are chosen from the whole mass of citizens. Their duties areassigned  to  them  by  open  vote;  one  is  appointed  to  command  the  heavy

infantry, and leads them if they go out to war; one to the defence of the

country, who remains on the defensive, and fights if there is war within the

borders of the country; two to Piraeus, one of whom is assigned to Munichia,

and  one  to  the  south  shore,  and  these  have  charge  of  the  defence  of  the

Piraeus; and one to superintend the symmories, who nominates the trierarchs

arranges exchanges of properties for them, and brings up actions to decide on

rival claims in connexion with them. The rest are dispatched to whatever

business may be on hand at the moment. The appointment of these officers is

submitted for confirmation in each prytany, when the question is put whether

they are considered to be doing their duty. If any officer is rejected on this

vote, he is tried in the lawcourt, and if he is found guilty the people decide

what punishment or fine shall be inflicted on him; but if he is acquitted he

resumes his office. The Generals have full power, when on active service, to

arrest any one for insubordination, or to cashier him publicly, or to inflict a

fine; the latter is, however, unusual.

  There are also ten Taxiarchs, one from each tribe, elected by open vote;

and each commands his own tribesmen and appoints captains of companies

(Lochagi).  There  are  also  two  Hipparchs,  elected  by  open  vote  from  the

whole  mass  of  the  citizens,  who  command  the  cavalry,  each  taking  five

tribes. They have the same powers as the Generals have in respect of the

infantry, and their appointments are also subject to confirmation. There are

also ten Phylarchs, elected by open vote, one from each tribe, to command

the cavalry, as the Taxiarchs do the infantry. There is also a Hipparch for

Lemnos, elected by open vote, who has charge of the cavalry in Lemnos.

There  is  also  a  treasurer  of  the  Paralus,  and  another  of  the  Ammonias,

similarly elected.


62


Of the magistrates elected by lot, in former times some including the nine

Archons, were elected out of the tribe as a whole, while others, namely those

who are now elected in the Theseum, were apportioned among the demes; but

since  the  demes  used  to  sell  the  elections,  these  magistrates  too  are  now

elected from the whole tribe, except the members of the Council and the

guards of the dockyards, who are still left to the demes.

  Pay  is  received  for  the  following  services.  First  the  members  of  theAssembly receive a drachma for the ordinary meetings, and nine obols for the

‘sovereign’ meeting. Then the jurors at the law-courts receive three obols;

and  the  members  of  the  Council  five  obols.  They  Prytanes  receive  an

allowance of an obol for their maintenance. The nine Archons receive four

obols apiece for maintenance, and also keep a herald and a flute-player; and

the Archon for Salamis receives a drachma a day. The Commissioners for

Games dine in the Prytaneum during the month of Hecatombaeon in which

the Panathenaic festival takes place, from the fourteenth day onwards. The

Amphictyonic deputies to Delos receive a drachma a day from the exchequer

of Delos. Also all magistrates sent to Samos, Scyros, Lemnos, or Imbros

receive an allowance for their maintenance. The military offices may be held

any  number  of  times,  but  none  of  the  others  more  than  once,  except  the

membership of the Council, which may be held twice.


63


The juries for the law-courts are chosen by lot by the nine Archons, each

for their own tribe, and by the clerk to the Thesmothetae for the tenth. There

are ten entrances into the courts, one for each tribe; twenty rooms in which

the lots are drawn, two for each tribe; a hundred chests, ten for each tribe;

other chests, in which are placed the tickets of the jurors on whom the lot

falls; and two vases. Further, staves, equal in number to the jurors required,

are placed by the side of each entrance; and counters are put into one vase,

equal in number to the staves. These are inscribed with letters of the alphabet

beginning with the eleventh (lambda), equal in number to the courts which

require to be filled. All persons above thirty years of age are qualified to

serve as jurors, provided they are not debtors to the state and have not lost

their civil rights. If any unqualified person serves as juror, an information is

laid against him, and he is brought before the court; and, if he is convicted,

the jurors assess the punishment or fine which they consider him to deserve.

If he is condemned to a money fine, he must be imprisoned until he has paid

up  both  the  original  debt,  on  account  of  which  the  information  was  laid

against him, and also the fine which the court as imposed upon him. Each

juror has his ticket of boxwood, on which is inscribed his name, with the

name of his father and his deme, and one of the letters of the alphabet up to

kappa; for the jurors in their several tribes are divided into ten sections, with

approximately an equal number in each letter. When the Thesmothetes hasdecided by lot which letters are required to attend at the courts, the servant

puts up above each court the letter which has been assigned to it by the lot.


64


The ten chests above mentioned are placed in front of the entrance used by

each tribe, and are inscribed with the letters of the alphabet from alpha to

kappa.  The  jurors  cast  in  their  tickets,  each  into  the  chest  on  which  is

inscribed the letter which is on his ticket; then the servant shakes them all up,

and the Archon draws one ticket from each chest. The individual so selected

is called the Ticket-hanger (Empectes), and his function is to hang up the

tickets out of his chest on the bar which bears the same letter as that on the

chest. He is chosen by lot, lest, if the Ticket-hanger were always the same

person, he might tamper with the results. There are five of these bars in each

of the rooms assigned for the lot-drawing. Then the Archon casts in the dice

and thereby chooses the jurors from each tribe, room by room. The dice are

made of brass, coloured black or white; and according to the number of jurors

required, so many white dice are put in, one for each five tickets, while the

remainder are black, in the same proportion. As the Archon draws out the

dice, the crier calls out the names of the individuals chosen. The Ticket-

hanger is included among those selected. Each juror, as he is chosen and

answers to his name, draws a counter from the vase, and holding it out with

the letter uppermost shows it first to the presiding Archon; and he, when he

has seen it, throws the ticket of the juror into the chest on which is inscribed

the letter which is on the counter, so that the juror must go into the court

assigned to him by lot, and not into one chosen by himself, and that it may be

impossible for any one to collect the jurors of his choice into any particular

court. For this purpose chests are placed near the Archon, as many in number

as there are courts to be filled that day, bearing the letters of the courts on

which the lot has fallen.


65


The  juror  thereupon,  after  showing  his  counter  again  to  the  attendant,

passes through the barrier into the court. The attendant gives him a staff of

the same colour as the court bearing the letter which is on his counter, so asto ensure his going into the court assigned to him by lot; since, if he were to

go into any other, he would be betrayed by the colour of his staff. Each court

has a certain colour painted on the lintel of the entrance. Accordingly the

juror, bearing his staff, enters the court which has the same colour as his staff,

and the same letter as his counter. As he enters, he receives a voucher from

the official to whom this duty has been assigned by lot. So with their counters

and their staves the selected jurors take their seats in the court, having thus

completed  the  process  of  admission.  The  unsuccessful  candidates  receive

back  their  tickets  from  the  Ticket-hangers.  The  public  servants  carry  the

chests  from  each  tribe,  one  to  each  court,  containing  the  names  of  the

members  of  the  tribe  who  are  in  that  court,  and  hand  them  over  to  the

officials assigned to the duty of giving back their tickets to the jurors in each

court, so that these officials may call them up by name and pay them their

fee.


66


  When all the courts are full, two ballot boxes are placed in the first court,

and a number of brazen dice, bearing the colours of the several courts, and

other dice inscribed with the names of the presiding magistrates. Then two of

the Thesmothetae, selected by lot, severally throw the dice with the colours

into  one  box,  and  those  with  the  magistrates’  names  into  the  other.  The

magistrate whose name is first drawn is thereupon proclaimed by the crier as

assigned for duty in the court which is first drawn, and the second in the

second, and similarly with the rest. The object of this procedure is that no one

may  know  which  court  he  will  have,  but  that  each  may  take  the  court

assigned to him by lot.

  When the jurors have come in, and have been assigned to their respective

courts, the presiding magistrate in each court draws one ticket out of each

chest (making ten in all, one out of each tribe), and throws them into another

empty  chest.  He  then  draws  out  five  of  them,  and  assigns  one  to  the

superintendence of the water-clock, and the other four to the telling of the

votes.  This  is  to  prevent  any  tampering  beforehand  with  either  the

superintendent of the clock or the tellers of the votes, and to secure that there

is no malpractice in these respects. The five who have not been selected for

these duties receive from them a statement of the order in which the jurors

shall  receive  their  fees,  and  of  the  places  where  the  several  tribes  shallrespectively  gather  in  the  court  for  this  purpose  when  their  duties  are

completed;  the  object  being  that  the  jurors  may  be  broken  up  into  small

groups for the reception of their pay, and not all crowd together and impede

one another.


67


  These preliminaries being concluded, the cases are called on. If it is a day

for private cases, the private litigants are called. Four cases are taken in each

of the categories defined in the law, and the litigants swear to confine their

speeches to the point at issue. If it is a day for public causes, the public

litigants are called, and only one case is tried. Water-clocks are provided,

having  small  supply-tubes,  into  which  the  water  is  poured  by  which  the

length of the pleadings is regulated. Ten gallons are allowed for a case in

which an amount of more than five thousand drachmas is involved, and three

for the second speech on each side. When the amount is between one and five

thousand drachmas, seven gallons are allowed for the first speech and two for

the second; when it is less than one thousand, five and two. Six gallons are

allowed for arbitrations between rival claimants, in which there is no second

speech. The official chosen by lot to superintend the water-clock places his

hand on the supply tube whenever the clerk is about to read a resolution or

law or affidavit or treaty. When, however, a case is conducted according to a

set  measurement  of  the  day,  he  does  not  stop  the  supply,  but  each  party

receives an equal allowance of water. The standard of measurement is the

length of the days in the month Poseideon… . The measured day is employed

in cases when imprisonment, death, exile, loss of civil rights, or confiscation

of goods is assigned as the penalty.


68


  Most of the courts consist of 500 members… ; and when it is necessary to

bring public cases before a jury of 1,000 members, two courts combine for

the purpose, the most important cases of all are brought 1,500 jurors, or three

courts. The ballot balls are made of brass with stems running through the

centre, half of them having the stem pierced and the other half solid. When

the speeches are concluded, the officials assigned to the taking of the votesgive each juror two ballot balls, one pierced and one solid. This is done in full

view of the rival litigants, to secure that no one shall receive two pierced or

two solid balls. Then the official designated for the purpose takes away the

jurors staves, in return for which each one as he records his vote receives a

brass voucher market with the numeral 3 (because he gets three obols when

he gives it up). This is to ensure that all shall vote; since no one can get a

voucher unless he votes. Two urns, one of brass and the other of wood, stand

in the court, in distinct spots so that no one may surreptitiously insert ballot

balls; in these the jurors record their votes. The brazen urn is for effective

votes, the wooden for unused votes; and the brazen urn has a lid pierced so as

to take only one ballot ball, in order that no one may put in two at a time.

  When the jurors are about to vote, the crier demands first whether the

litigants enter a protest against any of the evidence; for no protest can be

received after the voting has begun. Then he proclaims again, ‘The pierced

ballot for the plaintiff, the solid for the defendant’; and the juror, taking his

two ballot balls from the stand, with his hand closed over the stem so as not

to show either the pierced or the solid ballot to the litigants, casts the one

which is to count into the brazen urn, and the other into the wooden urn.


69


  When all the jurors have voted, the attendants take the urn containing the

effective votes and discharge them on to a reckoning board having as many

cavities as there are ballot balls, so that the effective votes, whether pierced

or  solid,  may  be  plainly  displayed  and  easily  counted.  Then  the  officials

assigned to the taking of the votes tell them off on the board, the solid in one

place and the pierced in another, and the crier announces the numbers of the

votes,  the  pierced  ballots  being  for  the  prosecutor  and  the  solid  for  the

defendant. Whichever has the majority is victorious; but if the votes are equal

the verdict is for the defendant. Each juror receives two ballots, and uses one

to record his vote, and throws the other away.

Then, if damages have to be awarded, they vote again in the same way,

first  returning  their  pay-vouchers  and  receiving  back  their  staves.  Half  a

gallon of water is allowed to each party for the discussion of the damages.

Finally, when all has been completed in accordance with the law, the jurors

receive their pay in the order assigned by the lot.                                    Part 7


                      Aesthetic Writings                                  Rhetoric, Book I


Translated by W. Rhys Roberts


<

div id="book1" class="book">


1


  Rhetoric the counterpart of Dialectic. Both alike are concerned with such

things as come, more or less, within the general ken of all men and belong to

no definite science. Accordingly all men make use, more or less, of both; for

to a certain extent all men attempt to discuss statements and to maintain them,

to defend themselves and to attack others. Ordinary people do this either at

random  or  through  practice  and  from  acquired  habit.  Both  ways  being

possible, the subject can plainly be handled systematically, for it is possible

to inquire the reason why some speakers succeed through practice and others

spontaneously; and every one will at once agree that such an inquiry is the

function of an art.

Now, the framers of the current treatises on rhetoric have constructed but a

small  portion  of  that  art.  The  modes  of  persuasion  are  the  only  true

constituents of the art: everything else is merely accessory. These writers,

however,  say  nothing  about  enthymemes,  which  are  the  substance  of

rhetorical persuasion, but deal mainly with non-essentials. The arousing of

prejudice,  pity,  anger,  and  similar  emotions  has  nothing  to  do  with  the

essential facts, but is merely a personal appeal to the man who is judging the

case.  Consequently  if  the  rules  for  trials  which  are  now  laid  down  some

states-especially  in  well-governed  states-were  applied  everywhere,  such

people would have nothing to say. All men, no doubt, think that the laws

should prescribe such rules, but some, as in the court of Areopagus, give

practical effect to their thoughts and forbid talk about non-essentials. This is

sound law and custom. It is not right to pervert the judge by moving him to

anger or envy or pity-one might as well warp a carpenter’s rule before using

it. Again, a litigant has clearly nothing to do but to show that the alleged fact

is so or is not so, that it has or has not happened. As to whether a thing isimportant or unimportant, just or unjust, the judge must surely refuse to take

his instructions from the litigants: he must decide for himself all such points

as the law-giver has not already defined for him.

Now, it is of great moment that well-drawn laws should themselves define

all the points they possibly can and leave as few as may be to the decision of

the judges; and this for several reasons. First, to find one man, or a few men,

who are sensible persons and capable of legislating and administering justice

is  easier  than  to  find  a  large  number.  Next,  laws  are  made  after  long

consideration, whereas decisions in the courts are given at short notice, which

makes it hard for those who try the case to satisfy the claims of justice and

expediency. The weightiest reason of all is that the decision of the lawgiver is

not particular but prospective and general, whereas members of the assembly

and the jury find it their duty to decide on definite cases brought before them.

They  will  often  have  allowed  themselves  to  be  so  much  influenced  by

feelings of friendship or hatred or self-interest that they lose any clear vision

of the truth and have their judgement obscured by considerations of personal

pleasure or pain. In general, then, the judge should, we say, be allowed to

decide as few things as possible. But questions as to whether something has

happened or has not happened, will be or will not be, is or is not, must of

necessity be left to the judge, since the lawgiver cannot foresee them. If this

is so, it is evident that any one who lays down rules about other matters, such

as what must be the contents of the ‘introduction’ or the ‘narration’ or any of

the other divisions of a speech, is theorizing about non-essentials as if they

belonged to the art. The only question with which these writers here deal is

how to put the judge into a given frame of mind. About the orator’s proper

modes of persuasion they have nothing to tell us; nothing, that is, about how

to gain skill in enthymemes.

  Hence  it  comes  that,  although  the  same  systematic  principles  apply  to

political as to forensic oratory, and although the former is a nobler business,

and  fitter  for  a  citizen,  than  that  which  concerns  the  relations  of  private

individuals, these authors say nothing about political oratory, but try, one and

all, to write treatises on the way to plead in court. The reason for this is that

in  political  oratory  there  is  less  inducement  to  talk  about  nonessentials.

Political oratory is less given to unscrupulous practices than forensic, because

it  treats  of  wider  issues.  In  a  political  debate  the  man  who  is  forming  a

judgement is making a decision about his own vital interests. There is no

need, therefore, to prove anything except that the facts are what the supporterof a measure maintains they are. In forensic oratory this is not enough; to

conciliate the listener is what pays here. It is other people’s affairs that are to

be decided, so that the judges, intent on their own satisfaction and listening

with  partiality,  surrender  themselves  to  the  disputants  instead  of  judging

between them. Hence in many places, as we have said already, irrelevant

speaking is forbidden in the law-courts: in the public assembly those who

have to form a judgement are themselves well able to guard against that.

It is clear, then, that rhetorical study, in its strict sense, is concerned with

the modes of persuasion. Persuasion is clearly a sort of demonstration, since

we  are  most  fully  persuaded  when  we  consider  a  thing  to  have  been

demonstrated. The orator’s demonstration is an enthymeme, and this is, in

general, the most effective of the modes of persuasion. The enthymeme is a

sort of syllogism, and the consideration of syllogisms of all kinds, without

distinction, is the business of dialectic, either of dialectic as a whole or of one

of its branches. It follows plainly, therefore, that he who is best able to see

how and from what elements a syllogism is produced will also be best skilled

in the enthymeme, when he has further learnt what its subject-matter is and in

what respects it differs from the syllogism of strict logic. The true and the

approximately true are apprehended by the same faculty; it may also be noted

that men have a sufficient natural instinct for what is true, and usually do

arrive at the truth. Hence the man who makes a good guess at truth is likely to

make a good guess at probabilities.

It has now been shown that the ordinary writers on rhetoric treat of non-

essentials; it has also been shown why they have inclined more towards the

forensic branch of oratory.

  Rhetoric is useful (1) because things that are true and things that are just

have a natural tendency to prevail over their opposites, so that if the decisions

of  judges  are  not  what  they  ought  to  be,  the  defeat  must  be  due  to  the

speakers themselves, and they must be blamed accordingly. Moreover, (2)

before some audiences not even the possession of the exactest knowledge

will make it easy for what we say to produce conviction. For argument based

on knowledge implies instruction, and there are people whom one cannot

instruct. Here, then, we must use, as our modes of persuasion and argument,

notions possessed by everybody, as we observed in the Topics when dealing

with the way to handle a popular audience. Further, (3) we must be able to

employ  persuasion,  just  as  strict  reasoning  can  be  employed,  on  opposite

sides of a question, not in order that we may in practice employ it in bothways (for we must not make people believe what is wrong), but in order that

we  may  see  clearly  what  the  facts  are,  and  that,  if  another  man  argues

unfairly, we on our part may be able to confute him. No other of the arts

draws opposite conclusions: dialectic and rhetoric alone do this. Both these

arts draw opposite conclusions impartially. Nevertheless, the underlying facts

do not lend themselves equally well to the contrary views. No; things that are

true and things that are better are, by their nature, practically always easier to

prove and easier to believe in. Again, (4) it is absurd to hold that a man ought

to be ashamed of being unable to defend himself with his limbs, but not of

being  unable  to  defend  himself  with  speech  and  reason,  when  the  use  of

rational speech is more distinctive of a human being than the use of his limbs.

And if it be objected that one who uses such power of speech unjustly might

do great harm, that is a charge which may be made in common against all

good  things  except  virtue,  and  above  all  against  the  things  that  are  most

useful, as strength, health, wealth, generalship. A man can confer the greatest

of benefits by a right use of these, and inflict the greatest of injuries by using

them wrongly.

It is clear, then, that rhetoric is not bound up with a single definite class of

subjects, but is as universal as dialectic; it is clear, also, that it is useful. It is

clear, further, that its function is not simply to succeed in persuading, but

rather  to  discover  the  means  of  coming  as  near  such  success  as  the

circumstances of each particular case allow. In this it resembles all other arts.

For example, it is not the function of medicine simply to make a man quite

healthy, but to put him as far as may be on the road to health; it is possible to

give excellent treatment even to those who can never enjoy sound health.

Furthermore, it is plain that it is the function of one and the same art to

discern the real and the apparent means of persuasion, just as it is the function

of dialectic to discern the real and the apparent syllogism. What makes a man

a ‘sophist’ is not his faculty, but his moral purpose. In rhetoric, however, the

term ‘rhetorician’ may describe either the speaker’s knowledge of the art, or

his moral purpose. In dialectic it is different: a man is a ‘sophist’ because he

has a certain kind of moral purpose, a ‘dialectician’ in respect, not of his

moral purpose, but of his faculty.

Let  us  now  try  to  give  some  account  of  the  systematic  principles  of

Rhetoric itself-of the right method and means of succeeding in the object we

set before us. We must make as it were a fresh start, and before going further

define what rhetoric is.2


  Rhetoric may be defined as the faculty of observing in any given case the

available means of persuasion. This is not a function of any other art. Every

other art can instruct or persuade about its own particular subject-matter; for

instance, medicine about what is healthy and unhealthy, geometry about the

properties of magnitudes, arithmetic about numbers, and the same is true of

the  other  arts  and  sciences.  But  rhetoric  we  look  upon  as  the  power  of

observing the means of persuasion on almost any subject presented to us; and

that is why we say that, in its technical character, it is not concerned with any

special or definite class of subjects.

Of the modes of persuasion some belong strictly to the art of rhetoric and

some do not. By the latter I mean such things as are not supplied by the

speaker but are there at the outset-witnesses, evidence given under torture,

written contracts, and so on. By the former I mean such as we can ourselves

construct by means of the principles of rhetoric. The one kind has merely to

be used, the other has to be invented.

Of the modes of persuasion furnished by the spoken word there are three

kinds. The first kind depends on the personal character of the speaker; the

second on putting the audience into a certain frame of mind; the third on the

proof,  or  apparent  proof,  provided  by  the  words  of  the  speech  itself.

Persuasion is achieved by the speaker’s personal character when the speech is

so spoken as to make us think him credible. We believe good men more fully

and more readily than others: this is true generally whatever the question is,

and  absolutely  true  where  exact  certainty  is  impossible  and  opinions  are

divided. This kind of persuasion, like the others, should be achieved by what

the speaker says, not by what people think of his character before he begins

to speak. It is not true, as some writers assume in their treatises on rhetoric,

that the personal goodness revealed by the speaker contributes nothing to his

power of persuasion; on the contrary, his character may almost be called the

most effective means of persuasion he possesses. Secondly, persuasion may

come  through  the  hearers,  when  the  speech  stirs  their  emotions.  Our

judgements when we are pleased and friendly are not the same as when we

are pained and hostile. It is towards producing these effects, as we maintain,

that present-day writers on rhetoric direct the whole of their efforts. This

subject shall be treated in detail when we come to speak of the emotions.

Thirdly,  persuasion  is  effected  through  the  speech  itself  when  we  haveproved a truth or an apparent truth by means of the persuasive arguments

suitable to the case in question.

  There are, then, these three means of effecting persuasion. The man who is

to be in command of them must, it is clear, be able (1) to reason logically, (2)

to understand human character and goodness in their various forms, and (3)

to understand the emotions-that is, to name them and describe them, to know

their  causes  and  the  way  in  which  they  are  excited.  It  thus  appears  that

rhetoric is an offshoot of dialectic and also of ethical studies. Ethical studies

may fairly be called political; and for this reason rhetoric masquerades as

political science, and the professors of it as political experts-sometimes from

want of education, sometimes from ostentation, sometimes owing to other

human failings. As a matter of fact, it is a branch of dialectic and similar to it,

as we said at the outset. Neither rhetoric nor dialectic is the scientific study of

any one separate subject: both are faculties for providing arguments. This is

perhaps a sufficient account of their scope and of how they are related to each

other.

  With regard to the persuasion achieved by proof or apparent proof: just as

in dialectic there is induction on the one hand and syllogism or apparent

syllogism on the other, so it is in rhetoric. The example is an induction, the

enthymeme  is  a  syllogism,  and  the  apparent  enthymeme  is  an  apparent

syllogism. I call the enthymeme a rhetorical syllogism, and the example a

rhetorical induction. Every one who effects persuasion through proof does in

fact use either enthymemes or examples: there is no other way. And since

every one who proves anything at all is bound to use either syllogisms or

inductions (and this is clear to us from the Analytics), it must follow that

enthymemes  are  syllogisms  and  examples  are  inductions.  The  difference

between example and enthymeme is made plain by the passages in the Topics

where induction and syllogism have already been discussed. When we base

the proof of a proposition on a number of similar cases, this is induction in

dialectic,  example  in  rhetoric;  when  it  is  shown  that,  certain  propositions

being  true,  a  further  and  quite  distinct  proposition  must  also  be  true  in

consequence,  whether  invariably  or  usually,  this  is  called  syllogism  in

dialectic, enthymeme in rhetoric. It is plain also that each of these types of

oratory has its advantages. Types of oratory, I say: for what has been said in

the Methodics applies equally well here; in some oratorical styles examples

prevail, in others enthymemes; and in like manner, some orators are better at

the former and some at the latter. Speeches that rely on examples are aspersuasive as the other kind, but those which rely on enthymemes excite the

louder applause. The sources of examples and enthymemes, and their proper

uses, we will discuss later. Our next step is to define the processes themselves

more clearly.

A statement is persuasive and credible either because it is directly self-

evident or because it appears to be proved from other statements that are so.

In either case it is persuasive because there is somebody whom it persuades.

But none of the arts theorize about individual cases. Medicine, for instance,

does not theorize about what will help to cure Socrates or Callias, but only

about what will help to cure any or all of a given class of patients: this alone

is  business:  individual  cases  are  so  infinitely  various  that  no  systematic

knowledge of them is possible. In the same way the theory of rhetoric is

concerned not with what seems probable to a given individual like Socrates

or Hippias, but with what seems probable to men of a given type; and this is

true of dialectic also. Dialectic does not construct its syllogisms out of any

haphazard materials, such as the fancies of crazy people, but out of materials

that call for discussion; and rhetoric, too, draws upon the regular subjects of

debate. The duty of rhetoric is to deal with such matters as we deliberate

upon  without  arts  or  systems  to  guide  us,  in  the  hearing  of  persons  who

cannot take in at a glance a complicated argument, or follow a long chain of

reasoning. The subjects of our deliberation are such as seem to present us

with  alternative  possibilities:  about  things  that  could  not  have  been,  and

cannot now or in the future be, other than they are, nobody who takes them to

be of this nature wastes his time in deliberation.

It is possible to form syllogisms and draw conclusions from the results of

previous syllogisms; or, on the other hand, from premisses which have not

been thus proved, and at the same time are so little accepted that they call for

proof. Reasonings of the former kind will necessarily be hard to follow owing

to their length, for we assume an audience of untrained thinkers; those of the

latter kind will fail to win assent, because they are based on premisses that

are not generally admitted or believed.

The enthymeme and the example must, then, deal with what is in the main

contingent, the example being an induction, and the enthymeme a syllogism,

about such matters. The enthymeme must consist of few propositions, fewer

often than those which make up the normal syllogism. For if any of these

propositions is a familiar fact, there is no need even to mention it; the hearer

adds it himself. Thus, to show that Dorieus has been victor in a contest forwhich the prize is a crown, it is enough to say ‘For he has been victor in the

Olympic games’, without adding ‘And in the Olympic games the prize is a

crown’, a fact which everybody knows.

  There  are  few  facts  of  the  ‘necessary’  type  that  can  form  the  basis  of

rhetorical syllogisms. Most of the things about which we make decisions, and

into which therefore we inquire, present us with alternative possibilities. For

it is about our actions that we deliberate and inquire, and all our actions have

a  contingent  character;  hardly  any  of  them  are  determined  by  necessity.

Again, conclusions that state what is merely usual or possible must be drawn

from premisses that do the same, just as ‘necessary’ conclusions must be

drawn from ‘necessary’ premisses; this too is clear to us from the Analytics.

It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  the  propositions  forming  the  basis  of

enthymemes, though some of them may be ‘necessary’, will most of them be

only usually true. Now the materials of enthymemes are Probabilities and

Signs, which we can see must correspond respectively with the propositions

that are generally and those that are necessarily true. A Probability is a thing

that  usually  happens;  not,  however,  as  some  definitions  would  suggest,

anything whatever that usually happens, but only if it belongs to the class of

the ‘contingent’ or ‘variable’. It bears the same relation to that in respect of

which it is probable as the universal bears to the particular. Of Signs, one

kind bears the same relation to the statement it supports as the particular

bears  to  the  universal,  the  other  the  same  as  the  universal  bears  to  the

particular. The infallible kind is a ‘complete proof’ (tekmerhiou); the fallible

kind  has  no  specific  name.  By  infallible  signs  I  mean  those  on  which

syllogisms proper may be based: and this shows us why this kind of Sign is

called ‘complete proof’: when people think that what they have said cannot

be refuted, they then think that they are bringing forward a ‘complete proof’,

meaning  that  the  matter  has  now  been  demonstrated  and  completed

(peperhasmeuou); for the word ‘perhas’ has the same meaning (of ‘end’ or

‘boundary’) as the word ‘tekmarh’ in the ancient tongue. Now the one kind of

Sign (that which bears to the proposition it supports the relation of particular

to universal) may be illustrated thus. Suppose it were said, ‘The fact that

Socrates was wise and just is a sign that the wise are just’. Here we certainly

have  a  Sign;  but  even  though  the  proposition  be  true,  the  argument  is

refutable, since it does not form a syllogism. Suppose, on the other hand, it

were said, ‘The fact that he has a fever is a sign that he is ill’, or, ‘The fact

that she is giving milk is a sign that she has lately borne a child’. Here wehave the infallible kind of Sign, the only kind that constitutes a complete

proof,  since  it  is  the  only  kind  that,  if  the  particular  statement  is  true,  is

irrefutable. The other kind of Sign, that which bears to the proposition it

supports the relation of universal to particular, might be illustrated by saying,

‘The fact that he breathes fast is a sign that he has a fever’. This argument

also is refutable, even if the statement about the fast breathing be true, since a

man may breathe hard without having a fever.

It has, then, been stated above what is the nature of a Probability, of a Sign,

and of a complete proof, and what are the differences between them. In the

Analytics a more explicit description has been given of these points; it is

there shown why some of these reasonings can be put into syllogisms and

some cannot.

The ‘example’ has already been described as one kind of induction; and

the special nature of the subject-matter that distinguishes it from the other

kinds has also been stated above. Its relation to the proposition it supports is

not that of part to whole, nor whole to part, nor whole to whole, but of part to

part, or like to like. When two statements are of the same order, but one is

more familiar than the other, the former is an ‘example’. The argument may,

for  instance,  be  that  Dionysius,  in  asking  as  he  does  for  a  bodyguard,  is

scheming to make himself a despot. For in the past Peisistratus kept asking

for a bodyguard in order to carry out such a scheme, and did make himself a

despot as soon as he got it; and so did Theagenes at Megara; and in the same

way all other instances known to the speaker are made into examples, in

order to show what is not yet known, that Dionysius has the same purpose in

making  the  same  request:  all  these  being  instances  of  the  one  general

principle, that a man who asks for a bodyguard is scheming to make himself a

despot. We have now described the sources of those means of persuasion

which are popularly supposed to be demonstrative.

  There is an important distinction between two sorts of enthymemes that

has  been  wholly  overlooked  by  almost  everybody-one  that  also  subsists

between the syllogisms treated of in dialectic. One sort of enthymeme really

belongs to rhetoric, as one sort of syllogism really belongs to dialectic; but

the other sort really belongs to other arts and faculties, whether to those we

already  exercise  or  to  those  we  have  not  yet  acquired.  Missing  this

distinction, people fail to notice that the more correctly they handle their

particular  subject  the  further  they  are  getting  away  from  pure  rhetoric  or

dialectic. This statement will be clearer if expressed more fully. I mean thatthe proper subjects of dialectical and rhetorical syllogisms are the things with

which we say the regular or universal Lines of Argument are concerned, that

is to say those lines of argument that apply equally to questions of right

conduct, natural science, politics, and many other things that have nothing to

do with one another. Take, for instance, the line of argument concerned with

‘the  more  or  less’.  On  this  line  of  argument  it  is  equally  easy  to  base  a

syllogism  or  enthymeme  about  any  of  what  nevertheless  are  essentially

disconnected  subjects-right  conduct,  natural  science,  or  anything  else

whatever. But there are also those special Lines of Argument which are based

on such propositions as apply only to particular groups or classes of things.

Thus there are propositions about natural science on which it is impossible to

base any enthymeme or syllogism about ethics, and other propositions about

ethics  on  which  nothing  can  be  based  about  natural  science.  The  same

principle applies throughout. The general Lines of Argument have no special

subject-matter,  and  therefore  will  not  increase  our  understanding  of  any

particular  class  of  things.  On  the  other  hand,  the  better  the  selection  one

makes of propositions suitable for special Lines of Argument, the nearer one

comes, unconsciously, to setting up a science that is distinct from dialectic

and rhetoric. One may succeed in stating the required principles, but one’s

science will be no longer dialectic or rhetoric, but the science to which the

principles thus discovered belong. Most enthymemes are in fact based upon

these  particular  or  special  Lines  of  Argument;  comparatively  few  on  the

common  or  general  kind.  As  in  the  therefore,  so  in  this  work,  we  must

distinguish, in dealing with enthymemes, the special and the general Lines of

Argument on which they are to be founded. By special Lines of Argument I

mean the propositions peculiar to each several class of things, by general

those common to all classes alike. We may begin with the special Lines of

Argument. But, first of all, let us classify rhetoric into its varieties. Having

distinguished these we may deal with them one by one, and try to discover

the elements of which each is composed, and the propositions each must

employ.


3


  Rhetoric  falls  into  three  divisions,  determined  by  the  three  classes  of

listeners to speeches. For of the three elements in speech-making—speaker,

subject, and person addressed—it is the last one, the hearer, that determinesthe  speech’s  end  and  object.  The  hearer  must  be  either  a  judge,  with  a

decision to make about things past or future, or an observer. A member of the

assembly decides about future events, a juryman about past events: while

those  who  merely  decide  on  the  orator’s  skill  are  observers.  From  this  it

follows that there are three divisions of oratory-(1) political, (2) forensic, and

(3) the ceremonial oratory of display.

  Political speaking urges us either to do or not to do something: one of these

two courses is always taken by private counsellors, as well as by men who

address  public  assemblies.  Forensic  speaking  either  attacks  or  defends

somebody: one or other of these two things must always be done by the

parties in a case. The ceremonial oratory of display either praises or censures

somebody. These three kinds of rhetoric refer to three different kinds of time.

The political orator is concerned with the future: it is about things to be done

hereafter  that  he  advises,  for  or  against.  The  party  in  a  case  at  law  is

concerned with the past; one man accuses the other, and the other defends

himself,  with  reference  to  things  already  done.  The  ceremonial  orator  is,

properly speaking, concerned with the present, since all men praise or blame

in view of the state of things existing at the time, though they often find it

useful also to recall the past and to make guesses at the future.

  Rhetoric has three distinct ends in view, one for each of its three kinds.

The political orator aims at establishing the expediency or the harmfulness of

a proposed course of action; if he urges its acceptance, he does so on the

ground that it will do good; if he urges its rejection, he does so on the ground

that it will do harm; and all other points, such as whether the proposal is just

or unjust, honourable or dishonourable, he brings in as subsidiary and relative

to this main consideration. Parties in a law-case aim at establishing the justice

or injustice of some action, and they too bring in all other points as subsidiary

and relative to this one. Those who praise or attack a man aim at proving him

worthy of honour or the reverse, and they too treat all other considerations

with reference to this one.

That the three kinds of rhetoric do aim respectively at the three ends we

have mentioned is shown by the fact that speakers will sometimes not try to

establish anything else. Thus, the litigant will sometimes not deny that a thing

has happened or that he has done harm. But that he is guilty of injustice he

will never admit; otherwise there would be no need of a trial. So too, political

orators  often  make  any  concession  short  of  admitting  that  they  are

recommending their hearers to take an inexpedient course or not to take anexpedient one. The question whether it is not unjust for a city to enslave its

innocent neighbours often does not trouble them at all. In like manner those

who praise or censure a man do not consider whether his acts have been

expedient or not, but often make it a ground of actual praise that he has

neglected  his  own  interest  to  do  what  was  honourable.  Thus,  they  praise

Achilles because he championed his fallen friend Patroclus, though he knew

that this meant death, and that otherwise he need not die: yet while to die thus

was the nobler thing for him to do, the expedient thing was to live on.

It is evident from what has been said that it is these three subjects, more

than any others, about which the orator must be able to have propositions at

his  command.  Now  the  propositions  of  Rhetoric  are  Complete  Proofs,

Probabilities,  and  Signs.  Every  kind  of  syllogism  is  composed  of

propositions, and the enthymeme is a particular kind of syllogism composed

of the aforesaid propositions.

  Since only possible actions, and not impossible ones, can ever have been

done in the past or the present, and since things which have not occurred, or

will not occur, also cannot have been done or be going to be done, it is

necessary for the political, the forensic, and the ceremonial speaker alike to

be able to have at their command propositions about the possible and the

impossible, and about whether a thing has or has not occurred, will or will

not occur. Further, all men, in giving praise or blame, in urging us to accept

or reject proposals for action, in accusing others or defending themselves,

attempt not only to prove the points mentioned but also to show that the good

or the harm, the honour or disgrace, the justice or injustice, is great or small,

either absolutely or relatively; and therefore it is plain that we must also have

at our command propositions about greatness or smallness and the greater or

the lesser-propositions both universal and particular. Thus, we must be able

to say which is the greater or lesser good, the greater or lesser act of justice or

injustice; and so on.

  Such, then, are the subjects regarding which we are inevitably bound to

master  the  propositions  relevant  to  them.  We  must  now  discuss  each

particular class of these subjects in turn, namely those dealt with in political,

in ceremonial, and lastly in legal, oratory.


4


First, then, we must ascertain what are the kinds of things, good or bad,about which the political orator offers counsel. For he does not deal with all

things, but only with such as may or may not take place. Concerning things

which exist or will exist inevitably, or which cannot possibly exist or take

place, no counsel can be given. Nor, again, can counsel be given about the

whole class of things which may or may not take place; for this class includes

some good things that occur naturally, and some that occur by accident; and

about these it is useless to offer counsel. Clearly counsel can only be given on

matters  about  which  people  deliberate;  matters,  namely,  that  ultimately

depend on ourselves, and which we have it in our power to set going. For we

turn  a  thing  over  in  our  mind  until  we  have  reached  the  point  of  seeing

whether we can do it or not.

Now  to  enumerate  and  classify  accurately  the  usual  subjects  of  public

business, and further to frame, as far as possible, true definitions of them is a

task which we must not attempt on the present occasion. For it does not

belong to the art of rhetoric, but to a more instructive art and a more real

branch of knowledge; and as it is, rhetoric has been given a far wider subject-

matter than strictly belongs to it. The truth is, as indeed we have said already,

that rhetoric is a combination of the science of logic and of the ethical branch

of politics; and it is partly like dialectic, partly like sophistical reasoning. But

the more we try to make either dialectic rhetoric not, what they really are,

practical faculties, but sciences, the more we shall inadvertently be destroying

their true nature; for we shall be re-fashioning them and shall be passing into

the region of sciences dealing with definite subjects rather than simply with

words and forms of reasoning. Even here, however, we will mention those

points which it is of practical importance to distinguish, their fuller treatment

falling naturally to political science.

The  main  matters  on  which  all  men  deliberate  and  on  which  political

speakers make speeches are some five in number: ways and means, war and

peace, national defence, imports and exports, and legislation.

As to Ways and Means, then, the intending speaker will need to know the

number and extent of the country’s sources of revenue, so that, if any is being

overlooked, it may be added, and, if any is defective, it may be increased.

Further, he should know all the expenditure of the country, in order that, if

any part of it is superfluous, it may be abolished, or, if any is too large, it may

be  reduced.  For  men  become  richer  not  only  by  increasing  their  existing

wealth  but  also  by  reducing  their  expenditure.  A  comprehensive  view  of

these questions cannot be gained solely from experience in home affairs; inorder  to  advise  on  such  matters  a  man  must  be  keenly  interested  in  the

methods worked out in other lands.

As to Peace and War, he must know the extent of the military strength of

his country, both actual and potential, and also the mature of that actual and

potential strength; and further, what wars his country has waged, and how it

has waged them. He must know these facts not only about his own country,

but also about neighbouring countries; and also about countries with which

war is likely, in order that peace may be maintained with those stronger than

his own, and that his own may have power to make war or not against those

that are weaker. He should know, too, whether the military power of another

country is like or unlike that of his own; for this is a matter that may affect

their relative strength. With the same end in view he must, besides, have

studied the wars of other countries as well as those of his own, and the way

they ended; similar causes are likely to have similar results.

  With regard to National Defence: he ought to know all about the methods

of defence in actual use, such as the strength and character of the defensive

force  and  the  positions  of  the  forts-this  last  means  that  he  must  be  well

acquainted  with  the  lie  of  the  country-in  order  that  a  garrison  may  be

increased if it is too small or removed if it is not wanted, and that the strategic

points may be guarded with special care.

  With regard to the Food Supply: he must know what outlay will meet the

needs of his country; what kinds of food are produced at home and what

imported; and what articles must be exported or imported. This last he must

know in order that agreements and commercial treaties may be made with the

countries concerned. There are, indeed, two sorts of state to which he must

see that his countrymen give no cause for offence, states stronger than his

own, and states with which it is advantageous to trade.

But while he must, for security’s sake, be able to take all this into account,

he must before all things understand the subject of legislation; for it is on a

country’s laws that its whole welfare depends. He must, therefore, know how

many different forms of constitution there are; under what conditions each of

these will prosper and by what internal developments or external attacks each

of them tends to be destroyed. When I speak of destruction through internal

developments I refer to the fact that all constitutions, except the best one of

all, are destroyed both by not being pushed far enough and by being pushed

too far. Thus, democracy loses its vigour, and finally passes into oligarchy,

not only when it is not pushed far enough, but also when it is pushed a greatdeal too far; just as the aquiline and the snub nose not only turn into normal

noses by not being aquiline or snub enough, but also by being too violently

aquiline or snub arrive at a condition in which they no longer look like noses

at all. It is useful, in framing laws, not only to study the past history of one’s

own country, in order to understand which constitution is desirable for it

now, but also to have a knowledge of the constitutions of other nations, and

so to learn for what kinds of nation the various kinds of constitution are

suited. From this we can see that books of travel are useful aids to legislation,

since from these we may learn the laws and customs of different races. The

political speaker will also find the researches of historians useful. But all this

is the business of political science and not of rhetoric.

These,  then,  are  the  most  important  kinds  of  information  which  the

political speaker must possess. Let us now go back and state the premisses

from which he will have to argue in favour of adopting or rejecting measures

regarding these and other matters.


5


It may be said that every individual man and all men in common aim at a

certain end which determines what they choose and what they avoid. This

end, to sum it up briefly, is happiness and its constituents. Let us, then, by

way of illustration only, ascertain what is in general the nature of happiness,

and what are the elements of its constituent parts. For all advice to do things

or not to do them is concerned with happiness and with the things that make

for or against it; whatever creates or increases happiness or some part of

happiness, we ought to do; whatever destroys or hampers happiness, or gives

rise to its opposite, we ought not to do.

We  may  define  happiness  as  prosperity  combined  with  virtue;  or  as

independence of life; or as the secure enjoyment of the maximum of pleasure;

or as a good condition of property and body, together with the power of

guarding one’s property and body and making use of them. That happiness is

one or more of these things, pretty well everybody agrees.

  From this definition of happiness it follows that its constituent parts are:-

good birth, plenty of friends, good friends, wealth, good children, plenty of

children, a happy old age, also such bodily excellences as health, beauty,

strength,  large  stature,  athletic  powers,  together  with  fame,  honour,  good

luck,  and  virtue.  A  man  cannot  fail  to  be  completely  independent  if  hepossesses these internal and these external goods; for besides these there are

no others to have. (Goods of the soul and of the body are internal. Good birth,

friends, money, and honour are external.) Further, we think that he should

possess resources and luck, in order to make his life really secure. As we

have already ascertained what happiness in general is, so now let us try to

ascertain what of these parts of it is.

Now good birth in a race or a state means that its members are indigenous

or ancient: that its earliest leaders were distinguished men, and that from

them have sprung many who were distinguished for qualities that we admire.

The good birth of an individual, which may come either from the male or

the female side, implies that both parents are free citizens, and that, as in the

case of the state, the founders of the line have been notable for virtue or

wealth or something else which is highly prized, and that many distinguished

persons belong to the family, men and women, young and old.

The phrases ‘possession of good children’ and ‘of many children’ bear a

quite clear meaning. Applied to a community, they mean that its young men

are numerous and of good a quality: good in regard to bodily excellences,

such as stature, beauty, strength, athletic powers; and also in regard to the

excellences of the soul, which in a young man are temperance and courage.

Applied to an individual, they mean that his own children are numerous and

have the good qualities we have described. Both male and female are here

included; the excellences of the latter are, in body, beauty and stature; in soul,

self-command and an industry that is not sordid. Communities as well as

individuals should lack none of these perfections, in their women as well as

in their men. Where, as among the Lacedaemonians, the state of women is

bad, almost half of human life is spoilt.

The constituents of wealth are: plenty of coined money and territory; the

ownership of numerous, large, and beautiful estates; also the ownership of

numerous and beautiful implements, live stock, and slaves. All these kinds of

property are our own, are secure, gentlemanly, and useful. The useful kinds

are those that are productive, the gentlemanly kinds are those that provide

enjoyment. By ‘productive’ I mean those from which we get our income; by

‘enjoyable’, those from which we get nothing worth mentioning except the

use of them. The criterion of ‘security’ is the ownership of property in such

places and under such Conditions that the use of it is in our power; and it is

‘our own’ if it is in our own power to dispose of it or keep it. By ‘disposing

of it’ I mean giving it away or selling it. Wealth as a whole consists in usingthings rather than in owning them; it is really the activity-that is, the use-of

property that constitutes wealth.

  Fame means being respected by everybody, or having some quality that is

desired by all men, or by most, or by the good, or by the wise.

  Honour is the token of a man’s being famous for doing good. it is chiefly

and most properly paid to those who have already done good; but also to the

man who can do good in future. Doing good refers either to the preservation

of life and the means of life, or to wealth, or to some other of the good things

which it is hard to get either always or at that particular place or time-for

many  gain  honour  for  things  which  seem  small,  but  the  place  and  the

occasion  account  for  it.  The  constituents  of  honour  are:  sacrifices;

commemoration, in verse or prose; privileges; grants of land; front seats at

civic  celebrations;  state  burial;  statues;  public  maintenance;  among

foreigners,  obeisances  and  giving  place;  and  such  presents  as  are  among

various bodies of men regarded as marks of honour. For a present is not only

the  bestowal  of  a  piece  of  property,  but  also  a  token  of  honour;  which

explains why honour-loving as well as money-loving persons desire it. The

present brings to both what they want; it is a piece of property, which is what

the lovers of money desire; and it brings honour, which is what the lovers of

honour desire.

The excellence of the body is health; that is, a condition which allows us,

while keeping free from disease, to have the use of our bodies; for many

people are ‘healthy’ as we are told Herodicus was; and these no one can

congratulate on their ‘health’, for they have to abstain from everything or

nearly everything that men do.-Beauty varies with the time of life. In a young

man beauty is the possession of a body fit to endure the exertion of running

and of contests of strength; which means that he is pleasant to look at; and

therefore all-round athletes are the most beautiful, being naturally adapted

both for contests of strength and for speed also. For a man in his prime,

beauty is fitness for the exertion of warfare, together with a pleasant but at

the  same  time  formidable  appearance.  For  an  old  man,  it  is  to  be  strong

enough  for  such  exertion  as  is  necessary,  and  to  be  free  from  all  those

deformities of old age which cause pain to others. Strength is the power of

moving some one else at will; to do this, you must either pull, push, lift, pin,

or grip him; thus you must be strong in all of those ways or at least in some.

Excellence  in  size  is  to  surpass  ordinary  people  in  height,  thickness,  and

breadth  by  just  as  much  as  will  not  make  one’s  movements  slower  inconsequence. Athletic excellence of the body consists in size, strength, and

swiftness; swiftness implying strength. He who can fling forward his legs in a

certain way, and move them fast and far, is good at running; he who can grip

and hold down is good at wrestling; he who can drive an adversary from his

ground with the right blow is a good boxer: he who can do both the last is a

good pancratiast, while he who can do all is an ‘all-round’ athlete.

  Happiness in old age is the coming of old age slowly and painlessly; for a

man  has  not  this  happiness  if  he  grows  old  either  quickly,  or  tardily  but

painfully. It arises both from the excellences of the body and from good luck.

If a man is not free from disease, or if he is strong, he will not be free from

suffering; nor can he continue to live a long and painless life unless he has

good luck. There is, indeed, a capacity for long life that is quite independent

of health or strength; for many people live long who lack the excellences of

the body; but for our present purpose there is no use in going into the details

of this.

The terms ‘possession of many friends’ and ‘possession of good friends’

need no explanation; for we define a ‘friend’ as one who will always try, for

your sake, to do what he takes to be good for you. The man towards whom

many  feel  thus  has  many  friends;  if  these  are  worthy  men,  he  has  good

friends.

  ‘Good luck’ means the acquisition or possession of all or most, or the most

important, of those good things which are due to luck. Some of the things that

are  due  to  luck  may  also  be  due  to  artificial  contrivance;  but  many  are

independent of art, as for example those which are due to nature-though, to

be sure, things due to luck may actually be contrary to nature. Thus health

may be due to artificial contrivance, but beauty and stature are due to nature.

All such good things as excite envy are, as a class, the outcome of good luck.

Luck is also the cause of good things that happen contrary to reasonable

expectation: as when, for instance, all your brothers are ugly, but you are

handsome  yourself;  or  when  you  find  a  treasure  that  everybody  else  has

overlooked; or when a missile hits the next man and misses you; or when you

are the only man not to go to a place you have gone to regularly, while the

others go there for the first time and are killed. All such things are reckoned

pieces of good luck.

As to virtue, it is most closely connected with the subject of Eulogy, and

therefore we will wait to define it until we come to discuss that subject.6


It is now plain what our aims, future or actual, should be in urging, and

what in depreciating, a proposal; the latter being the opposite of the former.

Now the political or deliberative orator’s aim is utility: deliberation seeks to

determine not ends but the means to ends, i.e. what it is most useful to do.

Further, utility is a good thing. We ought therefore to assure ourselves of the

main facts about Goodness and Utility in general.

We may define a good thing as that which ought to be chosen for its own

sake; or as that for the sake of which we choose something else; or as that

which is sought after by all things, or by all things that have sensation or

reason, or which will be sought after by any things that acquire reason; or as

that which must be prescribed for a given individual by reason generally, or

is prescribed for him by his individual reason, this being his individual good;

or  as  that  whose  presence  brings  anything  into  a  satisfactory  and  self-

sufficing condition; or as self-sufficiency; or as what produces, maintains, or

entails  characteristics  of  this  kind,  while  preventing  and  destroying  their

opposites.  One  thing  may  entail  another  in  either  of  two  ways-(1)

simultaneously,  (2)  subsequently.  Thus  learning  entails  knowledge

subsequently,  health  entails  life  simultaneously.  Things  are  productive  of

other things in three senses: first as being healthy produces health; secondly,

as food produces health; and thirdly, as exercise does-i.e. it does so usually.

All this being settled, we now see that both the acquisition of good things and

the removal of bad things must be good; the latter entails freedom from the

evil things simultaneously, while the former entails possession of the good

things subsequently. The acquisition of a greater in place of a lesser good, or

of a lesser in place of a greater evil, is also good, for in proportion as the

greater exceeds the lesser there is acquisition of good or removal of evil. The

virtues, too, must be something good; for it is by possessing these that we are

in a good condition, and they tend to produce good works and good actions.

They  must  be  severally  named  and  described  elsewhere.  Pleasure,  again,

must  be  a  good  thing,  since  it  is  the  nature  of  all  animals  to  aim  at  it.

Consequently both pleasant and beautiful things must be good things, since

the former are productive of pleasure, while of the beautiful things some are

pleasant and some desirable in and for themselves.

The  following  is  a  more  detailed  list  of  things  that  must  be  good.

Happiness, as being desirable in itself and sufficient by itself, and as beingthat  for  whose  sake  we  choose  many  other  things.  Also  justice,  courage,

temperance,  magnanimity,  magnificence,  and  all  such  qualities,  as  being

excellences of the soul. Further, health, beauty, and the like, as being bodily

excellences and productive of many other good things: for instance, health is

productive both of pleasure and of life, and therefore is thought the greatest

of goods, since these two things which it causes, pleasure and life, are two of

the things most highly prized by ordinary people. Wealth, again: for it is the

excellence of possession, and also productive of many other good things.

Friends and friendship: for a friend is desirable in himself and also productive

of many other good things. So, too, honour and reputation, as being pleasant,

and productive of many other good things, and usually accompanied by the

presence of the good things that cause them to be bestowed. The faculty of

speech and action; since all such qualities are productive of what is good.

Further-good parts, strong memory, receptiveness, quickness of intuition, and

the like, for all such faculties are productive of what is good. Similarly, all

the sciences and arts. And life: since, even if no other good were the result of

life,  it  is  desirable  in  itself.  And  justice,  as  the  cause  of  good  to  the

community.

The above are pretty well all the things admittedly good. In dealing with

things whose goodness is disputed, we may argue in the following ways:-

That is good of which the contrary is bad. That is good the contrary of which

is to the advantage of our enemies; for example, if it is to the particular

advantage of our enemies that we should be cowards, clearly courage is of

particular value to our countrymen. And generally, the contrary of that which

our enemies desire, or of that at which they rejoice, is evidently valuable.

Hence the passage beginning:


  Surely would Priam exult.


This principle usually holds good, but not always, since it may well be that

our interest is sometimes the same as that of our enemies. Hence it is said that

‘evils draw men together’; that is, when the same thing is hurtful to them

both.

  Further: that which is not in excess is good, and that which is greater than

it should be is bad. That also is good on which much labour or money has

been spent; the mere fact of this makes it seem good, and such a good is

assumed to be an end-an end reached through a long chain of means; and anyend is a good. Hence the lines beginning:


And for Priam (and Troy-town’s folk) should

they leave behind them a boast;


and


Oh, it were shame

To have tarried so long and return empty-handed

as erst we came;


and there is also the proverb about ‘breaking the pitcher at the door’.

That which most people seek after, and which is obviously an object of

contention, is also a good; for, as has been shown, that is good which is

sought after by everybody, and ‘most people’ is taken to be equivalent to

‘everybody’. That which is praised is good, since no one praises what is not

good. So, again, that which is praised by our enemies [or by the worthless]

for when even those who have a grievance think a thing good, it is at once

felt that every one must agree with them; our enemies can admit the fact only

because it is evident, just as those must be worthless whom their friends

censure and their enemies do not. (For this reason the Corinthians conceived

themselves to be insulted by Simonides when he wrote:


  Against the Corinthians hath Ilium no complaint.)


  Again,  that  is  good  which  has  been  distinguished  by  the  favour  of  a

discerning  or  virtuous  man  or  woman,  as  Odysseus  was  distinguished  by

Athena, Helen by Theseus, Paris by the goddesses, and Achilles by Homer.

And, generally speaking, all things are good which men deliberately choose

to do; this will include the things already mentioned, and also whatever may

be  bad  for  their  enemies  or  good  for  their  friends,  and  at  the  same  time

practicable. Things are ‘practicable’ in two senses: (1) it is possible to do

them, (2) it is easy to do them. Things are done ‘easily’ when they are done

either  without  pain  or  quickly:  the  ‘difficulty’  of  an  act  lies  either  in  its

painfulness or in the long time it takes. Again, a thing is good if it is as men

wish; and they wish to have either no evil at an or at least a balance of good

over evil. This last will happen where the penalty is either imperceptible or

slight. Good, too, are things that are a man’s very own, possessed by no oneelse, exceptional; for this increases the credit of having them. So are things

which befit the possessors, such as whatever is appropriate to their birth or

capacity, and whatever they feel they ought to have but lack-such things may

indeed be trifling, but none the less men deliberately make them the goal of

their action. And things easily effected; for these are practicable (in the sense

of being easy); such things are those in which every one, or most people, or

one’s equals, or one’s inferiors have succeeded. Good also are the things by

which  we  shall  gratify  our  friends  or  annoy  our  enemies;  and  the  things

chosen by those whom we admire: and the things for which we are fitted by

nature or experience, since we think we shall succeed more easily in these:

and  those  in  which  no  worthless  man  can  succeed,  for  such  things  bring

greater praise: and those which we do in fact desire, for what we desire is

taken  to  be  not  only  pleasant  but  also  better.  Further,  a  man  of  a  given

disposition  makes  chiefly  for  the  corresponding  things:  lovers  of  victory

make for victory, lovers of honour for honour, money-loving men for money,

and so with the rest. These, then, are the sources from which we must derive

our means of persuasion about Good and Utility.


7


  Since, however, it often happens that people agree that two things are both

useful but do not agree about which is the more so, the next step will be to

treat of relative goodness and relative utility.

A thing which surpasses another may be regarded as being that other thing

plus something more, and that other thing which is surpassed as being what is

contained in the first thing. Now to call a thing ‘greater’ or ‘more’ always

implies a comparison of it with one that is ‘smaller’ or ‘less’, while ‘great’

and ‘small’, ‘much’ and ‘little’, are terms used in comparison with normal

magnitude. The ‘great’ is that which surpasses the normal, the ‘small’ is that

which is surpassed by the normal; and so with ‘many’ and ‘few’.

Now we are applying the term ‘good’ to what is desirable for its own sake

and not for the sake of something else; to that at which all things aim; to what

they would choose if they could acquire understanding and practical wisdom;

and  to  that  which  tends  to  produce  or  preserve  such  goods,  or  is  always

accompanied by them. Moreover, that for the sake of which things are done is

the end (an end being that for the sake of which all else is done), and for each

individual that thing is a good which fulfils these conditions in regard tohimself. It follows, then, that a greater number of goods is a greater good than

one or than a smaller number, if that one or that smaller number is included

in the count; for then the larger number surpasses the smaller, and the smaller

quantity is surpassed as being contained in the larger.

  Again, if the largest member of one class surpasses the largest member of

another, then the one class surpasses the other; and if one class surpasses

another, then the largest member of the one surpasses the largest member of

the other. Thus, if the tallest man is taller than the tallest woman, then men in

general are taller than women. Conversely, if men in general are taller than

women,  then  the  tallest  man  is  taller  than  the  tallest  woman.  For  the

superiority of class over class is proportionate to the superiority possessed by

their largest specimens. Again, where one good is always accompanied by

another, but does not always accompany it, it is greater than the other, for the

use of the second thing is implied in the use of the first. A thing may be

accompanied by another in three ways, either simultaneously, subsequently,

or potentially. Life accompanies health simultaneously (but not health life),

knowledge  accompanies  the  act  of  learning  subsequently,  cheating

accompanies sacrilege potentially, since a man who has committed sacrilege

is always capable of cheating. Again, when two things each surpass a third,

that which does so by the greater amount is the greater of the two; for it must

surpass the greater as well as the less of the other two. A thing productive of

a greater good than another is productive of is itself a greater good than that

other. For this conception of ‘productive of a greater’ has been implied in our

argument.  Likewise,  that  which  is  produced  by  a  greater  good  is  itself  a

greater good; thus, if what is wholesome is more desirable and a greater good

than what gives pleasure, health too must be a greater good than pleasure.

Again, a thing which is desirable in itself is a greater good than a thing which

is  not  desirable  in  itself,  as  for  example  bodily  strength  than  what  is

wholesome,  since  the  latter  is  not  pursued  for  its  own  sake,  whereas  the

former is; and this was our definition of the good. Again, if one of two things

is an end, and the other is not, the former is the greater good, as being chosen

for its own sake and not for the sake of something else; as, for example,

exercise is chosen for the sake of physical well-being. And of two things that

which stands less in need of the other, or of other things, is the greater good,

since it is more self-sufficing. (That which stands ‘less’ in need of others is

that which needs either fewer or easier things.) So when one thing does not

exist or cannot come into existence without a second, while the second canexist without the first, the second is the better. That which does not need

something else is more self-sufficing than that which does, and presents itself

as a greater good for that reason. Again, that which is a beginning of other

things is a greater good than that which is not, and that which is a cause is a

greater good than that which is not; the reason being the same in each case,

namely that without a cause and a beginning nothing can exist or come into

existence. Again, where there are two sets of consequences arising from two

different  beginnings  or  causes,  the  consequences  of  the  more  important

beginning or cause are themselves the more important; and conversely, that

beginning or cause is itself the more important which has the more important

consequences. Now it is plain, from all that has been said, that one thing may

be shown to be more important than another from two opposite points of

view: it may appear the more important (1) because it is a beginning and the

other thing is not, and also (2) because it is not a beginning and the other

thing is-on the ground that the end is more important and is not a beginning.

So Leodamas, when accusing Callistratus, said that the man who prompted

the deed was more guilty than the doer, since it would not have been done if

he had not planned it. On the other hand, when accusing Chabrias he said that

the doer was worse than the prompter, since there would have been no deed

without some one to do it; men, said he, plot a thing only in order to carry it

out.

  Further, what is rare is a greater good than what is plentiful. Thus, gold is a

better thing than iron, though less useful: it is harder to get, and therefore

better worth getting. Reversely, it may be argued that the plentiful is a better

thing than the rare, because we can make more use of it. For what is often

useful surpasses what is seldom useful, whence the saying:


The best of things is water.


  More generally: the hard thing is better than the easy, because it is rarer:

and reversely, the easy thing is better than the hard, for it is as we wish it to

be. That is the greater good whose contrary is the greater evil, and whose loss

affects us more. Positive goodness and badness are more important than the

mere absence of goodness and badness: for positive goodness and badness

are ends, which the mere absence of them cannot be. Further, in proportion as

the functions of things are noble or base, the things themselves are good or

bad: conversely, in proportion as the things themselves are good or bad, theirfunctions also are good or bad; for the nature of results corresponds with that

of  their  causes  and  beginnings,  and  conversely  the  nature  of  causes  and

beginnings corresponds with that of their results. Moreover, those things are

greater goods, superiority in which is more desirable or more honourable.

Thus,  keenness  of  sight  is  more  desirable  than  keenness  of  smell,  sight

generally being more desirable than smell generally; and similarly, unusually

great love of friends being more honourable than unusually great love of

money, ordinary love of friends is more honourable than ordinary love of

money. Conversely, if one of two normal things is better or nobler than the

other, an unusual degree of that thing is better or nobler than an unusual

degree  of  the  other.  Again,  one  thing  is  more  honourable  or  better  than

another if it is more honourable or better to desire it; the importance of the

object of a given instinct corresponds to the importance of the instinct itself;

and  for  the  same  reason,  if  one  thing  is  more  honourable  or  better  than

another, it is more honourable and better to desire it. Again, if one science is

more honourable and valuable than another, the activity with which it deals is

also more honourable and valuable; as is the science, so is the reality that is

its object, each science being authoritative in its own sphere. So, also, the

more valuable and honourable the object of a science, the more valuable and

honourable the science itself is-in consequence. Again, that which would be

judged,  or  which  has  been  judged,  a  good  thing,  or  a  better  thing  than

something else, by all or most people of understanding, or by the majority of

men, or by the ablest, must be so; either without qualification, or in so far as

they use their understanding to form their judgement. This is indeed a general

principle, applicable to all other judgements also; not only the goodness of

things, but their essence, magnitude, and general nature are in fact just what

knowledge and understanding will declare them to be. Here the principle is

applied to judgements of goodness, since one definition of ‘good’ was ‘what

beings that acquire understanding will choose in any given case’: from which

it clearly follows that that thing is hetter which understanding declares to be

so.  That,  again,  is  a  better  thing  which  attaches  to  better  men,  either

absolutely, or in virtue of their being better; as courage is better than strength.

And that is a greater good which would be chosen by a better man, either

absolutely, or in virtue of his being better: for instance, to suffer wrong rather

than to do wrong, for that would be the choice of the juster man. Again, the

pleasanter of two things is the better, since all things pursue pleasure, and

things instinctively desire pleasurable sensation for its own sake; and theseare two of the characteristics by which the ‘good’ and the ‘end’ have been

defined. One pleasure is greater than another if it is more unmixed with pain,

or more lasting. Again, the nobler thing is better than the less noble, since the

noble is either what is pleasant or what is desirable in itself. And those things

also are greater goods which men desire more earnestly to bring about for

themselves or for their friends, whereas those things which they least desire

to bring about are greater evils. And those things which are more lasting are

better than those which are more fleeting, and the more secure than the less;

the enjoyment of the lasting has the advantage of being longer, and that of the

secure has the advantage of suiting our wishes, being there for us whenever

we  like.  Further,  in  accordance  with  the  rule  of  co-ordinate  terms  and

inflexions of the same stem, what is true of one such related word is true of

all.  Thus  if  the  action  qualified  by  the  term  ‘brave’  is  more  noble  and

desirable than the action qualified by the term ‘temperate’, then ‘bravery’ is

more desirable than ‘temperance’ and ‘being brave’ than ‘being temperate’.

That, again, which is chosen by all is a greater good than that which is not,

and that chosen by the majority than that chosen by the minority. For that

which all desire is good, as we have said;’ and so, the more a thing is desired,

the better it is. Further, that is the better thing which is considered so by

competitors or enemies, or, again, by authorized judges or those whom they

select to represent them. In the first two cases the decision is virtually that of

every one, in the last two that of authorities and experts. And sometimes it

may be argued that what all share is the better thing, since it is a dishonour

not to share in it; at other times, that what none or few share is better, since it

is rarer. The more praiseworthy things are, the nobler and therefore the better

they are. So with the things that earn greater honours than others-honour is,

as  it  were,  a  measure  of  value;  and  the  things  whose  absence  involves

comparatively  heavy  penalties;  and  the  things  that  are  better  than  others

admitted  or  believed  to  be  good.  Moreover,  things  look  better  merely  by

being  divided  into  their  parts,  since  they  then  seem  to  surpass  a  greater

number of things than before. Hence Homer says that Meleager was roused to

battle by the thought of


All horrors that light on a folk whose city

is ta’en of their foes,

  When they slaughter the men, when the burg is

  wasted with ravening flame,  When strangers are haling young children to thraldom,

(fair women to shame.)


The same effect is produced by piling up facts in a climax after the manner

of Epicharmus. The reason is partly the same as in the case of division (for

combination too makes the impression of great superiority), and partly that

the original thing appears to be the cause and origin of important results. And

since  a  thing  is  better  when  it  is  harder  or  rarer  than  other  things,  its

superiority  may  be  due  to  seasons,  ages,  places,  times,  or  one’s  natural

powers. When a man accomplishes something beyond his natural power, or

beyond his years, or beyond the measure of people like him, or in a special

way,  or  at  a  special  place  or  time,  his  deed  will  have  a  high  degree  of

nobleness, goodness, and justice, or of their opposites. Hence the epigram on

the victor at the Olympic games:


In time past, heaving a Yoke on my shoulders,

of wood unshaven,

I carried my loads of fish from, Argos to Tegea town.


So Iphicrates used to extol himself by describing the low estate from which

he had risen. Again, what is natural is better than what is acquired, since it is

harder to come by. Hence the words of Homer:


I have learnt from none but mysell.


And the best part of a good thing is particularly good; as when Pericles in

his funeral oration said that the country’s loss of its young men in battle was

‘as if the spring were taken out of the year’. So with those things which are of

service  when  the  need  is  pressing;  for  example,  in  old  age  and  times  of

sickness. And of two things that which leads more directly to the end in view

is the better. So too is that which is better for people generally as well as for a

particular individual. Again, what can be got is better than what cannot, for it

is good in a given case and the other thing is not. And what is at the end of

life is better than what is not, since those things are ends in a greater degree

which are nearer the end. What aims at reality is better than what aims at

appearance. We may define what aims at appearance as what a man will not

choose if nobody is to know of his having it. This would seem to show that to

receive  benefits  is  more  desirable  than  to  confer  them,  since  a  man  willchoose the former even if nobody is to know of it, but it is not the general

view that he will choose the latter if nobody knows of it. What a man wants

to be is better than what a man wants to seem, for in aiming at that he is

aiming more at reality. Hence men say that justice is of small value, since it is

more desirable to seem just than to be just, whereas with health it is not so.

That is better than other things which is more useful than they are for a

number of different purposes; for example, that which promotes life, good

life,  pleasure,  and  noble  conduct.  For  this  reason  wealth  and  health  are

commonly  thought  to  be  of  the  highest  value,  as  possessing  all  these

advantages. Again, that is better than other things which is accompanied both

with  less  pain  and  with  actual  pleasure;  for  here  there  is  more  than  one

advantage; and so here we have the good of feeling pleasure and also the

good of not feeling pain. And of two good things that is the better whose

addition to a third thing makes a better whole than the addition of the other to

the same thing will make. Again, those things which we are seen to possess

are better than those which we are not seen to possess, since the former have

the air of reality. Hence wealth may be regarded as a greater good if its

existence is known to others. That which is dearly prized is better than what

is not-the sort of thing that some people have only one of, though others have

more like it. Accordingly, blinding a one-eyed man inflicts worse injury than

half-blinding a man with two eyes; for the one-eyed man has been robbed of

what he dearly prized.

The grounds on which we must base our arguments, when we are speaking

for or against a proposal, have now been set forth more or less completely.


8


The most important and effective qualification for success in persuading

audiences and speaking well on public affairs is to understand all the forms of

government  and  to  discriminate  their  respective  customs,  institutions,  and

interests. For all men are persuaded by considerations of their interest, and

their interest lies in the maintenance of the established order. Further, it rests

with the supreme authority to give authoritative decisions, and this varies

with  each  form  of  government;  there  are  as  many  different  supreme

authorities  as  there  are  different  forms  of  government.  The  forms  of

government  are  four-democracy,  oligarchy,  aristocracy,  monarchy.  The

supreme right to judge and decide always rests, therefore, with either a part orthe whole of one or other of these governing powers.

A Democracy is a form of government under which the citizens distribute

the offices of state among themselves by lot, whereas under oligarchy there is

a property qualification, under aristocracy one of education. By education I

mean that education which is laid down by the law; for it is those who have

been loyal to the national institutions that hold office under an aristocracy.

These are bound to be looked upon as ‘the best men’, and it is from this fact

that this form of government has derived its name (’the rule of the best’).

Monarchy, as the word implies, is the constitution a in which one man has

authority  over  all.  There  are  two  forms  of  monarchy:  kingship,  which  is

limited  by  prescribed  conditions,  and  ‘tyranny’,  which  is  not  limited  by

anything.

We  must  also  notice  the  ends  which  the  various  forms  of  government

pursue,  since  people  choose  in  practice  such  actions  as  will  lead  to  the

realization of their ends. The end of democracy is freedom; of oligarchy,

wealth; of aristocracy, the maintenance of education and national institutions;

of  tyranny,  the  protection  of  the  tyrant.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  we  must

distinguish those particular customs, institutions, and interests which tend to

realize  the  ideal  of  each  constitution,  since  men  choose  their  means  with

reference  to  their  ends.  But  rhetorical  persuasion  is  effected  not  only  by

demonstrative but by ethical argument; it helps a speaker to convince us, if

we  believe  that  he  has  certain  qualities  himself,  namely,  goodness,  or

goodwill towards us, or both together. Similarly, we should know the moral

qualities characteristic of each form of government, for the special moral

character of each is bound to provide us with our most effective means of

persuasion in dealing with it. We shall learn the qualities of governments in

the same way as we learn the qualities of individuals, since they are revealed

in their deliberate acts of choice; and these are determined by the end that

inspires them.

We have now considered the objects, immediate or distant, at which we are

to aim when urging any proposal, and the grounds on which we are to base

our arguments in favour of its utility. We have also briefly considered the

means and methods by which we shall gain a good knowledge of the moral

qualities and institutions peculiar to the various forms of government-only,

however, to the extent demanded by the present occasion; a detailed account

of the subject has been given in the Politics.9


We have now to consider Virtue and Vice, the Noble and the Base, since

these are the objects of praise and blame. In doing so, we shall at the same

time be finding out how to make our hearers take the required view of our

own characters-our second method of persuasion. The ways in which to make

them trust the goodness of other people are also the ways in which to make

them  trust  our  own.  Praise,  again,  may  be  serious  or  frivolous;  nor  is  it

always of a human or divine being but often of inanimate things, or of the

humblest of the lower animals. Here too we must know on what grounds to

argue,  and  must,  therefore,  now  discuss  the  subject,  though  by  way  of

illustration only.

The Noble is that which is both desirable for its own sake and also worthy

of praise; or that which is both good and also pleasant because good. If this is

a true definition of the Noble, it follows that virtue must be noble, since it is

both a good thing and also praiseworthy. Virtue is, according to the usual

view,  a  faculty  of  providing  and  preserving  good  things;  or  a  faculty  of

conferring many great benefits, and benefits of all kinds on all occasions. The

forms  of  Virtue  are  justice,  courage,  temperance,  magnificence,

magnanimity, liberality, gentleness, prudence, wisdom. If virtue is a faculty

of beneficence, the highest kinds of it must be those which are most useful to

others, and for this reason men honour most the just and the courageous,

since courage is useful to others in war, justice both in war and in peace. Next

comes liberality; liberal people let their money go instead of fighting for it,

whereas other people care more for money than for anything else. Justice is

the  virtue  through  which  everybody  enjoys  his  own  possessions  in

accordance with the law; its opposite is injustice, through which men enjoy

the possessions of others in defiance of the law. Courage is the virtue that

disposes men to do noble deeds in situations of danger, in accordance with

the  law  and  in  obedience  to  its  commands;  cowardice  is  the  opposite.

Temperance is the virtue that disposes us to obey the law where physical

pleasures are concerned; incontinence is the opposite. Liberality disposes us

to spend money for others’ good; illiberality is the opposite. Magnanimity is

the virtue that disposes us to do good to others on a large scale; [its opposite

is meanness of spirit]. Magnificence is a virtue productive of greatness in

matters involving the spending of money. The opposites of these two are

smallness of spirit and meanness respectively. Prudence is that virtue of theunderstanding  which  enables  men  to  come  to  wise  decisions  about  the

relation  to  happiness  of  the  goods  and  evils  that  have  been  previously

mentioned.

The above is a sufficient account, for our present purpose, of virtue and

vice  in  general,  and  of  their  various  forms.  As  to  further  aspects  of  the

subject,  it  is  not  difficult  to  discern  the  facts;  it  is  evident  that  things

productive of virtue are noble, as tending towards virtue; and also the effects

of virtue, that is, the signs of its presence and the acts to which it leads. And

since the signs of virtue, and such acts as it is the mark of a virtuous man to

do  or  have  done  to  him,  are  noble,  it  follows  that  all  deeds  or  signs  of

courage, and everything done courageously, must be noble things; and so

with what is just and actions done justly. (Not, however, actions justly done

to us; here justice is unlike the other virtues; ‘justly’ does not always mean

‘nobly’; when a man is punished, it is more shameful that this should be

justly than unjustly done to him). The same is true of the other virtues. Again,

those actions are noble for which the reward is simply honour, or honour

more than money. So are those in which a man aims at something desirable

for some one else’s sake; actions good absolutely, such as those a man does

for his country without thinking of himself; actions good in their own nature;

actions that are not good simply for the individual, since individual interests

are selfish. Noble also are those actions whose advantage may be enjoyed

after death, as opposed to those whose advantage is enjoyed during one’s

lifetime: for the latter are more likely to be for one’s own sake only. Also, all

actions done for the sake of others, since less than other actions are done for

one’s own sake; and all successes which benefit others and not oneself; and

services done to one’s benefactors, for this is just; and good deeds generally,

since they are not directed to one’s own profit. And the opposites of those

things of which men feel ashamed, for men are ashamed of saying, doing, or

intending to do shameful things. So when Alcacus said


  Something I fain would say to thee,

  Only shame restraineth me,


  Sappho wrote


If for things good and noble thou wert yearning,

If to speak baseness were thy tongue not burning,No load of shame would on thine eyelids weigh;

  What thou with honour wishest thou wouldst say.


  Those  things,  also,  are  noble  for  which  men  strive  anxiously,  without

feeling fear; for they feel thus about the good things which lead to fair fame.

Again, one quality or action is nobler than another if it is that of a naturally

finer being: thus a man’s will be nobler than a woman’s. And those qualities

are noble which give more pleasure to other people than to their possessors;

hence the nobleness of justice and just actions. It is noble to avenge oneself

on one’s enemies and not to come to terms with them; for requital is just, and

the just is noble; and not to surrender is a sign of courage. Victory, too, and

honour belong to the class of noble things, since they are desirable even when

they yield no fruits, and they prove our superiority in good qualities. Things

that deserve to be remembered are noble, and the more they deserve this, the

nobler they are. So are the things that continue even after death; those which

are always attended by honour; those which are exceptional; and those which

are possessed by one person alone-these last are more readily remembered

than others. So again are possessions that bring no profit, since they are more

fitting  than  others  for  a  gentleman.  So  are  the  distinctive  qualities  of  a

particular people, and the symbols of what it specially admires, like long hair

in Sparta, where this is a mark of a free man, as it is not easy to perform any

menial task when one’s hair is long. Again, it is noble not to practise any

sordid craft, since it is the mark of a free man not to live at another’s beck

and call. We are also to assume when we wish either to praise a man or blame

him that qualities closely allied to those which he actually has are identical

with  them;  for  instance,  that  the  cautious  man  is  cold-blooded  and

treacherous, and that the stupid man is an honest fellow or the thick-skinned

man  a  good-tempered  one.  We  can  always  idealize  any  given  man  by

drawing on the virtues akin to his actual qualities; thus we may say that the

passionate  and  excitable  man  is  ‘outspoken’;  or  that  the  arrogant  man  is

‘superb’ or ‘impressive’. Those who run to extremes will be said to possess

the  corresponding  good  qualities;  rashness  will  be  called  courage,  and

extravagance generosity. That will be what most people think; and at the

same time this method enables an advocate to draw a misleading inference

from the motive, arguing that if a man runs into danger needlessly, much

more will he do so in a noble cause; and if a man is open-handed to any one

and every one, he will be so to his friends also, since it is the extreme form ofgoodness to be good to everybody.

We must also take into account the nature of our particular audience when

making a speech of praise; for, as Socrates used to say, ‘it is not difficult to

praise the Athenians to an Athenian audience.’ If the audience esteems a

given quality, we must say that our hero has that quality, no matter whether

we are addressing Scythians or Spartans or philosophers. Everything, in fact,

that is esteemed we are to represent as noble. After all, people regard the two

things as much the same.

All actions are noble that are appropriate to the man who does them: if, for

instance, they are worthy of his ancestors or of his own past career. For it

makes for happiness, and is a noble thing, that he should add to the honour he

already has. Even inappropriate actions are noble if they are better and nobler

than the appropriate ones would be; for instance, if one who was just an

average person when all went well becomes a hero in adversity, or if he

becomes better and easier to get on with the higher he rises. Compare the

saying of lphicrates, ‘Think what I was and what I am’; and the epigram on

the victor at the Olympic games,


In time past, bearing a yoke on my shoulders,

of wood unshaven,


and the encomium of Simonides,


A woman whose father, whose husband, whose

  brethren were princes all.


  Since we praise a man for what he has actually done, and fine actions are

distinguished from others by being intentionally good, we must try to prove

that our hero’s noble acts are intentional. This is all the easier if we can make

out  that  he  has  often  acted  so  before,  and  therefore  we  must  assert

coincidences and accidents to have been intended. Produce a number of good

actions, all of the same kind, and people will think that they must have been

intended, and that they prove the good qualities of the man who did them.

  Praise  is  the  expression  in  words  of  the  eminence  of  a  man’s  good

qualities, and therefore we must display his actions as the product of such

qualities.  Encomium  refers  to  what  he  has  actually  done;  the  mention  of

accessories, such as good birth and education, merely helps to make our story

credible-good fathers are likely to have good sons, and good training is likelyto produce good character. Hence it is only when a man has already done

something that we bestow encomiums upon him. Yet the actual deeds are

evidence of the doer’s character: even if a man has not actually done a given

good thing, we shall bestow praise on him, if we are sure that he is the sort of

man who would do it. To call any one blest is, it may be added, the same

thing as to call him happy; but these are not the same thing as to bestow

praise and encomium upon him; the two latter are a part of ‘calling happy’,

just as goodness is a part of happiness.

To praise a man is in one respect akin to urging a course of action. The

suggestions which would be made in the latter case become encomiums when

differently expressed. When we know what action or character is required,

then, in order to express these facts as suggestions for action, we have to

change and reverse our form of words. Thus the statement ‘A man should be

proud not of what he owes to fortune but of what he owes to himself’, if put

like this, amounts to a suggestion; to make it into praise we must put it thus,

‘Since he is proud not of what he owes to fortune but of what he owes to

himself.’ Consequently, whenever you want to praise any one, think what

you  would  urge  people  to  do;  and  when  you  want  to  urge  the  doing  of

anything,  think  what  you  would  praise  a  man  for  having  done.  Since

suggestion may or may not forbid an action, the praise into which we convert

it must have one or other of two opposite forms of expression accordingly.

  There are, also, many useful ways of heightening the effect of praise. We

must, for instance, point out that a man is the only one, or the first, or almost

the only one who has done something, or that he has done it better than any

one else; all these distinctions are honourable. And we must, further, make

much of the particular season and occasion of an action, arguing that we

could hardly have looked for it just then. If a man has often achieved the

same success, we must mention this; that is a strong point; he himself, and

not luck, will then be given the credit. So, too, if it is on his account that

observances have been devised and instituted to encourage or honour such

achievements as his own: thus we may praise Hippolochus because the first

encomium ever made was for him, or Harmodius and Aristogeiton because

their statues were the first to be put up in the market-place. And we may

censure bad men for the opposite reason.

  Again, if you cannot find enough to say of a man himself, you may pit him

against  others,  which  is  what  Isocrates  used  to  do  owing  to  his  want  of

familiarity with forensic pleading. The comparison should be with famousmen; that will strengthen your case; it is a noble thing to surpass men who are

themselves great. It is only natural that methods of ‘heightening the effect’

should be attached particularly to speeches of praise; they aim at proving

superiority  over  others,  and  any  such  superiority  is  a  form  of  nobleness.

Hence if you cannot compare your hero with famous men, you should at least

compare him with other people generally, since any superiority is held to

reveal  excellence.  And,  in  general,  of  the  lines  of  argument  which  are

common  to  all  speeches,  this  ‘heightening  of  effect’  is  most  suitable  for

declamations, where we take our hero’s actions as admitted facts, and our

business is simply to invest these with dignity and nobility. ‘Examples’ are

most  suitable  to  deliberative  speeches;  for  we  judge  of  future  events  by

divination  from  past  events.  Enthymemes  are  most  suitable  to  forensic

speeches; it is our doubts about past events that most admit of arguments

showing why a thing must have happened or proving that it did happen.

The above are the general lines on which all, or nearly all, speeches of

praise or blame are constructed. We have seen the sort of thing we must bear

in mind in making such speeches, and the materials out of which encomiums

and censures are made. No special treatment of censure and vituperation is

needed. Knowing the above facts, we know their contraries; and it is out of

these that speeches of censure are made.


10


We have next to treat of Accusation and Defence, and to enumerate and

describe the ingredients of the syllogisms used therein. There are three things

we must ascertain first, the nature and number of the incentives to wrong-

doing; second, the state of mind of wrongdoers; third, the kind of persons

who are wronged, and their condition. We will deal with these questions in

order. But before that let us define the act of ‘wrong-doing’.

We may describe ‘wrong-doing’ as injury voluntarily inflicted contrary to

law. ‘Law’ is either special or general. By special law I mean that written law

which regulates the life of a particular community; by general law, all those

unwritten principles which are supposed to be acknowledged everywhere.

We  do  things  ‘voluntarily’  when  we  do  them  consciously  and  without

constraint. (Not all voluntary acts are deliberate, but all deliberate acts are

conscious-no one is ignorant of what he deliberately intends.) The causes of

our deliberately intending harmful and wicked acts contrary to law are (1)vice,  (2)  lack  of  self-control.  For  the  wrongs  a  man  does  to  others  will

correspond to the bad quality or qualities that he himself possesses. Thus it is

the mean man who will wrong others about money, the profligate in matters

of physical pleasure, the effeminate in matters of comfort, and the coward

where  danger  is  concerned-his  terror  makes  him  abandon  those  who  are

involved in the same danger. The ambitious man does wrong for sake of

honour, the quick-tempered from anger, the lover of victory for the sake of

victory, the embittered man for the sake of revenge, the stupid man because

he has misguided notions of right and wrong, the shameless man because he

does not mind what people think of him; and so with the rest-any wrong that

any one does to others corresponds to his particular faults of character.

  However, this subject has already been cleared up in part in our discussion

of  the  virtues  and  will  be  further  explained  later  when  we  treat  of  the

emotions.  We  have  now  to  consider  the  motives  and  states  of  mind  of

wrongdoers, and to whom they do wrong.

Let us first decide what sort of things people are trying to get or avoid

when they set about doing wrong to others. For it is plain that the prosecutor

must consider, out of all the aims that can ever induce us to do wrong to our

neighbours, how many, and which, affect his adversary; while the defendant

must consider how many, and which, do not affect him. Now every action of

every person either is or is not due to that person himself. Of those not due to

himself some are due to chance, the others to necessity; of these latter, again,

some are due to compulsion, the others to nature. Consequently all actions

that are not due to a man himself are due either to chance or to nature or to

compulsion. All actions that are due to a man himself and caused by himself

are due either to habit or to rational or irrational craving. Rational craving is a

craving for good, i.e. a wish-nobody wishes for anything unless he thinks it

good. Irrational craving is twofold, viz. anger and appetite.

  Thus every action must be due to one or other of seven causes: chance,

nature,  compulsion,  habit,  reasoning,  anger,  or  appetite.  It  is  superfluous

further to distinguish actions according to the doers’ ages, moral states, or the

like; it is of course true that, for instance, young men do have hot tempers and

strong appetites; still, it is not through youth that they act accordingly, but

through anger or appetite. Nor, again, is action due to wealth or poverty; it is

of course true that poor men, being short of money, do have an appetite for it,

and that rich men, being able to command needless pleasures, do have an

appetite for such pleasures: but here, again, their actions will be due not towealth or poverty but to appetite. Similarly, with just men, and unjust men,

and all others who are said to act in accordance with their moral qualities,

their  actions  will  really  be  due  to  one  of  the  causes  mentioned-either

reasoning or emotion: due, indeed, sometimes to good dispositions and good

emotions, and sometimes to bad; but that good qualities should be followed

by good emotions, and bad by bad, is merely an accessory fact-it is no doubt

true that the temperate man, for instance, because he is temperate, is always

and at once attended by healthy opinions and appetites in regard to pleasant

things, and the intemperate man by unhealthy ones. So we must ignore such

distinctions.  Still  we  must  consider  what  kinds  of  actions  and  of  people

usually go together; for while there are no definite kinds of action associated

with the fact that a man is fair or dark, tall or short, it does make a difference

if  he  is  young  or  old,  just  or  unjust.  And,  generally  speaking,  all  those

accessory qualities that cause distinctions of human character are important:

e.g. the sense of wealth or poverty, of being lucky or unlucky. This shall be

dealt with later-let us now deal first with the rest of the subject before us.

The things that happen by chance are all those whose cause cannot be

determined, that have no purpose, and that happen neither always nor usually

nor in any fixed way. The definition of chance shows just what they are.

Those things happen by nature which have a fixed and internal cause; they

take place uniformly, either always or usually. There is no need to discuss in

exact detail the things that happen contrary to nature, nor to ask whether they

happen in some sense naturally or from some other cause; it would seem that

chance  is  at  least  partly  the  cause  of  such  events.  Those  things  happen

through compulsion which take place contrary to the desire or reason of the

doer, yet through his own agency. Acts are done from habit which men do

because  they  have  often  done  them  before.  Actions  are  due  to  reasoning

when, in view of any of the goods already mentioned, they appear useful

either as ends or as means to an end, and are performed for that reason: ‘for

that reason,’ since even licentious persons perform a certain number of useful

actions, but because they are pleasant and not because they are useful. To

passion and anger are due all acts of revenge. Revenge and punishment are

different things. Punishment is inflicted for the sake of the person punished;

revenge for that of the punisher, to satisfy his feelings. (What anger is will be

made clear when we come to discuss the emotions.) Appetite is the cause of

all actions that appear pleasant. Habit, whether acquired by mere familiarity

or by effort, belongs to the class of pleasant things, for there are many actionsnot  naturally  pleasant  which  men  perform  with  pleasure,  once  they  have

become used to them. To sum up then, all actions due to ourselves either are

or  seem  to  be  either  good  or  pleasant.  Moreover,  as  all  actions  due  to

ourselves  are  done  voluntarily  and  actions  not  due  to  ourselves  are  done

involuntarily, it follows that all voluntary actions must either be or seem to be

either  good  or  pleasant;  for  I  reckon  among  goods  escape  from  evils  or

apparent evils and the exchange of a greater evil for a less (since these things

are in a sense positively desirable), and likewise I count among pleasures

escape  from  painful  or  apparently  painful  things  and  the  exchange  of  a

greater pain for a less. We must ascertain, then, the number and nature of the

things that are useful and pleasant. The useful has been previously examined

in  connexion  with  political  oratory;  let  us  now  proceed  to  examine  the

pleasant. Our various definitions must be regarded as adequate, even if they

are not exact, provided they are clear.


11


We may lay it down that Pleasure is a movement, a movement by which

the soul as a whole is consciously brought into its normal state of being; and

that Pain is the opposite. If this is what pleasure is, it is clear that the pleasant

is what tends to produce this condition, while that which tends to destroy it,

or to cause the soul to be brought into the opposite state, is painful. It must

therefore  be  pleasant  as  a  rule  to  move  towards  a  natural  state  of  being,

particularly when a natural process has achieved the complete recovery of

that natural state. Habits also are pleasant; for as soon as a thing has become

habitual,  it  is  virtually  natural;  habit  is  a  thing  not  unlike  nature;  what

happens  often  is  akin  to  what  happens  always,  natural  events  happening

always, habitual events often. Again, that is pleasant which is not forced on

us; for force is unnatural, and that is why what is compulsory, painful, and it

has been rightly said


All that is done on compulsion is bitterness unto the soul.


So  all  acts  of  concentration,  strong  effort,  and  strain  are  necessarily

painful; they all involve compulsion and force, unless we are accustomed to

them, in which case it is custom that makes them pleasant. The opposites to

these are pleasant; and hence ease, freedom from toil, relaxation, amusement,rest, and sleep belong to the class of pleasant things; for these are all free

from any element of compulsion. Everything, too, is pleasant for which we

have the desire within us, since desire is the craving for pleasure. Of the

desires some are irrational, some associated with reason. By irrational I mean

those which do not arise from any opinion held by the mind. Of this kind are

those known as ‘natural’; for instance, those originating in the body, such as

the desire for nourishment, namely hunger and thirst, and a separate kind of

desire answering to each kind of nourishment; and the desires connected with

taste and sex and sensations of touch in general; and those of smell, hearing,

and vision. Rational desires are those which we are induced to have; there are

many things we desire to see or get because we have been told of them and

induced to believe them good. Further, pleasure is the consciousness through

the senses of a certain kind of emotion; but imagination is a feeble sort of

sensation, and there will always be in the mind of a man who remembers or

expects something an image or picture of what he remembers or expects. If

this is so, it is clear that memory and expectation also, being accompanied by

sensation, may be accompanied by pleasure. It follows that anything pleasant

is either present and perceived, past and remembered, or future and expected,

since we perceive present pleasures, remember past ones, and expect future

ones. Now the things that are pleasant to remember are not only those that,

when actually perceived as present, were pleasant, but also some things that

were  not,  provided  that  their  results  have  subsequently  proved  noble  and

good. Hence the words


  Sweet ‘tis when rescued to remember pain,


and


  Even his griefs are a joy long after to one that remembers

All that he wrought and endured.


The reason of this is that it is pleasant even to be merely free from evil.

The things it is pleasant to expect are those that when present are felt to

afford us either great delight or great but not painful benefit. And in general,

all the things that delight us when they are present also do so, as a rule, when

we merely remember or expect them. Hence even being angry is pleasant-

Homer said of wrath that  Sweeter it is by far than the honeycomb dripping with sweetness-


for no one grows angry with a person on whom there is no prospect of

taking vengeance, and we feel comparatively little anger, or none at all, with

those  who  are  much  our  superiors  in  power.  Some  pleasant  feeling  is

associated with most of our appetites we are enjoying either the memory of a

past pleasure or the expectation of a future one, just as persons down with

fever, during their attacks of thirst, enjoy remembering the drinks they have

had and looking forward to having more. So also a lover enjoys talking or

writing about his loved one, or doing any little thing connected with him; all

these things recall him to memory and make him actually present to the eye

of  imagination.  Indeed,  it  is  always  the  first  sign  of  love,  that  besides

enjoying some one’s presence, we remember him when he is gone, and feel

pain as well as pleasure, because he is there no longer. Similarly there is an

element of pleasure even in mourning and lamentation for the departed. There

is grief, indeed, at his loss, but pleasure in remembering him and as it were

seeing him before us in his deeds and in his life. We can well believe the poet

when he says


He spake, and in each man’s heart he awakened

the love of lament.


  Revenge, too, is pleasant; it is pleasant to get anything that it is painful to

fail to get, and angry people suffer extreme pain when they fail to get their

revenge; but they enjoy the prospect of getting it. Victory also is pleasant,

and not merely to ‘bad losers’, but to every one; the winner sees himself in

the light of a champion, and everybody has a more or less keen appetite for

being  that.  The  pleasantness  of  victory  implies  of  course  that  combative

sports and intellectual contests are pleasant (since in these it often happens

that  some  one  wins)  and  also  games  like  knuckle-bones,  ball,  dice,  and

draughts.  And  similarly  with  the  serious  sports;  some  of  these  become

pleasant when one is accustomed to them; while others are pleasant from the

first, like hunting with hounds, or indeed any kind of hunting. For where

there  is  competition,  there  is  victory.  That  is  why  forensic  pleading  and

debating contests are pleasant to those who are accustomed to them and have

the capacity for them. Honour and good repute are among the most pleasant

things of all; they make a man see himself in the character of a fine fellow,