the bronze. The same phenomenon occurs in other instances too.

It is clear, then, from the foregoing account, that ‘combination’ occurs,

what it is, to what it is due, and what kind of thing is ‘combinable’. The

phenomenon depends upon the fact that some things are such as to be (a)

reciprocally  susceptible  and  (b)  readily  adaptable  in  shape,  i.e.  easily

divisible.  For  such  things  can  be  ‘combined’  without  its  being  necessary

either  that  they  should  have  been  destroyed  or  that  they  should  survive

absolutely unaltered: and their ‘combination’ need not be a ‘composition’,

nor merely ‘relative to perception’. On the contrary: anything is ‘combinable’

which, being readily adaptable in shape, is such as to suffer action and to act;

and  it  is  ‘combinable  with’  another  thing  similarly  characterized  (for  the

‘combinable’  is  relative  to  the  ‘combinable’);  and  ‘combination’  is

unification of the ‘combinables’, resulting from their ‘alteration’.                On Generation and Corruption, Book II


Translated by H. H. Joachim


<

div class="section" title="1">


1


We have explained under what conditions ‘combination’, ‘contact’, and

‘action-passion’ are attributable to the things which undergo natural change.

Further,  we  have  discussed  ‘unqualified’  coming-to-be  and  passing-away,

and explained under what conditions they are predicable, of what subject, and

owing  to  what  cause.  Similarly,  we  have  also  discussed  ‘alteration’,  and

explained  what  ‘altering’  is  and  how  it  differs  from  coming-to-be  and

passing-away. But we have still to investigate the so-called ‘elements’ of

bodies.

For the complex substances whose formation and maintenance are due to

natural processes all presuppose the perceptible bodies as the condition of

their coming-to-be and passing-away: but philosophers disagree in regard to

the  matter  which  underlies  these  perceptible  bodies.  Some  maintain  it  is

single, supposing it to be, e.g. Air or Fire, or an ‘intermediate’ between these

two  (but  still  a  body  with  a  separate  existence).  Others,  on  the  contrary,

postulate  two  or  more  materials-ascribing  to  their  ‘association’  and

‘dissociation’, or to their ‘alteration’, the coming-to-be and passing-away of

things. (Some, for instance, postulate Fire and Earth: some add Air, making

three: and some, like Empedocles, reckon Water as well, thus postulating

four.)

Now we may agree that the primary materials, whose change (whether it

be  ‘association  and  dissociation’  or  a  process  of  another  kind)  results  in

coming-to-be and passingaway, are rightly described as ‘originative sources,

i.e. elements’. But (i) those thinkers are in error who postulate, beside the

bodies we have mentioned, a single matter-and that corporeal and separable

matter. For this ‘body’ of theirs cannot possibly exist without a ‘perceptible

contrariety’: this ‘Boundless’, which some thinkers identify with the ‘originalreal’, must be either light or heavy, either cold or hot. And (ii) what Plato has

written in the Timaeus is not based on any precisely-articulated conception.

For he has not stated clearly whether his ‘Omnirecipient” exists in separation

from the ‘elements’; nor does he make any use of it. He says, indeed, that it is

a  substratum  prior  to  the  so-called  ‘elements’-underlying  them,  as  gold

underlies the things that are fashioned of gold. (And yet this comparison, if

thus expressed, is itself open to criticism. Things which come-to-be and pass-

away cannot be called by the name of the material out of which they have

come-tobe: it is only the results of ‘alteration’ which retain the name of the

substratum whose ‘alterations’ they are. However, he actually says’ that the

truest account is to affirm that each of them is “gold”’.) Nevertheless he

carries his analysis of the ‘elements’-solids though they are-back to ‘planes’,

and it is impossible for ‘the Nurse’ (i.e. the primary matter) to be identical

with ‘the planes’.

Our  own  doctrine  is  that  although  there  is  a  matter  of  the  perceptible

bodies (a matter out of which the so-called ‘clements’ come-to-be), it has no

separate existence, but is always bound up with a contrariety. A more precise

account of these presuppositions has been given in another work’: we must,

however, give a detailed explanation of the primary bodies as well, since they

too are similarly derived from the matter. We must reckon as an ‘originative

source’ and as ‘primary’ the matter which underlies, though it is inseparable

from, the contrary qualities: for the hot’ is not matter for ‘the cold’ nor ‘the

cold’ for ‘the hot’, but the substratum is matter for them both. We therefore

have to recognize three ‘originative sources’: firstly that which potentially

perceptible body, secondly the contrarieties (I mean, e.g. heat and cold), and

thirdly Fire, Water, and the like. Only ‘thirdly’, however: for these bodies

change into one another (they are not immutable as Empedocles and other

thinkers assert, since ‘alteration’ would then have been impossible), whereas

the contrarieties do not change.

  Nevertheless, even so the question remains: What sorts of contrarieties,

and how many of them, are to be accounted ‘originative sources’ of body?

For all the other thinkers assume and use them without explaining why they

are these or why they are just so many.

<

div class="section" title="2">


2  Since, then, we are looking for ‘originative sources’ of perceptible body;

and since ‘perceptible’ is equivalent to ‘tangible’, and ‘tangible’ is that of

which  the  perception  is  touch;  it  is  clear  that  not  all  the  contrarieties

constitute ‘forms’ and ‘originative sources’ of body, but only those which

correspond to touch. For it is in accordance with a contrariety-a contrariety,

moreover,  of  tangible  qualities-that  the  primary  bodies  are  differentiated.

That  is  why  neither  whiteness  (and  blackness),  nor  sweetness  (and

bitterness),  nor  (similarly)  any  quality  belonging  to  the  other  perceptible

contrarieties either, constitutes an ‘element’. And yet vision is prior to touch,

so that its object also is prior to the object of touch. The object of vision,

however, is a quality of tangible body not qua tangible, but qua something

else-qua something which may well be naturally prior to the object of touch.

  Accordingly, we must segregate the tangible differences and contrarieties,

and distinguish which amongst them are primary. Contrarieties correlative to

touch are the following: hot-cold, dry-moist, heavy-light, hard-soft, viscous-

brittle, rough-smooth, coarse-fine. Of these (i) heavy and light are neither

active nor susceptible. Things are not called ‘heavy’ and ‘light’ because they

act  upon,  or  suffer  action  from,  other  things.  But  the  ‘elements’  must  be

reciprocally active and susceptible, since they ‘combine’ and are transformed

into one another. On the other hand (ii) hot and cold, and dry and moist, are

terms,  of  which  the  first  pair  implies  power  to  act  and  the  second  pair

susceptibility. ‘Hot’ is that which ‘associates’ things of the same kind (for

‘dissociating’, which people attribute to Fire as its function, is ‘associating’

things of the same class, since its effect is to eliminate what is foreign), while

‘cold’  is  that  which  brings  together,  i.e.  ‘associates’,  homogeneous  and

heterogeneous things alike. And moise is that which, being readily adaptable

in shape, is not determinable by any limit of its own: while ‘dry’ is that which

is readily determinable by its own limit, but not readily adaptable in shape.

  From  moist  and  dry  are  derived  (iii)  the  fine  and  coarse,  viscous  and

brittle, hard and soft, and the remaining tangible differences. For (a) since the

moist  has  no  determinate  shape,  but  is  readily  adaptable  and  follows  the

outline of that which is in contact with it, it is characteristic of it to be ‘such

as to fill up’. Now ‘the fine’ is ‘such as to fill up’. For the fine’ consists of

subtle particles; but that which consists of small particles is ‘such as to fill

up’, inasmuch as it is in contact whole with whole-and ‘the fine’ exhibits this

character in a superlative degree. Hence it is evident that the fine derives

from the moist, while the coarse derives from the dry. Again (b) the viscous’derives from the moist: for ‘the viscous’ (e.g. oil) is a ‘moist’ modified in a

certain way. ‘The brittle’, on the other hand, derives from the dry: for ‘brittle’

is  that  which  is  completely  dry-so  completely,  that  its  solidification  has

actually been due to failure of moisture. Further (c) ‘the soft’ derives from the

moist. For ‘soft’ is that which yields to pressure by retiring into itself, though

it does not yield by total displacement as the moist does-which explains why

the moist is not ‘soft’, although ‘the soft’ derives from the moist. ‘The hard’,

on the other hand, derives from the dry: for ‘hard’ is that which is solidified,

and the solidified is dry.

The terms ‘dry’ and ‘moist’ have more senses than one. For ‘the damp’, as

well as the moist, is opposed to the dry: and again ‘the solidified’, as well as

the dry, is opposed to the moist. But all these qualities derive from the dry

and moist we mentioned first.’ For (i) the dry is opposed to the damp: i.e.

‘damp’ is that which has foreign moisture on its surface (’sodden’ being that

which is penetrated to its core), while ‘dry’ is that which has lost foreign

moisture. Hence it is evident that the damp will derive from the moist, and

‘the dry’ which is opposed to it will derive from the primary dry. Again (ii)

the ‘moist’ and the solidified derive in the same way from the primary pair.

For  ‘moist’  is  that  which  contains  moisture  of  its-own  deep  within  it

(’sodden’ being that which is deeply penetrated by foreign mosture), whereas

‘solidigied’ is that which has lost this inner moisture. Hence these too derive

from the primary pair, the ‘solidified’ from the dry and the ‘solidified’ from

the dry the ‘liquefiable’ from the moist.

It is clear, then, that all the other differences reduce to the first four, but

that these admit of no further reduction. For the hot is not essentially moist or

dry,  nor  the  moist  essentially  hot  or  cold:  nor  are  the  cold  and  the  dry

derivative forms, either of one another or of the hot and the moist. Hence

these must be four.

<

div class="section" title="3">


3


The elementary qualities are four, and any four terms can be combined in

six couples. Contraries, however, refuse to be coupled: for it is impossible for

the same thing to be hot and cold, or moist and dry. Hence it is evident that

the ‘couplings’ of the elementary qualities will be four: hot with dry andmoist with hot, and again cold with dry and cold with moist. And these four

couples have attached themselves to the apparently ‘simple’ bodies (Fire, Air,

Water, and Earth) in a manner consonant with theory. For Fire is hot and dry,

whereas Air is hot and moist (Air being a sort of aqueous vapour); and Water

is  cold  and  moist,  while  Earth  is  cold  and  dry.  Thus  the  differences  are

reasonably distributed among the primary bodies, and the number of the latter

is consonant with theory. For all who make the simple bodies ‘elements’

postulate either one, or two, or three, or four. Now (i) those who assert there

is  one  only,  and  then  generate  everything  else  by  condensation  and

rarefaction, are in effect making their ‘originative sources’ two, viz. the rare

and the dense, or rather the hot and the cold: for it is these which are the

moulding forces, while the ‘one’ underlies them as a ‘matter’. But (ii) those

who postulate two from the start-as Parmenides postulated Fire and Earth-

make the intermediates (e.g. Air and Water) blends of these. The same course

is followed (iii) by those who advocate three. (We may compare what Plato

does in Me Divisions’: for he makes ‘the middle’ a blend.) Indeed, there is

practically no difference between those who postulate two and those who

postulate three, except that the former split the middle ‘element’ into two,

while the latter treat it as only one. But (iv) some advocate four from the

start, e.g. Empedocles: yet he too draws them together so as to reduce them to

the two, for he opposes all the others to Fire.

In fact, however, fire and air, and each of the bodies we have mentioned,

are not simple, but blended. The ‘simple’ bodies are indeed similar in nature

to them, but not identical with them. Thus the ‘simple’ body corresponding to

fire is ‘such-as-fire, not fire: that which corresponds to air is ‘such-as-air’:

and so on with the rest of them. But fire is an excess of heat, just as ice is an

excess  of  cold.  For  freezing  and  boiling  are  excesses  of  heat  and  cold

respectively. Assuming, therefore, that ice is a freezing of moist and cold, fire

analogously  will  be  a  boiling  of  dry  and  hot:  a  fact,  by  the  way,  which

explains why nothing comes-to-be either out of ice or out of fire.

The ‘simple’ bodies, since they are four, fall into two pairs which belong to

the two regions, each to each: for Fire and Air are forms of the body moving

towards  the  ‘limit’,  while  Earth  and  Water  are  forms  of  the  body  which

moves  towards  the  ‘centre’.  Fire  and  Earth,  moreover,  are  extremes  and

purest: Water and Air, on the contrary are intermediates and more like blends.

And, further, the members of either pair are contrary to those of the other,

Water being contrary to Fire and Earth to Air; for the qualities constitutingWater  and  Earth  are  contrary  to  those  that  constitute  Fire  and  Air.

Nevertheless,  since  they  are  four,  each  of  them  is  characterized  par

excellence a single quality: Earth by dry rather than by cold, Water by cold

rather than by moist, Air by moist rather than by hot, and Fire by hot rather

than by dry.

<

div class="section" title="4">


4


It has been established before’ that the coming-to-be of the ‘simple’ bodies

is  reciprocal.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  manifest,  even  on  the  evidence  of

perception, that they do come-to-be: for otherwise there would not have been

‘alteration,  since  ‘alteration’  is  change  in  respect  to  the  qualities  of  the

objects of touch. Consequently, we must explain (i) what is the manner of

their reciprocal transformation, and (ii) whether every one of them can come

to-be out of every one-or whether some can do so, but not others.

Now it is evident that all of them are by nature such as to change into one

another: for coming-to-be is a change into contraries and out of contraries,

and the ‘elements’ all involve a contrariety in their mutual relations because

their distinctive qualities are contrary. For in some of them both qualities are

contrary-e.g. in Fire and Water, the first of these being dry and hot, and the

second moist and cold: while in others one of the qualities (though only one)

is  contrary-e.g.  in  Air  and  Water,  the  first  being  moist  and  hot,  and  the

second moist and cold. It is evident, therefore, if we consider them in general,

that every one is by nature such as to come-to-be out of every one: and when

we come to consider them severally, it is not difficult to see the manner in

which their transformation is effected. For, though all will result from all,

both the speed and the facility of their conversion will differ in degree.

  Thus (i) the process of conversion will be quick between those which have

interchangeable ‘complementary factors’, but slow between those which have

none. The reason is that it is easier for a single thing to change than for many.

Air, e.g. will result from Fire if a single quality changes: for Fire, as we saw,

is hot and dry while Air is hot and moist, so that there will be Air if the dry

be overcome by the moist. Again, Water will result from Air if the hot be

overcome by the cold: for Air, as we saw, is hot and moist while Water is

cold and moist, so that, if the hot changes, there will be Water. So too, in thesame manner, Earth will result from Water and Fire from Earth, since the two

‘elements’  in  both  these  couples  have  interchangeable  ‘complementary

factors’. For Water is moist and cold while Earth is cold and dry-so that, if

the moist be overcome, there will be Earth: and again, since Fire is dry and

hot while Earth is cold and dry, Fire will result from Earth if the cold pass-

away.

It is evident, therefore, that the coming-to-be of the ‘simple’ bodies will be

cyclical;  and  that  this  cyclical  method  of  transformation  is  the  easiest,

because the consecutive ‘clements’ contain interchangeable ‘complementary

factors’. On the other hand (ii) the transformation of Fire into Water and of

Air into Earth, and again of Water and Earth into Fire and Air respectively,

though possible, is more difficult because it involves the change of more

qualities. For if Fire is to result from Water, both the cold and the moist must

pass-away: and again, both the cold and the dry must pass-away if Air is to

result from Earth. So’ too, if Water and Earth are to result from Fire and Air

respectively-both qualities must change.

This second method of coming-to-be, then, takes a longer time. But (iii) if

one quality in each of two ‘elements’ pass-away, the transformation, though

easier, is not reciprocal. Still, from Fire plus Water there will result Earth and

Air, and from Air plus Earth Fire and Water. For there will be Air, when the

cold of the Water and the dry of the Fire have passed-away (since the hot of

the latter and the moist of the former are left): whereas, when the hot of the

Fire and the moist of the Water have passed-away, there will be Earth, owing

to the survival of the dry of the Fire and the cold of the Water. So, too, in the

same Way, Fire and Water will result from Air plus Earth. For there will be

Water, when the hot of the Air and the dry of the Earth have passed-away

(since the moist of the former and the cold of the latter are left): whereas,

when the moist of the Air and the cold of the Earth have passed-away, there

will be Fire, owing to the survival of the hot of the Air and the dry of the

Earth-qualities essentially constitutive of Fire. Moreover, this mode of Fire’s

coming-to-be is confirmed by perception. For flame is par excellence Fire:

but flame is burning smoke, and smoke consists of Air and Earth.

No  transformation,  however,  into  any  of  the  ‘simple’  bodies  can  result

from the passingaway of one elementary quality in each of two ‘elements’

when they are taken in their consecutive order, because either identical or

contrary qualities are left in the pair: but no ‘simple’ body can be formed

either out of identical, or out of contrary, qualities. Thus no ‘simple’ bodywould result, if the dry of Fire and the moist of Air were to pass-away: for the

hot is left in both. On the other hand, if the hot pass-away out both, the

contraries-dry and moist-are left. A similar result will occur in all the others

too: for all the consecutive ‘elements’ contain one identical, and one contrary,

quality.  Hence,  too,  it  clearly  follows  that,  when  one  of  the  consecutive

‘elements’  is  transformed  into  one,  the  coming-to-be  is  effected  by  the

passing-away of a single quality: whereas, when two of them are transformed

into a third, more than one quality must have passedaway.

We have stated that all the ‘elements’ come-to-be out of any one of them;

and we have explained the manner in which their mutual conversion takes

place.  Let  us  nevertheless  supplement  our  theory  by  the  following

speculations concerning them.

<

div class="section" title="5">


5


If  Water,  Air,  and  the  like  are  a  ‘matter’  of  which  the  natural  bodies

consist, as some thinkers in fact believe, these ‘clements’ must be either one,

or two, or more. Now they cannot all of them be one-they cannot, e.g. all be

Air or Water or Fire or Earth-because ‘Change is into contraries’. For if they

all were Air, then (assuming Air to persist) there will be ‘alteration’ instead

of coming-to-be. Besides, nobody supposes a single ‘element’ to persist, as

the basis of all, in such a way that it is Water as well as Air (or any other

‘element’)  at  the  same  time.  So  there  will  be  a  certain  contrariety,  i.e.  a

differentiating quality: and the other member of this contrariety, e.g. heat,

will belong to some other ‘element’, e.g. to Fire. But Fire will certainly not be

‘hot Air’. For a change of that kind (a) is ‘alteration’, and (b) is not what is

observed. Moreover (c) if Air is again to result out of the Fire, it will do so by

the  conversion  of  the  hot  into  its  contrary:  this  contrary,  therefore,  will

belong to Air, and Air will be a cold something: hence it is impossible for

Fire to be ‘hot Air’, since in that case the same thing will be simultaneously

hot and cold. Both Fire and Air, therefore, will be something else which is the

same; i.e. there will be some ‘matter’, other than either, common to both.

The same argument applies to all the ‘elements’, proving that there is no

single one of them out of which they all originate. But neither is there, beside

these  four,  some  other  body  from  which  they  originate-a  somethingintermediate, e.g. between Air and Water (coarser than Air, but finer than

Water), or between Air and Fire (coarser than Fire, but finer than Air). For

the supposed ‘intermediate’ will be Air and Fire when a pair of contrasted

qualities is added to it: but, since one of every two contrary qualities is a

‘privation’,  the  ‘intermediate’  never  can  exist-as  some  thinkers  assert  the

‘Boundless’ or the ‘Environing’ exists-in isolation. It is, therefore, equally

and indifferently any one of the ‘elements’, or else it is nothing.

  Since, then, there is nothing-at least, nothing perceptible-prior to these,

they must be all. That being so, either they must always persist and not be

transformable into one another: or they must undergo transformation-either

all of them, or some only (as Plato wrote in the Timacus).’ Now it has been

proved before that they must undergo reciprocal transformation. It has also

been proved that the speed with which they come-to-be, one out of another, is

not uniform-since the process of reciprocal transformation is relatively quick

between the ‘elements’ with a ‘complementary factor’, but relatively slow

between  those  which  possess  no  such  factor.  Assuming,  then,  that  the

contrariety, in respect to which they are transformed, is one, the elements’

will inevitably be two: for it is ‘matter’ that is the ‘mean’ between the two

contraries,  and  matter  is  imperceptible  and  inseparable  from  them.  Since,

however, the ‘elements’ are seen to be more than two, the contrarieties must

at the least be two. But the contrarieties being two, the ‘elements’ must be

four (as they evidently are) and cannot be three: for the couplings’ are four,

since, though six are possible, the two in which the qualities are contrary to

one another cannot occur.

  These subjects have been discussed before:’ but the following arguments

will make it clear that, since the ‘elements’ are transformed into one another,

it is impossible for any one of them-whether it be at the end or in the middle-

to be an ‘originative source’ of the rest. There can be no such ‘originative

element’ at the ends: for all of them would then be Fire or Earth, and this

theory amounts to the assertion that all things are made of Fire or Earth. Nor

can  a  ‘middle-element’  be  such  an  originative  source’-as  some  thinkers

suppose that Air is transformed both into Fire and into Water, and Water both

into Air and into Earth, while the ‘end-elements’ are not further transformed

into one another. For the process must come to a stop, and cannot continue ad

infinitum  in  a  straight  line  in  either  direction,  since  otherwise  an  infinite

number of contrarieties would attach to the single ‘element’. Let E stand for

Earth, W for Water, A for Air, and F for Fire. Then (i) since A is transformedinto  F  and  W,  there  will  be  a  contrariety  belonging  to  A  F.  Let  these

contraries be whiteness and blackness. Again (ii) since A is transformed into

W, there will be another contrariety: for W is not the same as F. Let this

second  contrariety  be  dryness  and  moistness,  D  being  dryness  and  M

moistness. Now if, when A is transformed into W, the ‘white’ persists, Water

will be moist and white: but if it does not persist, Water will be black since

change is into contraries. Water, therefore, must be either white or black. Let

it  then  be  the  first.  On  similar  grounds,  therefore,  D  (dryness)  will  also

belong  to  F.  Consequently  F  (Fire)  as  well  as  Air  will  be  able  to  be

transformed into Water: for it has qualities contrary to those of Water, since

Fire was first taken to be black and then to be dry, while Water was moist and

then showed itself white. Thus it is evident that all the ‘elements’ will be able

to  be  transformed  out  of  one  another;  and  that,  in  the  instances  we  have

taken, E (Earth) also will contain the remaining two ‘complementary factors’,

viz. the black and the moist (for these have not yet been coupled).

We have dealt with this last topic before the thesis we set out to prove.

That thesis-viz. that the process cannot continue ad infinitum-will be clear

from the following considerations. If Fire (which is represented by F) is not

to revert, but is to be transformed in turn into some other ‘element’ (e.g. into

Q), a new contrariety, other than those mentioned, will belong to Fire and Q:

for it has been assumed that Q is not the same as any of the four, E W A and

F. Let K, then, belong to F and Y to Q. Then K will belong to all four, E W A

and F: for they are transformed into one another. This last point, however, we

may admit, has not yet been proved: but at any rate it is clear that if Q is to be

transformed in turn into yet another ‘element’, yet another contrariety will

belong not only to Q but also to F (Fire). And, similarly, every addition of a

new ‘element’ will carry with it the attachment of a new contrariety to the

preceding  elements’.  Consequently,  if  the  ‘elements’  are  infinitely  many,

there  will  also  belong  to  the  single  ‘element’  an  infinite  number  of

contrarieties. But if that be so, it will be impossible to define any ‘element’:

impossible also for any to come-to-be. For if one is to result from another, it

will have to pass through such a vast number of contrarieties-and indeed even

more than any determinate number. Consequently (i) into some ‘elements’

transformation will never be effected-viz. if the intermediates are infinite in

number, as they must be if the ‘elements’ are infinitely many: further (ii)

there will not even be a transformation of Air into Fire, if the contrarieties are

infinitely many: moreover (iii) all the ‘elements’ become one. For all thecontrarieties of the ‘elements’ above F must belong to those below F, and

vice versa: hence they will all be one.

<

div class="section" title="6">


6


As for those who agree with Empedocles that the ‘elements’ of body are

more than one, so that they are not transformed into one another-one may

well wonder in what sense it is open to them to maintain that the ‘elements’

are comparable. Yet Empedocles says ‘For these are all not only equal… ’

If  it  is  meant  that  they  are  comparable  in  their  amount,  all  the

‘comparables’  must  possess  an  identical  something  whereby  they  are

measured. If, e.g. one pint of Water yields ten of Air, both are measured by

the same unit; and therefore both were from the first an identical something.

On the other hand, suppose (ii) they are not ‘comparable in their amount’ in

the sense that so-much of the one yields so much of the other, but comparable

in ‘power of action (a pint of Water, e.g. having a power of cooling equal to

that of ten pints of Air); even so, they are ‘comparable in their amount’,

though not qua ‘amount’ but qua Iso-much power’. There is also (iii) a third

possibility.  Instead  of  comparing  their  powers  by  the  measure  of  their

amount, they might be compared as terms in a ‘correspondence’: e.g. ‘as x is

hot, so correspondingly y is white’. But ‘correspondence’, though it means

equality in the quantum, means similarity in a quale. Thus it is manifestly

absurd  that  the  ‘simple’  bodies,  though  they  are  not  transformable,  are

comparable not merely as ‘corresponding’, but by a measure of their powers;

i.e. that so-much Fire is comparable with many times-that-amount of Air, as

being  ‘equally’  or  ‘similarly’  hot.  For  the  same  thing,  if  it  be  greater  in

amount, will, since it belongs to the same kind, have its ratio correspondingly

increased.

A  further  objection  to  the  theory  of  Empedocles  is  that  it  makes  even

growth impossible, unless it be increase by addition. For his Fire increases by

Fire: ‘And Earth increases its own frame and Ether increases Ether.” These,

however, are cases of addition: but it is not by addition that growing things

are believed to increase. And it is far more difficult for him to account for the

coming-to-be which occurs in nature. For the things which come-to-be by

natural process all exhibit, in their coming-to-be, a uniformity either absoluteor highly regular: while any exceptions any results which are in accordance

neither with the invariable nor with the general rule are products of chance

and luck. Then what is the cause determining that man comes-to-be from

man,  that  wheat  (instead  of  an  olive)  comes-to-be  from  wheat,  either

invariably or generally? Are we to say ‘Bone comes-to-be if the “elements”

be  put  together  in  such-and  such  a  manner’?  For,  according  to  his  own

estatements, nothing comes-to-be from their ‘fortuitous consilience’, but only

from their ‘consilience’ in a certain proportion. What, then, is the cause of

this proportional consilience? Presumably not Fire or Earth. But neither is it

Love and Strife: for the former is a cause of ‘association’ only, and the latter

only of ‘dissociation’. No: the cause in question is the essential nature of each

thing-not merely to quote his words) ‘a mingling and a divorce of what has

been  mingled’.  And  chance,  not  proportion,  ‘is  the  name  given  to  these

occurrences’: for things can be ‘mingled’ fortuitously.

The cause, therefore, of the coming-to-be of the things which owe their

existence to nature is that they are in such-and-such a determinate condition:

and it is this which constitutes, the ‘nature’ of each thing-a ‘nature’ about

which he says nothing. What he says, therefore, is no explanation of ‘nature’.

Moreover,  it  is  this  which  is  both  ‘the  excellence’  of  each  thing  and  its

‘good’: whereas he assigns the whole credit to the ‘mingling’. (And yet the

‘elements’ at all events are ‘dissociated’ not by Strife, but by Love: since the

‘elements’ are by nature prior to the Deity, and they too are Deities.)

  Again,  his  account  of  motion  is  vague.  For  it  is  not  an  adequate

explanation to say that ‘Love and Strife set things moving, unless the very

nature of Love is a movement of this kind and the very nature of Strife a

movement of that kind. He ought, then, either to have defined or to have

postulated these characteristic movements, or to have demonstrated them-

whether strictly or laxly or in some other fashion. Moreover, since (a) the

‘simple’ bodies appear to move ‘naturally’ as well as by compulsion, i.e. in a

manner  contrary  to  nature  (fire,  e.g.  appears  to  move  upwards  without

compulsion, though it appears to move by compulsion downwards); and since

(b)  what  is  ‘natural’  is  contrary  to  that  which  is  due  to  compulsion,  and

movement by compulsion actually occurs; it follows that ‘natural movement’

can also occur in fact. Is this, then, the movement that Love sets going? No:

for, on the contrary, the ‘natural movement’ moves Earth downwards and

resembles ‘dissociation’, and Strife rather than Love is its cause-so that in

general, too, Love rather than Strife would seem to be contrary to nature. Andunless Love or Strife is actually setting them in motion, the ‘simple’ bodies

themselves have absolutely no movement or rest. But this is paradoxical: and

what is more, they do in fact obviously move. For though Strife ‘dissociated’,

it was not by Strife that the ‘Ether’ was borne upwards. On the contrary,

sometimes he attributes its movement to something like chance (’For thus, as

it ran, it happened to meet them then, though often otherwise”), while at other

times he says it is the nature of Fire to be borne upwards, but ‘the Ether’ (to

quote his words) ‘sank down upon the Earth with long roots’. With such

statements, too, he combines the assertion that the Order of the World is the

same now, in the reign of Strife, as it was formerly in the reign of Love.

What, then, is the ‘first mover’ of the ‘elements’? What causes their motion?

Presumably  not  Love  and  Strife:  on  the  contrary,  these  are  causes  of  a

particular motion, if at least we assume that ‘first mover’ to be an originative

source’.

An additional paradox is that the soul should consist of the ‘elements’, or

that it should be one of them. How are the soul’s ‘alterations’ to take Place?

How, e.g. is the change from being musical to being unmusical, or how is

memory or forgetting, to occur? For clearly, if the soul be Fire, only such

modifications will happen to it as characterize Fire qua Fire: while if it be

compounded out of the elements’, only the corporeal modifications will occur

in it. But the changes we have mentioned are none of them corporeal.

<

div class="section" title="7">


7


The discussion of these difficulties, however, is a task appropriate to a

different investigation:’ let us return to the ‘elements’ of which bodies are

composed.  The  theories  that  ‘there  is  something  common  to  all  the

“elements”’, and that they are reciprocally transformed’, are so related that

those who accept either are bound to accept the other as well. Those, on the

other hand, who do not make their coming-to-be reciprocal-who refuse to

suppose that any one of the ‘elements’ comes-to-be out of any other taken

singly, except in the sense in which bricks come-to-be out of a wall-are faced

with a paradox. How, on their theory, are flesh and bones or any of the other

compounds to result from the ‘elements’ taken together?

  Indeed, the point we have raised constitutes a problem even for those whogenerate the ‘elements’ out of one another. In what manner does anything

other  than,  and  beside,  the  ‘elements’  come-to-be  out  of  them?  Let  me

illustrate  my  meaning.  Water  can  come-to-be  out  of  Fire  and  Fire  out  of

Water; for their substralum is something common to them both. But flesh too,

presumably, and marrow come-to-be out of them. How, then, do such things

come to-be? For (a) how is the manner of their coming-to-be to be conceived

by those who maintain a theory like that of Empedocles? They must conceive

it as composition-just as a wall comes-to-be out of bricks and stones: and the

‘Mixture’, of which they speak, will be composed of the ‘elements’, these

being preserved in it unaltered but with their small particles juxtaposed each

to each. That will be the manner, presumably, in which flesh and every other

compound results from the ‘elements’. Consequently, it follows that Fire and

Water do not come-to-be ‘out of any and every part of flesh’. For instance,

although a sphere might come-to-be out of this part of a lump of wax and a

pyramid out of some other part, it was nevertheless possible for either figure

to  have  come-to-be  out  of  either  part  indifferently:  that  is  the  manner  of

coming-to-be when ‘both Fire and Water come-to-be out of any and every

part of flesh’. Those, however, who maintain the theory in question, are not at

liberty to conceive that ‘both come-to-be out of flesh’ in that manner, but

only as a stone and a brick ‘both come-to-be out of a wall’-viz. each out of a

different place or part. Similarly (b) even for those who postulate a single

matter  of  their  ‘elements’  there  is  a  certain  difficulty  in  explaining  how

anything is to result from two of them taken together-e.g. from ‘cold’ and

hot’, or from Fire and Earth. For if flesh consists of both and is neither of

them,  nor  again  is  a  ‘composition’  of  them  in  which  they  are  preserved

unaltered, what alternative is left except to identify the resultant of the two

‘elements’  with  their  matter?  For  the  passingaway  of  either  ‘element’

produces either the other or the matter.

  Perhaps we may suggest the following solution. (i) There are differences of

degree in hot and cold. Although, therefore, when either is fully real without

qualification, the other will exist potentially; yet, when neither exists in the

full completeness of its being, but both by combining destroy one another’s

excesses so that there exist instead a hot which (for a ‘hot’) is cold and a cold

which (for a ‘cold’) is hot; then what results from these two contraries will be

neither  their  matter,  nor  either  of  them  existing  in  its  full  reality  without

qualification.  There  will  result  instead  an  ‘intermediate’:  and  this

‘intermediate’, according as it is potentially more hot than cold or vice versa,will possess a power-of-heating that is double or triple its power-of-cooling,

or otherwise related thereto in some similar ratio. Thus all the other bodies

will result from the contraries, or rather from the ‘elements’, in so far as these

have been ‘combined’: while the elements’ will result from the contraries, in

so  far  as  these  ‘exist  potentially’  in  a  special  sense-not  as  matter  ‘exists

potentially’, but in the sense explained above. And when a thing comes-to-be

in this manner, the process is cobination’; whereas what comes-to-be in the

other  manner  is  matter.  Moreover  (ii)  contraries  also  ‘suffer  action’,  in

accordance  with  the  disjunctively-articulated  definition  established  in  the

early  part  of  this  work.’  For  the  actually-hot  is  potentially-cold  and  the

actually cold potentially-hot; so that hot and cold, unless they are equally

balanced,  are  transformed  into  one  another  (and  all  the  other  contraries

behave in a similar way). It is thus, then, that in the first place the ‘elements’

are transformed; and that (in the second place) out of the ‘elements’ there

come-to-be flesh and bones and the like-the hot becoming cold and the cold

becoming hot when they have been brought to the ‘mean’. For at the ‘mean’

is neither hot nor cold. The ‘mean’, however, is of considerable extent and

not indivisible. Similarly, it is qua reduced to a ‘mean’ condition that the dry

and the moist, as well as the contraries we have used as examples, produce

flesh and bone and the remaining compounds.

<

div class="section" title="8">


8


All the compound bodies-all of which exist in the region belonging to the

central body-are composed of all the ‘simple’ bodies. For they all contain

Earth  because  every  ‘simple’  body  is  to  be  found  specially  and  most

abundantly  in  its  own  place.  And  they  all  contain  Water  because  (a)  the

compound must possess a definite outline and Water, alone of the ‘simple’

bodies, is readily adaptable in shape: moreover (b) Earth has no power of

cohesion  without  the  moist.  On  the  contrary,  the  moist  is  what  holds  it

together;  for  it  would  fall  to  pieces  if  the  moist  were  eliminated  from  it

completely.

  They contain Earth and Water, then, for the reasons we have given: and

they contain Air and Fire, because these are contrary to Earth and Water

(Earth being contrary to Air and Water to Fire, in so far as one Substance canbe ‘contrary’ to another). Now all compounds presuppose in their coming-to-

be constituents which are contrary to one another: and in all compounds there

is contained one set of the contrasted extremes. Hence the other set must be

contained in them also, so that every compound will include all the ‘simple’

bodies.

  Additional evidence seems to be furnished by the food each compound

takes. For all of them are fed by substances which are the same as their

constituents, and all of them are fed by more substances than one. Indeed,

even the plants, though it might be thought they are fed by one substance

only, viz. by Water, are fed by more than one: for Earth has been mixed with

the  Water.  That  is  why  farmers  too  endeavour  to  mix  before  watering.

Although food is akin to the matter, that which is fed is the ‘figure’-i.e. the

‘form’ taken along with the matter. This fact enables us to understand why,

whereas all the ‘simple’ bodies come-to-be out of one another, Fire is the

only one of them which (as our predecessors also assert) ‘is fed’. For Fire

alone-or more than all the rest-is akin to the ‘form’ because it tends by nature

to be borne towards the limit. Now each of them naturally tends to be borne

towards its own place; but the ‘figure’-i.e. the ‘form’-Of them all is at the

limits.

  Thus we have explained that all the compound bodies are composed of all

the ‘simple’ bodies.

<

div class="section" title="9">


9


  Since some things are such as to come-to-be and pass-away, and since

coming-to-be in fact occurs in the region about the centre, we must explain

the number and the nature of the ‘originative sources’ of all coming-to-be

alike:  for  a  grasp  of  the  true  theory  of  any  universal  facilitates  the

understanding of its specific forms.

The ‘originative sources’, then, of the things which come-to-be are equal in

number to, and identical in kind with, those in the sphere of the eternal and

primary things. For there is one in the sense of ‘matter’, and a second in the

sense  of  ‘form’:  and,  in  addition,  the  third  ‘originative  source’  must  be

present as well. For the two first are not sufficient to bring things into being,

any more than they are adequate to account for the primary things.Now cause, in the sense of material origin, for the things which are such as

to  come-to-be  is  ‘that  which  can  be-and-not-be’:  and  this  is  identical

with’that which can come-to-be-and-pass-away’, since the latter, while it is at

one time, at another time is not. (For whereas some things are of necessity,

viz. the eternal things, others of necessity are not. And of these two sets of

things,  since  they  cannot  diverge  from  the  necessity  of  their  nature,  it  is

impossible for the first not to he and impossible for the second to he. Other

things, however, can both be and not he.) Hence coming-to-be and passing-

away must occur within the field of ‘that which can be-and not-be’. This,

therefore, is cause in the sense of material origin for the things which are

such as to come-to-be; while cause, in the sense of their ‘end’, is their ‘figure’

or ‘form’-and that is the formula expressing the essential nature of each of

them.

But the third ‘originative source’ must be present as well-the cause vaguely

dreamed of by all our predecessors, definitely stated by none of them. On the

contrary  (a)  some  amongst  them  thought  the  nature  of  ‘the  Forms’  was

adequate  to  account  for  coming-to-be.  Thus  Socrates  in  the  Phaedo  first

blames  everybody  else  for  having  given  no  explanation;  and  then  lays  it

down; that ‘some things are Forms, others Participants in the Forms’, and that

‘while a thing is said to “be” in virtue of the Form, it is said to “come-to-be”

qua sharing in,” to “pass-away” qua “losing,” the ‘Form’. Hence he thinks

that ‘assuming the truth of these theses, the Forms must be causes both of

coming-to-be and of passing-away’. On the other hand (b) there were others

who thought ‘the matter’ was adequate by itself to account for coming-to-be,

since ‘the movement originates from the matter’.

  Neither  of  these  theories,  however,  is  sound.  For  (a)  if  the  Forms  are

causes, why is their generating activity intermittent instead of perpetual and

continuous-since there always are Participants as well as Forms? Besides, in

some instances we see that the cause is other than the Form. For it is the

doctor who implants health and the man of science who implants science,

although ‘Health itself’ and ‘Science itself’ are as well as the Participants:

and  the  same  principle  applies  to  everything  else  that  is  produced  in

accordance with an art. On the other hand (b) to say that ‘matter generates

owing to its movement’ would be, no doubt, more scientific than to make

such statements as are made by the thinkers we have been criticizing. For

what ‘alters’ and transfigures plays a greater part in bringing, things into

being; and we are everywhere accustomed, in the products of nature and ofart alike, to look upon that which can initiate movement as the producing

cause. Nevertheless this second theory is not right either.

  For, to begin with, it is characteristic of matter to suffer action, i.e. to be

moved:  but  to  move,  i.e.  to  act,  belongs  to  a  different  ‘power’.  This  is

obvious both in the things that come-to-be by art and in those that come to-be

by nature. Water does not of itself produce out of itself an animal: and it is

the art, not the wood, that makes a bed. Nor is this their only error. They

make  a  second  mistake  in  omitting  the  more  controlling  cause:  for  they

eliminate the essential nature, i.e. the ‘form’. And what is more, since they

remove the formal cause, they invest the forces they assign to the ‘simple’

bodies-the forces which enable these bodies to bring things into being-with

too instrumental a character. For ‘since’ (as they say) ‘it is the nature of the

hot to dissociate, of the cold to bring together, and of each remaining contrary

either to act or to suffer action’, it is out of such materials and by their agency

(so they maintain) that everything else comes-to-be and passes-away. Yet (a)

it is evident that even Fire is itself moved, i.e. suffers action. Moreover (b)

their procedure is virtually the same as if one were to treat the saw (and the

various instruments of carpentry) as ‘the cause’ of the things that come-to-be:

for the wood must be divided if a man saws, must become smooth if he

planes, and so on with the remaining tools. Hence, however true it may be

that Fire is active, i.e. sets things moving, there is a further point they fail to

observe-viz. that Fire is inferior to the tools or instruments in the manner in

which it sets things moving.

<

div class="section" title="10">


10


As to our own theory-we have given a general account of the causes in an

earlier work,’ we have now explained and distinguished the ‘matter’ and the

‘form’. Further, since the change which is motion has been proved’ to be

eternal, the continuity of the occurrence of coming-to-be follows necessarily

from  what  we  have  established:  for  the  eternal  motion,  by  causing  ‘the

generator’ to approach and retire, will produce coming-to-be uninterruptedly.

At the same time it is clear that we were right when, in an earlier work,’ we

called motion (not coming-to-be) ‘the primary form of change’. For it is far

more reasonable that what is should cause the coming-to-be of what is not,than that what is not should cause the being of what is. Now that which is

being moved is, but that which is coming-to-be is not: hence, also, motion is

prior to coming-to-be.

We have assumed, and have proved, that coming-to-be and passing-away

happen to things continuously; and we assert that motion causes coming-to-

be. That being so, it is evident that, if the motion be single, both processes

cannot occur since they are contrary to one another: for it is a law of nature

that  the  same  cause,  provided  it  remain  in  the  same  condition,  always

produces the same effect, so that, from a single motion, either coming-to-be

or passing-away will always result. The movements must, on the contrary, be

more than one, and they must be contrasted with one another either by the

sense  of  their  motion  or  by  its  irregularity:  for  contrary  effects  demand

contraries as their causes.

This explains why it is not the primary motion that causes coming-to-be

and passingaway, but the motion along the inclined circle: for this motion not

only possesses the necessary continuity, but includes a duality of movements

as well. For if coming-to-be and passing-away are always to be continuous,

there must be some body always being moved (in order that these changes

may not fail) and moved with a duality of movements (in order that both

changes, not one only, may result). Now the continuity of this movement is

caused by the motion of the whole: but the approaching and retreating of the

moving  body  are  caused  by  the  inclination.  For  the  consequence  of  the

inclination is that the body becomes alternately remote and near; and since its

distance  is  thus  unequal,  its  movement  will  be  irregular.  Therefore,  if  it

generates  by  approaching  and  by  its  proximity,  it-this  very  same  body-

destroys by retreating and becoming remote: and if it generates by many

successive approaches, it also destroys by many successive retirements. For

contrary effects demand contraries as their causes; and the natural processes

of passing-away and coming-to-be occupy equal periods of time. Hence, too,

the times-i.e. the lives-of the several kinds of living things have a number by

which they are distinguished: for there is an Order controlling all things, and

every time (i.e. every life) is measured by a period. Not all of them, however,

are measured by the same period, but some by a smaller and others by a

greater one: for to some of them the period, which is their measure, is a year,

while to some it is longer and to others shorter.

And there are facts of observation in manifest agreement with our theories.

Thus we see that coming-to-be occurs as the sun approaches and decay as itretreats;  and  we  see  that  the  two  processes  occupy  equal  times.  For  the

durations  of  the  natural  processes  of  passing-away  and  coming-to-be  are

equal. Nevertheless it Often happens that things pass-away in too short a

time. This is due to the ‘intermingling’ by which the things that come-to-be

and pass-away are implicated with one another. For their matter is ‘irregular’,

i.e. is not everywhere the same: hence the processes by which they come-to-

be  must  be  ‘irregular’  too,  i.e.  some  too  quick  and  others  too  slow.

Consequently  the  phenomenon  in  question  occurs,  because  the  ‘irregular’

coming-to-be of these things is the passing-away of other things.

  Coming-to-be  and  passing-away  will,  as  we  have  said,  always  be

continuous,  and  will  never  fail  owing  to  the  cause  we  stated.  And  this

continuity  has  a  sufficient  reason  on  our  theory.  For  in  all  things,  as  we

affirm,  Nature  always  strives  after  ‘the  better’.  Now  ‘being’  (we  have

explained elsewhere the exact variety of meanings we recognize in this term)

is better than ‘not-being’: but not all things can possess ‘being’, since they

are too far removed from the ‘originative source. ‘God therefore adopted the

remaining alternative, and fulfilled the perfection of the universe by making

coming-to-be uninterrupted: for the greatest possible coherence would thus

be secured to existence, because that ‘coming-to-be should itself come-to-be

perpetually’ is the closest approximation to eternal being.

The cause of this perpetuity of coming-to-be, as we have often said, is

circular motion: for that is the only motion which is continuous. That, too, is

why  all  the  other  things-the  things,  I  mean,  which  are  reciprocally

transformed in virtue of their ‘passions’ and their ‘powers of action’ e.g. the

‘simple’ bodiesimitate circular motion. For when Water is transformed into

Air, Air into Fire, and the Fire back into Water, we say the coming-to-be ‘has

completed the circle’, because it reverts again to the beginning. Hence it is by

imitating circular motion that rectilinear motion too is continuous.

  These considerations serve at the same time to explain what is to some

people a baffling problem-viz. why the ‘simple’ bodies, since each them is

travelling  towards  its  own  place,  have  not  become  dissevered  from  one

another  in  the  infinite  lapse  of  time.  The  reason  is  their  reciprocal

transformation. For, had each of them persisted in its own place instead of

being transformed by its neighbour, they would have got dissevered long ago.

They are transformed, however, owing to the motion with its dual character:

and because they are transformed, none of them is able to persist in any place

allotted to it by the Order.It is clear from what has been said (i) that coming-to-be and passing-away

actually occur, (ii) what causes them, and (iii) what subject undergoes them.

But (a) if there is to be movement (as we have explained elsewhere, in an

earlier work’) there must be something which initiates it; if there is to be

movement always, there must always be something which initiates it; if the

movement is to be continuous, what initiates it must be single, unmoved,

ungenerated, and incapable of ‘alteration’; and if the circular movements are

more  than  one,  their  initiating  causes  must  all  of  them,  in  spite  of  their

plurality,  be  in  some  way  subordinated  to  a  single  ‘originative  source’.

Further  (b)  since  time  is  continuous,  movement  must  be  continuous,

inasmuch as there can be no time without movement. Time, therefore, is a

‘number’  of  some  continuous  movement-a  ‘number’,  therefore,  of  the

circular movement, as was established in the discussions at the beginning.

But (c) is movement continuous because of the continuity of that which is

moved, or because that in which the movement occurs (I mean, e.g. the place

or the quality) is continuous? The answer must clearly be ‘because that which

is moved is continuous’. (For how can the quality be continuous except in

virtue of the continuity of the thing to which it belongs? But if the continuity

of ‘that in which’ contributes to make the movement continuous, this is true

only of ‘the place in which’; for that has ‘magnitude’ in a sense.) But (d)

amongst continuous bodies which are moved, only that which is moved in a

circle is ‘continuous’ in such a way that it preserves its continuity with itself

throughout  the  movement.  The  conclusion  therefore  is  that  this  is  what

produces continuous movement, viz. the body which is being moved in a

circle; and its movement makes time continuous.

<

div class="section" title="11">


11


  Wherever there is continuity in any process (coming-to-be or ‘alteration’ or

any kind of change whatever) we observe consecutiveness’, i.e. this coming-

to-be  after  that  without  any  interval.  Hence  we  must  investigate  whether,

amongst  the  consecutive  members,  there  is  any  whose  future  being  is

necessary; or whether, on the contrary, every one of them may fail to come-

to-be. For that some of them may fail to occur, is clear. (a) We need only

appeal to the distinction between the statements ‘x will be’ and ‘x is about towhich depends upon this fact. For if it be true to say of x that it ‘will be’, it

must at some time be true to say of it that ‘it is’: whereas, though it be true to

say of x now that ‘it is about to occur’, it is quite possible for it not to come-

to-be-thus a man might not walk, though he is now ‘about to’ walk. And (b)

since (to appeal to a general principle) amongst the things which ‘are’ some

are capable also of ‘not-being’, it is clear that the same ambiguous character

will attach to them no less when they are coming-to-be: in other words, their

coming-to-be will not be necessary.

  Then are all the things that come-to-be of this contingent character? Or, on

the contrary, is it absolutely necessary for some of them to come-to-be? Is

there, in fact, a distinction in the field of ‘coming-to-be’ corresponding to the

distinction, within the field of ‘being’, between things that cannot possibly

‘not-be’  and  things  that  can  ‘not-be’?  For  instance,  is  it  necessary  that

solstices shall come-to-be, i.e. impossible that they should fail to be able to

occur?

  Assuming that the antecedent must have come-to-be if the consequent is to

be (e.g. that foundations must have come-to-be if there is to be a house: clay,

if there are to be foundations), is the converse also true? If foundations have

come-to-be,  must  a  house  come-to-be?  The  answer  seems  to  be  that  the

necessary nexus no longer holds, unless it is ‘necessary’ for the consequent

(as well as for the antecedent) to come-to-be-’necessary’ absolutely. If that be

the case, however, ‘a house must come to-be if foundations have come-to-

be’, as well as vice versa. For the antecedent was assumed to be so related to

the consequent that, if the latter is to be, the antecedent must have come-tobe

before it. If, therefore, it is necessary that the consequent should come-to-be,

the antecedent also must have come-to-be: and if the antecedent has come-to-

be, then the consequent also must come-to-be-not, however, because of the

antecedent, but because the future being of the consequent was assumed as

necessary.  Hence,  in  any  sequence,  when  the  being  of  the  consequent  is

necessary, the nexus is reciprocal-in other words, when the antecedent has

come-to-be the consequent must always come-to-be too.

Now  (i)  if  the  sequence  of  occurrences  is  to  proceed  ad  infinitum

‘downwards’, the coming to-be of any determinate ‘this’ amongst the later

members  of  the  sequence  will  not  be  absolutely,  but  only  conditionally,

necessary. For it will always be necessary that some other member shall have

come-to-be before ‘this’ as the presupposed condition of the necessity that

‘this’  should  come-to-be:  consequently,  since  what  is  ‘infinite’  has  no‘originative  source’,  neither  will  there  be  in  the  infinite  sequence  any

‘primary’ member which will make it ‘necessary’ for the remaining members

to come-to-be.

Nor again (ii) will it be possible to say with truth, even in regard to the

members of a limited sequence, that it is ‘absolutely necessary’ for any one

of  them  to  come-to-be.  We  cannot  truly  say,  e.g.  that  ‘it  is  absolutely

necessary for a house to come-to-be when foundations have been laid’: for

(unless it is always necessary for a house to be coming-to-be) we should be

faced with the consequence that, when foundations have been laid, a thing,

which need not always be, must always be. No: if its coming-to-be is to be

‘necessary’,  it  must  be  ‘always’  in  its  coming-to-be.  For  what  is  ‘of

necessity’ coincides with what is ‘always’, since that which ‘must be’ cannot

possibly ‘not-be’. Hence a thing is eternal if its ‘being’ is necessary: and if it

is eternal, its ‘being’ is necessary. And if, therefore, the ‘coming-to-be’ of a

thing is necessary, its ‘coming-to-be’ is eternal; and if eternal, necessary.

It follows that the coming-to-be of anything, if it is absolutely necessary,

must be cyclical-i.e. must return upon itself. For coming to-be must either be

limited  or  not  limited:  and  if  not  limited,  it  must  be  either  rectilinear  or

cyclical. But the first of these last two alternatives is impossible if coming-to-

be  is  to  be  eternal,  because  there  could  not  be  any  ‘originative  source’

whatever in an infinite rectilinear sequence, whether its members be taken

‘downwards’ (as future events) or ‘upwards’ (as past events). Yet coming-to-

be must have an ‘originative source’ (if it is to be necessary and therefore

eternal), nor can it be eternal if it is limited. Consequently it must be cyclical.

Hence  the  nexus  must  be  reciprocal.  By  this  I  mean  that  the  necessary

occurrence of ‘this’ involves the necessary occurrence of its antecedent: and

conversely that, given the antecedent, it is also necessary for the consequent

to come-to-be. And this reciprocal nexus will hold continuously throughout

the sequence: for it makes no difference whether the reciprocal nexus, of

which we are speaking, is mediated by two, or by many, members.

It is in circular movement, therefore, and in cyclical coming-to-be that the

‘absolutely necessary’ is to be found. In other words, if the coming-to-be of

any things is cyclical, it is ‘necessary’ that each of them is coming-to-be and

has come-to-be: and if the coming-to-be of any things is ‘necessary’, their

coming-to-be is cyclical.

The result we have reached is logically concordant with the eternity of

circular motion, i.e. the eternity of the revolution of the heavens (a fact whichapproved itself on other and independent evidence),’ since precisely those

movements which belong to, and depend upon, this eternal revolution ‘come-

to-be’ of necessity, and of necessity ‘will be’. For since the revolving body is

always setting something else in motion, the movement of the things it moves

must  also  be  circular.  Thus,  from  the  being  of  the  ‘upper  revolution’  it

follows that the sun revolves in this determinate manner; and since the sun

revolves thus, the seasons in consequence come-to-be in a cycle, i.e. return

upon themselves; and since they come-to-be cyclically, so in their turn do the

things whose coming-to-be the seasons initiate.

  Then why do some things manifestly come to-be in this cyclical fashion

(as, e.g. showers and air, so that it must rain if there is to be a cloud and,

conversely, there must be a cloud if it is to rain), while men and animals do

not  ‘return  upon  themselves’  so  that  the  same  individual  comes-to-be  a

second time (for though your coming-to-be presupposes your father’s, his

coming-to-be does not presuppose yours)? Why, on the contrary, does this

coming-to-be seem to constitute a rectilinear sequence?

In discussing this new problem, we must begin by inquiring whether all

things  ‘return  upon  themselves’  in  a  uniform  manner;  or  whether,  on  the

contrary, though in some sequences what recurs is numerically the same, in

other  sequences  it  is  the  same  only  in  species.  In  consequence  of  this

distinction, it is evident that those things, whose ‘substance’-that which is

undergoing  the  process-is  imperishable,  will  be  numerically,  as  well  as

specifically, the same in their recurrence: for the character of the process is

determined by the character of that which undergoes it. Those things, on the

other hand, whose ‘substance’ is perish, able (not imperishable) must ‘return

upon themselves’ in the sense that what recurs, though specifically the same,

is not the same numerically. That why, when Water comes-to-be from Air

and Air from Water, the Air is the same ‘specifically’, not ‘numerically’: and

if these too recur numerically the same, at any rate this does not happen with

things whose ‘substance’ comes-to-be-whose ‘substance’ is such that it is

essentially capable of not-being.                              Meteorology, Book I


Translated by E. W. Webster


<

div class="section" title="1">


1


We  have  already  discussed  the  first  causes  of  nature,  and  all  natural

motion, also the stars ordered in the motion of the heavens, and the physical

element-enumerating and specifying them and showing how they change into

one  another-and  becoming  and  perishing  in  general.  There  remains  for

consideration  a  part  of  this  inquiry  which  all  our  predecessors  called

meteorology. It is concerned with events that are natural, though their order is

less perfect than that of the first of the elements of bodies. They take place in

the region nearest to the motion of the stars. Such are the milky way, and

comets, and the movements of meteors. It studies also all the affections we

may call common to air and water, and the kinds and parts of the earth and

the  affections  of  its  parts.  These  throw  light  on  the  causes  of  winds  and

earthquakes and all the consequences the motions of these kinds and parts

involve. Of these things some puzzle us, while others admit of explanation in

some  degree.  Further,  the  inquiry  is  concerned  with  the  falling  of

thunderbolts and with whirlwinds and fire-winds, and further, the recurrent

affections produced in these same bodies by concretion. When the inquiry

into these matters is concluded let us consider what account we can give, in

accordance with the method we have followed, of animals and plants, both

generally and in detail. When that has been done we may say that the whole

of our original undertaking will have been carried out.

  After this introduction let us begin by discussing our immediate subject.

<

div class="section" title="2">


2We have already laid down that there is one physical element which makes

up the system of the bodies that move in a circle, and besides this four bodies

owing their existence to the four principles, the motion of these latter bodies

being of two kinds: either from the centre or to the centre. These four bodies

are fire, air, water, earth. Fire occupies the highest place among them all,

earth the lowest, and two elements correspond to these in their relation to one

another, air being nearest to fire, water to earth. The whole world surrounding

the earth, then, the affections of which are our subject, is made up of these

bodies.  This  world  necessarily  has  a  certain  continuity  with  the  upper

motions: consequently all its power and order is derived from them. (For the

originating principle of all motion is the first cause. Besides, that clement is

eternal and its motion has no limit in space, but is always complete; whereas

all these other bodies have separate regions which limit one another.) So we

must treat fire and earth and the elements like them as the material causes of

the events in this world (meaning by material what is subject and is affected),

but must assign causality in the sense of the originating principle of motion to

the influence of the eternally moving bodies.

<

div class="section" title="3">


3


Let us first recall our original principles and the distinctions already drawn

and then explain the ‘milky way’ and comets and the other phenomena akin

to these.

Fire, air, water, earth, we assert, originate from one another, and each of

them exists potentially in each, as all things do that can be resolved into a

common and ultimate substrate.

The first difficulty is raised by what is called the air. What are we to take

its nature to be in the world surrounding the earth? And what is its position

relatively to the other physical elements. (For there is no question as to the

relation of the bulk of the earth to the size of the bodies which exist around it,

since astronomical demonstrations have by this time proved to us that it is

actually far smaller than some individual stars. As for the water, it is not

observed to exist collectively and separately, nor can it do so apart from that

volume of it which has its seat about the earth: the sea, that is, and rivers,

which we can see, and any subterranean water that may be hidden from ourobservation.) The question is really about that which lies between the earth

and the nearest stars. Are we to consider it to be one kind of body or more

than one? And if more than one, how many are there and what are the bounds

of their regions?

We  have  already  described  and  characterized  the  first  element,  and

explained that the whole world of the upper motions is full of that body.

This is an opinion we are not alone in holding: it appears to be an old

assumption and one which men have held in the past, for the word ether has

long been used to denote that element. Anaxagoras, it is true, seems to me to

think that the word means the same as fire. For he thought that the upper

regions were full of fire, and that men referred to those regions when they

spoke of ether. In the latter point he was right, for men seem to have assumed

that a body that was eternally in motion was also divine in nature; and, as

such  a  body  was  different  from  any  of  the  terrestrial  elements,  they

determined to call it ‘ether’.

For the um opinions appear in cycles among men not once nor twice, but

infinitely often.

Now there are some who maintain that not only the bodies in motion but

that which contains them is pure fire, and the interval between the earth and

the stars air: but if they had considered what is now satisfactorily established

by  mathematics,  they  might  have  given  up  this  puerile  opinion.  For  it  is

altogether childish to suppose that the moving bodies are all of them of a

small size, because they so to us, looking at them from the earth.

This a matter which we have already discussed in our treatment of the

upper region, but we may return to the point now.

If the intervals were full of fire and the bodies consisted of fire every one

of the other elements would long ago have vanished.

  However, they cannot simply be said to be full of air either; for even if

there were two elements to fill the space between the earth and the heavens,

the  air  would  far  exceed  the  quantitu  required  to  maintain  its  proper

proportion to the other elements. For the bulk of the earth (which includes the

whole volume of water) is infinitesimal in comparison with the whole world

that  surrounds  it.  Now  we  find  that  the  excess  in  volume  is  not

proportionately great where water dissolves into air or air into fire. Whereas

the proportion between any given small quantity of water and the air that is

generated from it ought to hold good between the total amount of air and the

total amount of water. Nor does it make any difference if any one denies thatthe elements originate from one another, but asserts that they are equal in

power. For on this view it is certain amounts of each that are equal in power,

just as would be the case if they actually originated from one another.

So it is clear that neither air nor fire alone fills the intermediate space.

It  remains  to  explain,  after  a  preliminary  discussion  of  difficulties,  the

relation of the two elements air and fire to the position of the first element,

and the reason why the stars in the upper region impart heat to the earth and

its neighbourhood. Let us first treat of the air, as we proposed, and then go on

to these questions.

  Since water is generated from air, and air from water, why are clouds not

formed in the upper air? They ought to form there the more, the further from

the earth and the colder that region is. For it is neither appreciably near to the

heat  of  the  stars,  nor  to  the  rays  relected  from  the  earth.  It  is  these  that

dissolve any formation by their heat and so prevent clouds from forming near

the earth. For clouds gather at the point where the reflected rays disperse in

the infinity of space and are lost. To explain this we must suppose either that

it is not all air which water is generated, or, if it is produced from all air alike,

that  what  immediately  surrounds  the  earth  is  not  mere  air,  but  a  sort  of

vapour, and that its vaporous nature is the reason why it condenses back to

water again. But if the whole of that vast region is vapour, the amount of air

and  of  water  will  be  disproportionately  great.  For  the  spaces  left  by  the

heavenly bodies must be filled by some element. This cannot be fire, for then

all the rest would have been dried up. Consequently, what fills it must be air

and the water that surrounds the whole earth-vapour being water dissolved.

  After this exposition of the difficulties involved, let us go on to lay down

the truth, with a view at once to what follows and to what has already been

said. The upper region as far as the moon we affirm to consist of a body

distinct both from fire and from air, but varying degree of purity and in kind,

especially  towards  its  limit  on  the  side  of  the  air,  and  of  the  world

surrounding the earth. Now the circular motion of the first element and of the

bodies it contains dissolves, and inflames by its motion, whatever part of the

lower world is nearest to it, and so generates heat. From another point of

view we may look at the motion as follows. The body that lies below the

circular motion of the heavens is, in a sort, matter, and is potentially hot,

cold, dry, moist, and possessed of whatever other qualities are derived from

these. But it actually acquires or retains one of these in virtue of motion or

rest, the cause and principle of which has already been explained. So at thecentre and round it we get earth and water, the heaviest and coldest elements,

by  themselves;  round  them  and  contiguous  with  them,  air  and  what  we

commonly call fire. It is not really fire, for fire is an excess of heat and a sort

of ebullition; but in reality, of what we call air, the part surrounding the earth

is moist and warm, because it contains both vapour and a dry exhalation from

the  earth.  But  the  next  part,  above  that,  is  warm  and  dry.  For  vapour  is

naturally moist and cold, but the exhalation warm and dry; and vapour is

potentially like water, the exhalation potentially like fire. So we must take the

reason why clouds are not formed in the upper region to be this: that it is

filled not with mere air but rather with a sort of fire.

  However, it may well be that the formation of clouds in that upper region

is  also  prevented  by  the  circular  motion.  For  the  air  round  the  earth  is

necessarily  all  of  it  in  motion,  except  that  which  is  cut  off  inside  the

circumference which makes the earth a complete sphere. In the case of winds

it is actually observable that they originate in marshy districts of the earth;

and they do not seem to blow above the level of the highest mountains. It is

the  revolution  of  the  heaven  which  carries  the  air  with  it  and  causes  its

circular motion, fire being continuous with the upper element and air with

fire. Thus its motion is a second reason why that air is not condensed into

water.

But whenever a particle of air grows heavy, the warmth in it is squeezed

out into the upper region and it sinks, and other particles in turn are carried

up together with the fiery exhalation. Thus the one region is always full of air

and the other of fire, and each of them is perpetually in a state of change.

So much to explain why clouds are not formed and why the air is not

condensed into water, and what account must be given of the space between

the stars and the earth, and what is the body that fills it.

As for the heat derived from the sun, the right place for a special and

scientific account of it is in the treatise about sense, since heat is an affection

of sense, but we may now explain how it can be produced by the heavenly

bodies which are not themselves hot.

We see that motion is able to dissolve and inflame the air; indeed, moving

bodies  are  often  actually  found  to  melt.  Now  the  sun’s  motion  alone  is

sufficient  to  account  for  the  origin  of  terrestrial  warmth  and  heat.  For  a

motion that is to have this effect must be rapid and near, and that of the stars

is rapid but distant, while that of the moon is near but slow, whereas the sun’s

motion  combines  both  conditions  in  a  sufficient  degree.  That  most  heatshould be generated where the sun is present is easy to understand if we

consider the analogy of terrestrial phenomena, for here, too, it is the air that is

nearest to a thing in rapid motion which is heated most. This is just what we

should expect, as it is the nearest air that is most dissolved by the motion of a

solid body.

This then is one reason why heat reaches our world. Another is that the fire

surrounding the air is often scattered by the motion of the heavens and driven

downwards in spite of itself.

  Shooting-stars further suffix to prove that the celestial sphere is not hot or

fiery: for they do not occur in that upper region but below: yet the more and

the faster a thing moves, the more apt it is to take fire. Besides, the sun,

which most of all the stars is considered to be hot, is really white and not

fiery in colour.

<

div class="section" title="4">


4


  Having  determined  these  principles  let  us  explain  the  cause  of  the

appearance  in  the  sky  of  burning  flames  and  of  shooting-stars,  and  of

‘torches’, and ‘goats’, as some people call them. All these phenomena are one

and the same thing, and are due to the same cause, the difference between

them being one of degree.

The explanation of these and many other phenomena is this. When the sun

warms  the  earth  the  evaporation  which  takes  place  is  necessarily  of  two

kinds, not of one only as some think. One kind is rather of the nature of

vapour, the other of the nature of a windy exhalation. That which rises from

the moisture contained in the earth and on its surface is vapour, while that

rising from the earth itself, which is dry, is like smoke. Of these the windy

exhalation, being warm, rises above the moister vapour, which is heavy and

sinks below the other. Hence the world surrounding the earth is ordered as

follows. First below the circular motion comes the warm and dry element,

which we call fire, for there is no word fully adequate to every state of the

fumid evaporation: but we must use this terminology since this element is the

most inflammable of all bodies. Below this comes air. We must think of what

we just called fire as being spread round the terrestrial sphere on the outside

like a kind of fuel, so that a little motion often makes it burst into flame justas smoke does: for flame is the ebullition of a dry exhalation. So whenever

the circular motion stirs this stuff up in any way, it catches fire at the point at

which it is most inflammable. The result differs according to the disposition

and quantity of the combustible material. If this is broad and long, we often

see a flame burning as in a field of stubble: if it burns lengthwise only, we see

what  are  called  ‘torches’  and  ‘goats’  and  shooting-stars.  Now  when  the

inflammable material is longer than it is broad sometimes it seems to throw

off sparks as it burns. (This happens because matter catches fire at the sides

in small portions but continuously with the main body.) Then it is called a

‘goat’. When this does not happen it is a ‘torch’. But if the whole length of

the  exhalation  is  scattered  in  small  parts  and  in  many  directions  and  in

breadth and depth alike, we get what are called shooting-stars.

The cause of these shooting-stars is sometimes the motion which ignites

the exhalation. At other times the air is condensed by cold and squeezes out

and ejects the hot element; making their motion look more like that of a thing

thrown than like a running fire. For the question might be raised whether the

‘shooting’ of a ‘star’ is the same thing as when you put an exhalation below a

lamp and it lights the lower lamp from the flame above. For here too the

flame passes wonderfully quickly and looks like a thing thrown, and not as if

one thing after another caught fire. Or is a ‘star’ when it ‘shoots’ a single

body that is thrown? Apparently both cases occur: sometimes it is like the

flame from the lamp and sometimes bodies are projected by being squeezed

out (like fruit stones from one’s fingers) and so are seen to fall into the sea

and on the dry land, both by night and by day when the sky is clear. They are

thrown downwards because the condensation which propels them inclines

downwards. Thunderbolts fall downwards for the same reason: their origin is

never combustion but ejection under pressure, since naturally all heat tends

upwards.

  When  the  phenomenon  is  formed  in  the  upper  region  it  is  due  to  the

combustion of the exhalation. When it takes place at a lower level it is due to

the ejection of the exhalation by the condensing and cooling of the moister

evaporation: for this latter as it condenses and inclines downward contracts,

and thrusts out the hot element and causes it to be thrown downwards. The

motion is upwards or downwards or sideways according to the way in which

the evaporation lies, and its disposition in respect of breadth and depth. In

most cases the direction is sideways because two motions are involved, a

compulsory  motion  downwards  and  a  natural  motion  upwards,  and  underthese circumstances an object always moves obliquely. Hence the motion of

‘shooting-stars’ is generally oblique.

So the material cause of all these phenomena is the exhalation, the efficient

cause  sometimes  the  upper  motion,  sometimes  the  contraction  and

condensation of the air. Further, all these things happen below the moon. This

is shown by their apparent speed, which is equal to that of things thrown by

us; for it is because they are close to us, that these latter seem far to exceed in

speed the stars, the sun, and the moon.

<

div class="section" title="5">


5


  Sometimes on a fine night we see a variety of appearances that form in the

sky: ‘chasms’ for instance and ‘trenches’ and blood-red colours. These, too,

have the same cause. For we have seen that the upper air condenses into an

inflammable  condition  and  that  the  combustion  sometimes  takes  on  the

appearance of a burning flame, sometimes that of moving torches and stars.

So it is not surprising that this same air when condensing should assume a

variety of colours. For a weak light shining through a dense air, and the air

when  it  acts  as  a  mirror,  will  cause  all  kinds  of  colours  to  appear,  but

especially crimson and purple. For these colours generally appear when fire-

colour  and  white  are  combined  by  superposition.  Thus  on  a  hot  day,  or

through a smoky, medium, the stars when they rise and set look crimson. The

light  will  also  create  colours  by  reflection  when  the  mirror  is  such  as  to

reflect colour only and not shape.

  These appearances do not persist long, because the condensation of the air

is transient.

  ‘Chasms’ get their appearance of depth from light breaking out of a dark

blue or black mass of air. When the process of condensation goes further in

such a case we often find ‘torches’ ejected. When the ‘chasm’ contracts it

presents the appearance of a ‘trench’.

In general, white in contrast with black creates a variety of colours; like

flame, for instance, through a medium of smoke. But by day the sun obscures

them, and, with the exception of crimson, the colours are not seen at night

because they are dark.

  These  then  must  be  taken  to  be  the  causes  of  ‘shooting-stars’  and  thephenomena of combustion and also of the other transient appearances of this

kind.

<

div class="section" title="6">


6


Let us go on to explain the nature of comets and the ‘milky way’, after a

preliminary discussion of the views of others.

  Anaxagoras and Democritus declare that comets are a conjunction of the

planets approaching one another and so appearing to touch one another.

  Some of the Italians called Pythagoreans say that the comet is one of the

planets, but that it appears at great intervals of time and only rises a little

above the horizon. This is the case with Mercury too; because it only rises a

little above the horizon it often fails to be seen and consequently appears at

great intervals of time.

A view like theirs was also expressed by Hippocrates of Chios and his

pupil Aeschylus. Only they say that the tail does not belong to the comet

iself, but is occasionally assumed by it on its course in certain situations,

when our sight is reflected to the sun from the moisture attracted by the

comet. It appears at greater intervals than the other stars because it is slowest

to get clear of the sun and has been left behind by the sun to the extent of the

whole of its circle before it reappears at the same point. It gets clear of the

sun both towards the north and towards the south. In the space between the

tropics it does not draw water to itself because that region is dried up by the

sun on its course. When it moves towards the south it has no lack of the

necessary moisture, but because the segment of its circle which is above the

horizon is small, and that below it many times as large, it is impossible for

the sun to be reflected to our sight, either when it approaches the southern

tropic, or at the summer solstice. Hence in these regions it does not develop a

tail at all. But when it is visible in the north it assumes a tail because the arc

above  the  horizon  is  large  and  that  below  it  small.  For  under  these

circumstances there is nothing to prevent our vision from being reflected to

the sun.

  These views involve impossibilities, some of which are common to all of

them, while others are peculiar to some only.

This is the case, first, with those who say that the comet is one of theplanets. For all the planets appear in the circle of the zodiac, whereas many

comets have been seen outside that circle. Again more comets than one have

often appeared simultaneously. Besides, if their tail is due to reflection, as

Aeschylus and Hippocrates say, this planet ought sometimes to be visible

without a tail since, as they it does not possess a tail in every place in which it

appears. But, as a matter of fact, no planet has been observed besides the five.

And all of them are often visible above the horizon together at the same time.

Further, comets are often found to appear, as well when all the planets are

visible as when some are not, but are obscured by the neighbourhood of the

sun. Moreover the statement that a comet only appears in the north, with the

sun at the summer solstice, is not true either. The great comet which appeared

at the time of the earthquake in Achaea and the tidal wave rose due west; and

many have been known to appear in the south. Again in the archonship of

Euclees, son of Molon, at Athens there appeared a comet in the north in the

month Gamelion, the sun being about the winter solstice. Yet they themselves

admit that reflection over so great a space is an impossibility.

An objection that tells equally against those who hold this theory and those

who say that comets are a coalescence of the planets is, first, the fact that

some of the fixed stars too get a tail. For this we must not only accept the

authority of the Egyptians who assert it, but we have ourselves observed the

fact. For a star in the thigh of the Dog had a tail, though a faint one. If you

fixed  your  sight  on  it  its  light  was  dim,  but  if  you  just  glanced  at  it,  it

appeared brighter. Besides, all the comets that have been seen in our day have

vanished without setting, gradually fading away above the horizon; and they

have not left behind them either one or more stars. For instance the great

comet we mentioned before appeared to the west in winter in frosty weather

when the sky was clear, in the archonship of Asteius. On the first day it set

before the sun and was then not seen. On the next day it was seen, being ever

so little behind the sun and immediately setting. But its light extended over a

third part of the sky like a leap, so that people called it a ‘path’. This comet

receded  as  far  as  Orion’s  belt  and  there  dissolved.  Democritus  however,

insists upon the truth of his view and affirms that certain stars have been seen

when comets dissolve. But on his theory this ought not to occur occasionally

but always. Besides, the Egyptians affirm that conjunctions of the planets

with one another, and with the fixed stars, take place, and we have ourselves

observed Jupiter coinciding with one of the stars in the Twins and hiding it,

and yet no comet was formed. Further, we can also give a rational proof ofour point. It is true that some stars seem to be bigger than others, yet each one

by  itself  looks  indivisible.  Consequently,  just  as,  if  they  really  had  been

indivisible, their conjunction could not have created any greater magnitude,

so now that they are not in fact indivisible but look as if they were, their

conjunction will not make them look any bigger.

  Enough has been said, without further argument, to show that the causes

brought forward to explain comets are false.

<

div class="section" title="7">


7


We  consider  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  phenomena  inaccessible  to

observation  to  have  been  given  when  our  account  of  them  is  free  from

impossibilities. The observations before us suggest the following account of

the phenomena we are now considering. We know that the dry and warm

exhalation is the outermost part of the terrestrial world which falls below the

circular motion. It, and a great part of the air that is continuous with it below,

is carried round the earth by the motion of the circular revolution. In the

course of this motion it often ignites wherever it may happen to be of the

right consistency, and this we maintain to be the cause of the ‘shooting’ of

scattered ‘stars’. We may say, then, that a comet is formed when the upper

motion introduces into a gathering of this kind a fiery principle not of such

excessive strength as to burn up much of the material quickly, nor so weak as

soon  to  be  extinguished,  but  stronger  and  capable  of  burning  up  much

material, and when exhalation of the right consistency rises from below and

meets  it.  The  kind  of  comet  varies  according  to  the  shape  which  the

exhalation happens to take. If it is diffused equally on every side the star is

said to be fringed, if it stretches out in one direction it is called bearded. We

have seen that when a fiery principle of this kind moves we seem to have a

shooting-star: similarly when it stands still we seem to have a star standing

still. We may compare these phenomena to a heap or mass of chaff into

which a torch is thrust, or a spark thrown. That is what a shooting-star is like.

The fuel is so inflammable that the fire runs through it quickly in a line. Now

if this fire were to persist instead of running through the fuel and perishing

away, its course through the fuel would stop at the point where the latter was

densest, and then the whole might begin to move. Such is a comet-like ashooting-star that contains its beginning and end in itself.

  When the matter begins to gather in the lower region independently the

comet appears by itself. But when the exhalation is constituted by one of the

fixed stars or the planets, owing to their motion, one of them becomes a

comet. The fringe is not close to the stars themselves. Just as haloes appear to

follow the sun and the moon as they move, and encircle them, when the air is

dense  enough  for  them  to  form  along  under  the  sun’s  course,  so  too  the

fringe. It stands in the relation of a halo to the stars, except that the colour of

the halo is due to reflection, whereas in the case of comets the colour is

something that appears actually on them.

Now when this matter gathers in relation to a star the comet necessarily

appears to follow the same course as the star. But when the comet is formed

independently it falls behind the motion of the universe, like the rest of the

terrestrial  world.  It  is  this  fact,  that  a  comet  often  forms  independently,

indeed oftener than round one of the regular stars, that makes it impossible to

maintain that a comet is a sort of reflection, not indeed, as Hippocrates and

his school say, to the sun, but to the very star it is alleged to accompany-in

fact, a kind of halo in the pure fuel of fire.

As for the halo we shall explain its cause later.

The fact that comets when frequent foreshadow wind and drought must be

taken as an indication of their fiery constitution. For their origin is plainly

due to the plentiful supply of that secretion. Hence the air is necessarily drier

and the moist evaporation is so dissolved and dissipated by the quantity of the

hot exhalation as not readily to condense into water.-But this phenomenon

too shall be explained more clearly later when the time comes to speak of the

winds.-So when there are many comets and they are dense, it is as we say,

and the years are clearly dry and windy. When they are fewer and fainter this

effect does not appear in the same degree, though as a rule the is found to be

excessive  either  in  duration  or  strength.  For  instance  when  the  stone  at

Aegospotami fell out of the air-it had been carried up by a wind and fell

down in the daytime-then too a comet happened to have appeared in the west.

And  at  the  time  of  the  great  comet  the  winter  was  dry  and  north  winds

prevailed, and the wave was due to an opposition of winds. For in the gulf a

north wind blew and outside it a violent south wind. Again in the archonship

of Nicomachus a comet appeared for a few days about the equinoctial circle

(this  one  had  not  risen  in  the  west),  and  simultaneously  with  it  there

happened the storm at Corinth.That there are few comets and that they appear rarely and outside the tropic

circles more than within them is due to the motion of the sun and the stars.

For this motion does not only cause the hot principle to be secreted but also

dissolves it when it is gathering. But the chief reason is that most of this stuff

collects in the region of the milky way.

<

div class="section" title="8">


8


Let us now explain the origin, cause, and nature of the milky way. And

here too let us begin by discussing the statements of others on the subject.

(1) Of the so-called Pythagoreans some say that this is the path of one of

the stars that fell from heaven at the time of Phaethon’s downfall. Others say

that the sun used once to move in this circle and that this region was scorched

or met with some other affection of this kind, because of the sun and its

motion.

But it is absurd not to see that if this were the reason the circle of the

Zodiac ought to be affected in the same way, and indeed more so than that of

the milky way, since not the sun only but all the planets move in it. We can

see the whole of this circle (half of it being visible at any time of the night),

but it shows no signs of any such affection except where a part of it touches

the circle of the milky way.

(2) Anaxagoras, Democritus, and their schools say that the milky way is

the light of certain stars. For, they say, when the sun passes below the earth

some of the stars are hidden from it. Now the light of those on which the sun

shines is invisible, being obscured by the of the sun. But the milky way is the

peculiar light of those stars which are shaded by the earth from the sun’s rays.

This, too, is obviously impossible. The milky way is always unchanged

and  among  the  same  constellations  (for  it  is  clearly  a  greatest  circle),

whereas, since the sun does not remain in the same place, what is hidden

from it differs at different times. Consequently with the change of the sun’s

position the milky way ought to change its position too: but we find that this

does not happen. Besides, if astronomical demonstrations are correct and the

size of the sun is greater than that of the earth and the distance of the stars

from the earth many times greater than that of the sun (just as the sun is

further from the earth than the moon), then the cone made by the rays of thesun would terminate at no great distance from the earth, and the shadow of

the earth (what we call night) would not reach the stars. On the contrary, the

sun shines on all the stars and the earth screens none of them.

(3) There is a third theory about the milky way. Some say that it is a

reflection of our sight to the sun, just as they say that the comet is.

But this too is impossible. For if the eye and the mirror and the whole of

the  object  were  severally  at  rest,  then  the  same  part  of  the  image  would

appear at the same point in the mirror. But if the mirror and the object move,

keeping the same distance from the eye which is at rest, but at different rates

of speed and so not always at the same interval from one another, then it is

impossible  for  the  same  image  always  to  appear  in  the  same  part  of  the

mirror. Now the constellations included in the circle of the milky way move;

and so does the sun, the object to which our sight is reflected; but we stand

still. And the distance of those two from us is constant and uniform, but their

distance  from  one  another  varies.  For  the  Dolphin  sometimes  rises  at

midnight, sometimes in the morning. But in each case the same parts of the

milky way are found near it. But if it were a reflection and not a genuine

affection of these this ought not to be the case.

  Again, we can see the milky way reflected at night in water and similar

mirrors. But under these circumstances it is impossible for our sight to be

reflected to the sun.

  These considerations show that the milky way is not the path of one of the

planets, nor the light of imperceptible stars, nor a reflection. And those are

the chief theories handed down by others hitherto.

Let us recall our fundamental principle and then explain our views. We

have already laid down that the outermost part of what is called the air is

potentially fire and that therefore when the air is dissolved by motion, there is

separated off a kind of matter-and of this matter we assert that comets consist.

We must suppose that what happens is the same as in the case of the comets

when the matter does not form independently but is formed by one of the

fixed  stars  or  the  planets.  Then  these  stars  appear  to  be  fringed,  because

matter of this kind follows their course. In the same way, a certain kind of

matter follows the sun, and we explain the halo as a reflection from it when

the air is of the right constitution. Now we must assume that what happens in

the case of the stars severally happens in the case of the whole of the heavens

and all the upper motion. For it is natural to suppose that, if the motion of a

single star excites a flame, that of all the stars should have a similar result,and  especially  in  that  region  in  which  the  stars  are  biggest  and  most

numerous and nearest to one another. Now the circle of the zodiac dissolves

this kind of matter because of the motion of the sun and the planets, and for

this reason most comets are found outside the tropic circles. Again, no fringe

appears round the sun or moon: for they dissolve such matter too quickly to

admit of its formation. But this circle in which the milky way appears to our

sight is the greatest circle, and its position is such that it extends far outside

the  tropic  circles.  Besides  the  region  is  full  of  the  biggest  and  brightest

constellations and also of what called ‘scattered’ stars (you have only to look

to see this clearly). So for these reasons all this matter is continually and

ceaselessly collecting there. A proof of the theory is this: In the circle itself

the light is stronger in that half where the milky way is divided, and in it the

constellations are more numerous and closer to one another than in the other

half;  which  shows  that  the  cause  of  the  light  is  the  motion  of  the

constellations and nothing else. For if it is found in the circle in which there

are most constellations and at that point in the circle at which they are densest

and contain the biggest and the most stars, it is natural to suppose that they

are  the  true  cause  of  the  affection  in  question.  The  circle  and  the

constellations in it may be seen in the diagram. The so-called ‘scattered’ stars

it is not possible to set down in the same way on the sphere because none of

them have an evident permanent position; but if you look up to the sky the

point is clear. For in this circle alone are the intervals full of these stars: in the

other circles there are obvious gaps. Hence if we accept the cause assigned

for the appearance of comets as plausible we must assume that the same kind

of thing holds good of the milky way. For the fringe which in the former case

is an affection of a single star here forms in the same way in relation to a

whole circle. So if we are to define the milky way we may call it ‘a fringe

attaching to the greatest circle, and due to the matter secreted’. This, as we

said before, explains why there are few comets and why they appear rarely; it

is because at each revolution of the heavens this matter has always been and

is always being separated off and gathered into this region.

We  have  now  explained  the  phenomena  that  occur  in  that  part  of  the

terrestrial  world  which  is  continuous  with  the  motions  of  the  heavens,

namely, shooting-stars and the burning flame, comets and the milky way,

these being the chief affections that appear in that region.

<

div class="section" title="9">9


Let us go on to treat of the region which follows next in order after this and

which immediately surrounds the earth. It is the region common to water and

air, and the processes attending the formation of water above take place in it.

We must consider the principles and causes of all these phenomena too as

before. The efficient and chief and first cause is the circle in which the sun

moves. For the sun as it approaches or recedes, obviously causes dissipation

and condensation and so gives rise to generation and destruction. Now the

earth remains but the moisture surrounding it is made to evaporate by the

sun’s rays and the other heat from above, and rises. But when the heat which

was  raising  it  leaves  it,  in  part  dispersing  to  the  higher  region,  in  part

quenched  through  rising  so  far  into  the  upper  air,  then  the  vapour  cools

because its heat is gone and because the place is cold, and condenses again

and turns from air into water. And after the water has formed it falls down

again to the earth.

The exhalation of water is vapour: air condensing into water is cloud. Mist

is what is left over when a cloud condenses into water, and is therefore rather

a sign of fine weather than of rain; for mist might be called a barren cloud. So

we get a circular process that follows the course of the sun. For according as

the sun moves to this side or that, the moisture in this process rises or falls.

We must think of it as a river flowing up and down in a circle and made up

partly of air, partly of water. When the sun is near, the stream of vapour

flows upwards; when it recedes, the stream of water flows down: and the

order of sequence, at all events, in this process always remains the same. So

if ‘Oceanus’ had some secret meaning in early writers, perhaps they may

have meant this river that flows in a circle about the earth.

So the moisture is always raised by the heat and descends to the earth

again when it gets cold. These processes and, in some cases, their varieties

are distinguished by special names. When the water falls in small drops it is

called a drizzle; when the drops are larger it is rain.

<

div class="section" title="10">


10


  Some of the vapour that is formed by day does not rise high because theratio of the fire that is raising it to the water that is being raised is small.

When this cools and descends at night it is called dew and hoar-frost. When

the vapour is frozen before it has condensed to water again it is hoar-frost;

and this appears in winter and is commoner in cold places. It is dew when the

vapour has condensed into water and the heat is not so great as to dry up the

moisture that has been raised nor the cold sufficient (owing to the warmth of

the  climate  or  season)  for  the  vapour  itself  to  freeze.  For  dew  is  more

commonly found when the season or the place is warm, whereas the opposite,

as has been said, is the case with hoar-frost. For obviously vapour is warmer

than  water,  having  still  the  fire  that  raised  it:  consequently  more  cold  is

needed to freeze it.

Both dew and hoar-frost are found when the sky is clear and there is no

wind. For the vapour could not be raised unless the sky were clear, and if a

wind were blowing it could not condense.

The fact that hoar-frost is not found on mountains contributes to prove that

these phenomena occur because the vapour does not rise high. One reason for

this is that it rises from hollow and watery places, so that the heat that is

raising it, bearing as it were too heavy a burden cannot lift it to a great height

but soon lets it fall again. A second reason is that the motion of the air is

more pronounced at a height, and this dissolves a gathering of this kind.

  Everywhere, except in Pontus, dew is found with south winds and not with

north winds. There the opposite is the case and it is found with north winds

and not with south. The reason is the same as that which explains why dew is

found in warm weather and not in cold. For the south wind brings warm, and

the north, wintry weather. For the north wind is cold and so quenches the heat

of  the  evaporation.  But  in  Pontus  the  south  wind  does  not  bring  warmth

enough  to  cause  evaporation,  whereas  the  coldness  of  the  north  wind

concentrates the heat by a sort of recoil, so that there is more evaporation and

not less. This is a thing which we can often observe in other places too.

Wells, for instance, give off more vapour in a north than in a south wind.

Only the north winds quench the heat before any considerable quantity of

vapour has gathered, while in a south wind the evaporation is allowed to

accumulate.

  Water, once formed, does not freeze on the surface of the earth, in the way

that it does in the region of the clouds.

<

div class="section" title="11">11


  From the latter there fall three bodies condensed by cold, namely rain,

snow, hail. Two of these correspond to the phenomena on the lower level and

are due to the same causes, differing from them only in degree and quantity.

  Snow and hoar-frost are one and the same thing, and so are rain and dew:

only there is a great deal of the former and little of the latter. For rain is due

to the cooling of a great amount of vapour, for the region from which and the

time during which the vapour is collected are considerable. But of dew there

is little: for the vapour collects for it in a single day and from a small area, as

its quick formation and scanty quantity show.

The relation of hoar-frost and snow is the same: when cloud freezes there

is snow, when vapour freezes there is hoar-frost. Hence snow is a sign of a

cold season or country. For a great deal of heat is still present and unless the

cold were overpowering it the cloud would not freeze. For there still survives

in it a great deal of the heat which caused the moisture to rise as vapour from

the earth.

Hail on the other hand is found in the upper region, but the corresponding

phenomenon in the vaporous region near the earth is lacking. For, as we said,

to snow in the upper region corresponds hoar-frost in the lower, and to rain in

the upper region, dew in the lower. But there is nothing here to correspond to

hail in the upper region. Why this is so will be clear when we have explained

the nature of hail.

<

div class="section" title="12">


12


But we must go on to collect the facts bearing on the origin of it, both

those which raise no difficulties and those which seem paradoxical.

Hail is ice, and water freezes in winter; yet hailstorms occur chiefly in

spring and autumn and less often in the late summer, but rarely in winter and

then only when the cold is less intense. And in general hailstorms occur in

warmer, and snow in colder places. Again, there is a difficulty about water

freezing in the upper region. It cannot have frozen before becoming water:

and water cannot remain suspended in the air for any space of time. Nor can

we say that the case is like that of particles of moisture which are carried upowing to their small size and rest on the iar (the water swimming on the air

just as small particles of earth and gold often swim on water). In that case

large drops are formed by the union of many small, and so fall down. This

cannot take place in the case of hail, since solid bodies cannot coalesce like

liquid ones. Clearly then drops of that size were suspended in the air or else

they could not have been so large when frozen.

  Some think that the cause and origin of hail is this. The cloud is thrust up

into the upper atmosphere, which is colder because the reflection of the sun’s

rays from the earth ceases there, and upon its arrival there the water freezes.

They think that this explains why hailstorms are commoner in summer and in

warm countries; the heat is greater and it thrusts the clouds further up from

the earth. But the fact is that hail does not occur at all at a great height: yet it

ought to do so, on their theory, just as we see that snow falls most on high

mountains. Again clouds have often been observed moving with a great noise

close to the earth, terrifying those who heard and saw them as portents of

some catastrophe. Sometimes, too, when such clouds have been seen, without

any noise, there follows a violent hailstorm, and the stones are of incredible

size, and angular in shape. This shows that they have not been falling for long

and that they were frozen near to the earth, and not as that theory would have

it. Moreover, where the hailstones are large, the cause of their freezing must

be present in the highest degree: for hail is ice as every one can see. Now

those hailstones are large which are angular in shape. And this shows that

they froze close to the earth, for those that fall far are worn away by the

length of their fall and become round and smaller in size.

It clearly follows that the congelation does not take place because the cloud

is thrust up into the cold upper region.

Now we see that warm and cold react upon one another by recoil. Hence in

warm weather the lower parts of the earth are cold and in a frost they are

warm. The same thing, we must suppose, happens in the air, so that in the

warmer seasons the cold is concentrated by the surrounding heat and causes

the  cloud  to  go  over  into  water  suddenly.  (For  this  reason  rain-drops  are

much  larger  on  warm  days  than  in  winter,  and  showers  more  violent.  A

shower is said to be more violent in proportion as the water comes down in a

body, and this happens when the condensation takes place quickly,-though

this is just the opposite of what Anaxagoras says. He says that this happens

when the cloud has risen into the cold air; whereas we say that it happens

when the cloud has descended into the warm air, and that the more the furtherthe cloud has descended). But when the cold has been concentrated within

still more by the outer heat, it freezes the water it has formed and there is hail.

We get hail when the process of freezing is quicker than the descent of the

water. For if the water falls in a certain time and the cold is sufficient to

freeze  it  in  less,  there  is  no  difficulty  about  its  having  frozen  in  the  air,

provided  that  the  freezing  takes  place  in  a  shorter  time  than  its  fall.  The

nearer to the earth, and the more suddenly, this process takes place, the more

violent is the rain that results and the larger the raindrops and the hailstones

because of the shortness of their fall. For the same reason large raindrops do

not fall thickly. Hail is rarer in summer than in spring and autumn, though

commoner than in winter, because the air is drier in summer, whereas in

spring it is still moist, and in autumn it is beginning to grow moist. It is for

the same reason that hailstorms sometimes occur in the late summer as we

have said.

The  fact  that  the  water  has  previously  been  warmed  contributes  to  its

freezing quickly: for so it cools sooner. Hence many people, when they want

to cool hot water quickly, begin by putting it in the sun. So the inhabitants of

Pontus when they encamp on the ice to fish (they cut a hole in the ice and

then fish) pour warm water round their reeds that it may freeze the quicker,

for they use the ice like lead to fix the reeds. Now it is in hot countries and

seasons that the water which forms soon grows warm.

It is for the same reason that rain falls in summer and not in winter in

Arabia and Ethiopia too, and that in torrents and repeatedly on the same day.

For the concentration or recoil due to the extreme heat of the country cools

the clouds quickly.

So much for an account of the nature and causes of rain, dew, snow, hoar-

frost, and hail.

<

div class="section" title="13">


13


Let us explain the nature of winds, and all windy vapours, also of rivers

and of the sea. But here, too, we must first discuss the difficulties involved:

for, as in other matters, so in this no theory has been handed down to us that

the most ordinary man could not have thought of.

  Some say that what is called air, when it is in motion and flows, is wind,and that this same air when it condenses again becomes cloud and water,

implying that the nature of wind and water is the same. So they define wind

as a motion of the air. Hence some, wishing to say a clever thing, assert that

all the winds are one wind, because the air that moves is in fact all of it one

and the same; they maintain that the winds appear to differ owing to the

region from which the air may happen to flow on each occasion, but really do

not differ at all. This is just like thinking that all rivers are one and the same

river, and the ordinary unscientific view is better than a scientific theory like

this. If all rivers flow from one source, and the same is true in the case of the

winds, there might be some truth in this theory; but if it is no more true in the

one case than in the other, this ingenious idea is plainly false. What requires

investigation is this: the nature of wind and how it originates, its efficient

cause and whence they derive their source; whether one ought to think of the

wind as issuing from a sort of vessel and flowing until the vessel is empty, as

if let out of a wineskin, or, as painters represent the winds, as drawing their

source from themselves.

We find analogous views about the origin of rivers. It is thought that the

water is raised by the sun and descends in rain and gathers below the earth

and so flows from a great reservoir, all the rivers from one, or each from a

different  one.  No  water  at  all  is  generated,  but  the  volume  of  the  rivers

consists of the water that is gathered into such reservoirs in winter. Hence

rivers are always fuller in winter than in summer, and some are perennial,

others not. Rivers are perennial where the reservoir is large and so enough

water has collected in it to last out and not be used up before the winter rain

returns. Where the reservoirs are smaller there is less water in the rivers, and

they are dried up and their vessel empty before the fresh rain comes on.

But if any one will picture to himself a reservoir adequate to the water that

is continuously flowing day by day, and consider the amount of the water, it

is obvious that a receptacle that is to contain all the water that flows in the

year would be larger than the earth, or, at any rate, not much smaller.

  Though it is evident that many reservoirs of this kind do exist in many

parts of the earth, yet it is unreasonable for any one to refuse to admit that air

becomes water in the earth for the same reason as it does above it. If the cold

causes  the  vaporous  air  to  condense  into  water  above  the  earth  we  must

suppose the cold in the earth to produce this same effect, and recognize that

there not only exists in it and flows out of it actually formed water, but that

water is continually forming in it too.  Again, even in the case of the water that is not being formed from day to

day but exists as such, we must not suppose as some do that rivers have their

source in definite subterranean lakes. On the contrary, just as above the earth

small drops form and these join others, till finally the water descends in a

body  as  rain,  so  too  we  must  suppose  that  in  the  earth  the  water  at  first

trickles together little by little, and that the sources of the rivers drip, as it

were, out of the earth and then unite. This is proved by facts. When men

construct an aqueduct they collect the water in pipes and trenches, as if the

earth in the higher ground were sweating the water out. Hence, too, the head-

waters of rivers are found to flow from mountains, and from the greatest

mountains there flow the most numerous and greatest rivers. Again, most

springs are in the neighbourhood of mountains and of high ground, whereas if

we except rivers, water rarely appears in the plains. For mountains and high

ground, suspended over the country like a saturated sponge, make the water

ooze out and trickle together in minute quantities but in many places. They

receive  a  great  deal  of  water  falling  as  rain  (for  it  makes  no  difference

whether a spongy receptacle is concave and turned up or convex and turned

down: in either case it will contain the same volume of matter) and, they also

cool the vapour that rises and condense it back into water.

  Hence, as we said, we find that the greatest rivers flow from the greatest

mountains. This can be seen by looking at itineraries: what is recorded in

them consists either of things which the writer has seen himself or of such as

he has compiled after inquiry from those who have seen them.

In Asia we find that the most numerous and greatest rivers flow from the

mountain called Parnassus, admittedly the greatest of all mountains towards

the south-east. When you have crossed it you see the outer ocean, the further

limit of which is unknown to the dwellers in our world. Besides other rivers

there flow from it the Bactrus, the Choaspes, the Araxes: from the last a

branch separates off and flows into lake Maeotis as the Tanais. From it, too,

flows the Indus, the volume of whose stream is greatest of all rivers. From

the Caucasus flows the Phasis, and very many other great rivers besides. Now

the Caucasus is the greatest of the mountains that lie to the northeast, both as

regards its extent and its height. A proof of its height is the fact that it can be

seen from the so-called ‘deeps’ and from the entrance to the lake. Again, the

sun shines on its peaks for a third part of the night before sunrise and again

after  sunset.  Its  extent  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  thought  contains  many

inhabitable regions which are occupied by many nations and in which thereare said to be great lakes, yet they say that all these regions are visible up to

the last peak. From Pyrene (this is a mountain towards the west in Celtice)

there flow the Istrus and the Tartessus. The latter flows outside the pillars,

while  the  Istrus  flows  through  all  Europe  into  the  Euxine.  Most  of  the

remaining rivers flow northwards from the Hercynian mountains, which are

the  greatest  in  height  and  extent  about  that  region.  In  the  extreme  north,

beyond furthest Scythia, are the mountains called Rhipae. The stories about

their size are altogether too fabulous: however, they say that the most and

(after the Istrus) the greatest rivers flow from them. So, too, in Libya there

flow from the Aethiopian mountains the Aegon and the Nyses; and from the

so-called Silver Mountain the two greatest of named rivers, the river called

Chremetes that flows into the outer ocean, and the main source of the Nile.

Of  the  rivers  in  the  Greek  world,  the  Achelous  flows  from  Pindus,  the

Inachus from the same mountain; the Strymon, the Nestus, and the Hebrus all

three from Scombrus; many rivers, too, flow from Rhodope.

All other rivers would be found to flow in the same way, but we have

mentioned  these  as  examples.  Even  where  rivers  flow  from  marshes,  the

marshes in almost every case are found to lie below mountains or gradually

rising ground.

It is clear then that we must not suppose rivers to originate from definite

reservoirs: for the whole earth, we might almost say, would not be sufficient

(any more than the region of the clouds would be) if we were to suppose that

they were fed by actually existing water only and it were not the case that as

some water passed out of existence some more came into existence, but rivers

always drew their stream from an existing store. Secondly, the fact that rivers

rise at the foot of mountains proves that a place transmits the water it contains

by gradual percolation of many drops, little by little, and that this is how the

sources of rivers originate. However, there is nothing impossible about the

existence of such places containing a quantity of water like lakes: only they

cannot be big enough to produce the supposed effect. To think that they are is

just as absurd as if one were to suppose that rivers drew all their water from

the sources we see (for most rivers do flow from springs). So it is no more

reasonable to suppose those lakes to contain the whole volume of water than

these springs.

That there exist such chasms and cavities in the earth we are taught by the

rivers that are swallowed up. They are found in many parts of the earth: in the

Peloponnesus, for instance, there are many such rivers in Arcadia. The reasonis that Arcadia is mountainous and there are no channels from its valleys to

the sea. So these places get full of water, and this, having no outlet, under the

pressure  of  the  water  that  is  added  above,  finds  a  way  out  for  itself

underground. In Greece this kind of thing happens on quite a small scale, but

the lake at the foot of the Caucasus, which the inhabitants of these parts call a

sea, is considerable. Many great rivers fall into it and it has no visible outlet

but  issues  below  the  earth  off  the  land  of  the  Coraxi  about  the  so-called

‘deeps of Pontus’. This is a place of unfathomable depth in the sea: at any

rate no one has yet been able to find bottom there by sounding. At this spot,

about three hundred stadia from land, there comes up sweet water over a

large area, not all of it together but in three places. And in Liguria a river

equal in size to the Rhodanus is swallowed up and appears again elsewhere:

the Rhodanus being a navigable river.

<

div class="section" title="14">


14


The same parts of the earth are not always moist or dry, but they change

according as rivers come into existence and dry up. And so the relation of

land  to  sea  changes  too  and  a  place  does  not  always  remain  land  or  sea

throughout all time, but where there was dry land there comes to be sea, and

where there is now sea, there one day comes to be dry land. But we must

suppose these changes to follow some order and cycle. The principle and

cause of these changes is that the interior of the earth grows and decays, like

the bodies of plants and animals. Only in the case of these latter the process

does not go on by parts, but each of them necessarily grows or decays as a

whole, whereas it does go on by parts in the case of the earth. Here the causes

are cold and heat, which increase and diminish on account of the sun and its

course. It is owing to them that the parts of the earth come to have a different

character, that some parts remain moist for a certain time, and then dry up

and grow old, while other parts in their turn are filled with life and moisture.

Now when places become drier the springs necessarily give out, and when

this happens the rivers first decrease in size and then finally become dry; and

when  rivers  change  and  disappear  in  one  part  and  come  into  existence

correspondingly in another, the sea must needs be affected.

If the sea was once pushed out by rivers and encroached upon the landanywhere, it necessarily leaves that place dry when it recedes; again, if the

dry land has encroached on the sea at all by a process of silting set up by the

rivers when at their full, the time must come when this place will be flooded

again.

But the whole vital process of the earth takes place so gradually and in

periods of time which are so immense compared with the length of our life,

that these changes are not observed, and before their course can be recorded

from  beginning  to  end  whole  nations  perish  and  are  destroyed.  Of  such

destructions the most utter and sudden are due to wars; but pestilence or

famine cause them too. Famines, again, are either sudden and severe or else

gradual. In the latter case the disappearance of a nation is not noticed because

some leave the country while others remain; and this goes on until the land is

unable to maintain any inhabitants at all. So a long period of time is likely to

elapse from the first departure to the last, and no one remembers and the

lapse  of  time  destroys  all  record  even  before  the  last  inhabitants  have

disappeared. In the same way a nation must be supposed to lose account of

the time when it first settled in a land that was changing from a marshy and

watery state and becoming dry. Here, too, the change is gradual and lasts a

long time and men do not remember who came first, or when, or what the

land was like when they came. This has been the case with Egypt. Here it is

obvious that the land is continually getting drier and that the whole country is

a deposit of the river Nile. But because the neighbouring peoples settled in

the land gradually as the marshes dried, the lapse of time has hidden the

beginning of the process. However, all the mouths of the Nile, with the single

exception of that at Canopus, are obviously artificial and not natural. And

Egypt was nothing more than what is called Thebes, as Homer, too, shows,

modern though he is in relation to such changes. For Thebes is the place that

he mentions; which implies that Memphis did not yet exist, or at any rate was

not as important as it is now. That this should be so is natural, since the lower

land came to be inhabited later than that which lay higher. For the parts that

lie nearer to the place where the river is depositing the silt are necessarily

marshy  for  a  longer  time  since  the  water  always  lies  most  in  the  newly

formed land. But in time this land changes its character, and in its turn enjoys

a  period  of  prosperity.  For  these  places  dry  up  and  come  to  be  in  good

condition while the places that were formerly well-tempered some day grow

excessively  dry  and  deteriorate.  This  happened  to  the  land  of  Argos  and

Mycenae  in  Greece.  In  the  time  of  the  Trojan  wars  the  Argive  land  wasmarshy  and  could  only  support  a  small  population,  whereas  the  land  of

Mycenae  was  in  good  condition  (and  for  this  reason  Mycenae  was  the

superior).  But  now  the  opposite  is  the  case,  for  the  reason  we  have

mentioned:  the  land  of  Mycenae  has  become  completely  dry  and  barren,

while the Argive land that was formerly barren owing to the water has now

become fruitful. Now the same process that has taken place in this small

district must be supposed to be going on over whole countries and on a large

scale.

Men  whose  outlook  is  narrow  suppose  the  cause  of  such  events  to  be

change in the universe, in the sense of a coming to be of the world as a

whole.  Hence  they  say  that  the  sea  being  dried  up  and  is  growing  less,

because this is observed to have happened in more places now than formerly.

But this is only partially true. It is true that many places are now dry, that

formerly were covered with water. But the opposite is true too: for if they

look they will find that there are many places where the sea has invaded the

land. But we must not suppose that the cause of this is that the world is in

process of becoming. For it is absurd to make the universe to be in process

because of small and trifling changes, when the bulk and size of the earth are

surely as nothing in comparison with the whole world. Rather we must take

the cause of all these changes to be that, just as winter occurs in the seasons

of the year, so in determined periods there comes a great winter of a great

year and with it excess of rain. But this excess does not always occur in the

same place. The deluge in the time of Deucalion, for instance, took place

chiefly  in  the  Greek  world  and  in  it  especially  about  ancient  Hellas,  the

country about Dodona and the Achelous, a river which has often changed its

course. Here the Selli dwelt and those who were formerly called Graeci and

now  Hellenes.  When,  therefore,  such  an  excess  of  rain  occurs  we  must

suppose that it suffices for a long time. We have seen that some say that the

size of the subterranean cavities is what makes some rivers perennial and

others not, whereas we maintain that the size of the mountains is the cause,

and their density and coldness; for great, dense, and cold mountains catch and

keep  and  create  most  water:  whereas  if  the  mountains  that  overhang  the

sources of rivers are small or porous and stony and clayey, these rivers run

dry earlier. We must recognize the same kind of thing in this case too. Where

such abundance of rain falls in the great winter it tends to make the moisture

of those places almost everlasting. But as time goes on places of the latter

type dry up more, while those of the former, moist type, do so less: until atlast the beginning of the same cycle returns.

  Since there is necessarily some change in the whole world, but not in the

way of coming into existence or perishing (for the universe is permanent), it

must be, as we say, that the same places are not for ever moist through the

presence of sea and rivers, nor for ever dry. And the facts prove this. The

whole land of the Egyptians, whom we take to be the most ancient of men,

has evidently gradually come into existence and been produced by the river.

This is clear from an observation of the country, and the facts about the Red

Sea suffice to prove it too. One of their kings tried to make a canal to it (for it

would have been of no little advantage to them for the whole region to have

become navigable; Sesostris is said to have been the first of the ancient kings

to try), but he found that the sea was higher than the land. So he first, and

Darius afterwards, stopped making the canal, lest the sea should mix with the

river water and spoil it. So it is clear that all this part was once unbroken sea.

For  the  same  reason  Libya-the  country  of  Ammon-is,  strangely  enough,

lower and hollower than the land to the seaward of it. For it is clear that a

barrier of silt was formed and after it lakes and dry land, but in course of time

the water that was left behind in the lakes dried up and is now all gone. Again

the silting up of the lake Maeotis by the rivers has advanced so much that the

limit to the size of the ships which can now sail into it to trade is much lower

than it was sixty years ago. Hence it is easy to infer that it, too, like most

lakes, was originally produced by the rivers and that it must end by drying up

entirely.

  Again, this process of silting up causes a continuous current through the

Bosporus; and in this case we can directly observe the nature of the process.

Whenever the current from the Asiatic shore threw up a sandbank, there first

formed  a  small  lake  behind  it.  Later  it  dried  up  and  a  second  sandbank

formed in front of the first and a second lake. This process went on uniformly

and without interruption. Now when this has been repeated often enough, in

the course of time the strait must become like a river, and in the end the river

itself must dry up.

So it is clear, since there will be no end to time and the world is eternal,

that neither the Tanais nor the Nile has always been flowing, but that the

region whence they flow was once dry: for their effect may be fulfilled, but

time cannot. And this will be equally true of all other rivers. But if rivers

come  into  existence  and  perish  and  the  same  parts  of  the  earth  were  not

always moist, the sea must needs change correspondingly. And if the sea isalways advancing in one place and receding in another it is clear that the

same parts of the whole earth are not always either sea or land, but that all

this changes in course of time.

So we have explained that the same parts of the earth are not always land

or sea and why that is so: and also why some rivers are perennial and others

not.                              Meteorology, Book II


Translated by E. W. Webster


<

div class="section" title="1">


1


Let us explain the nature of the sea and the reason why such a large mass

of water is salt and the way in which it originally came to be.

The old writers who invented theogonies say that the sea has springs, for

they  want  earth  and  sea  to  have  foundations  and  roots  of  their  own.

Presumably they thought that this view was grander and more impressive as

implying  that  our  earth  was  an  important  part  of  the  universe.  For  they

believed that the whole world had been built up round our earth and for its

sake, and that the earth was the most important and primary part of it. Others,

wiser in human knowledge, give an account of its origin. At first, they say,

the earth was surrounded by moisture. Then the sun began to dry it up, part of

it evaporated and is the cause of winds and the turnings back of the sun and

the moon, while the remainder forms the sea. So the sea is being dried up and

is growing less, and will end by being some day entirely dried up. Others say

that the sea is a kind of sweat exuded by the earth when the sun heats it, and

that this explains its saltness: for all sweat is salt. Others say that the saltness

is due to the earth. Just as water strained through ashes becomes salt, so the

sea owes its saltness to the admixture of earth with similar properties.

We must now consider the facts which prove that the sea cannot possibly

have springs. The waters we find on the earth either flow or are stationary.

All flowing water has springs. (By a spring, as we have explained above, we

must not understand a source from which waters are ladled as it were from a

vessel, but a first point at which the water which is continually forming and

percolating gathers.) Stationary water is either that which has collected and

has been left standing, marshy pools, for instance, and lakes, which differ

merely  in  size,  or  else  it  comes  from  springs.  In  this  case  it  is  always

artificial, I mean as in the case of wells, otherwise the spring would have tobe above the outlet. Hence the water from fountains and rivers flows of itself,

whereas wells need to be worked artificially. All the waters that exist belong

to one or other of these classes.

On the basis of this division we can sec that the sea cannot have springs.

For it falls under neither of the two classes; it does not flow and it is not

artificial; whereas all water from springs must belong to one or other of them.

Natural standing water from springs is never found on such a large scale.

  Again, there are several seas that have no communication with one another

at all. The Red Sea, for instance, communicates but slightly with the ocean

outside the straits, and the Hyrcanian and Caspian seas are distinct from this

ocean and people dwell all round them. Hence, if these seas had had any

springs anywhere they must have been discovered.

It is true that in straits, where the land on either side contracts an open sea

into a small space, the sea appears to flow. But this is because it is swinging

to and fro. In the open sea this motion is not observed, but where the land

narrows and contracts the sea the motion that was imperceptible in the open

necessarily strikes the attention.

The whole of the Mediterranean does actually flow. The direction of this

flow is determined by the depth of the basins and by the number of rivers.

Maeotis flows into Pontus and Pontus into the Aegean. After that the flow of

the remaining seas is not so easy to observe. The current of Maeotis and

Pontus is due to the number of rivers (more rivers flow into the Euxine and

Maeotis than into the whole Mediterranean with its much larger basin), and to

their own shallowness. For we find the sea getting deeper and deeper. Pontus

is deeper than Maeotis, the Aegean than Pontus, the Sicilian sea than the

Aegean; the Sardinian and Tyrrhenic being the deepest of all. (Outside the

pillars of Heracles the sea is shallow owing to the mud, but calm, for it lies in

a hollow.) We see, then, that just as single rivers flow from mountains, so it is

with the earth as a whole: the greatest volume of water flows from the higher

regions in the north. Their alluvium makes the northern seas shallow, while

the outer seas are deeper. Some further evidence of the height of the northern

regions  of  the  earth  is  afforded  by  the  view  of  many  of  the  ancient

meteorologists. They believed that the sun did not pass below the earth, but

round its northern part, and that it was the height of this which obscured the

sun and caused night.

So much to prove that there cannot be sources of the sea and to explain its

observed flow.<

div class="section" title="2">


2


We must now discuss the origin of the sea, if it has an origin, and the cause

of its salt and bitter taste.

  What made earlier writers consider the sea to be the original and main

body of water is this. It seems reasonable to suppose that to be the case on the

analogy of the other elements. Each of them has a main bulk which by reason

of its mass is the origin of that element, and any parts which change and mix

with the other elements come from it. Thus the main body of fire is in the

upper region; that of air occupies the place next inside the region of fire;

while the mass of the earth is that round which the rest of the elements are

seen to lie. So we must clearly look for something analogous in the case of

water. But here we can find no such single mass, as in the case of the other

elements, except the sea. River water is not a unity, nor is it stable, but is seen

to  be  in  a  continuous  process  of  becoming  from  day  to  day.  It  was  this

difficulty  which  made  people  regard  the  sea  as  the  origin  and  source  of

moisture and of all water. And so we find it maintained that rivers not only

flow into the sea but originate from it, the salt water becoming sweet by

filtration.

But this view involves another difficulty. If this body of water is the origin

and source of all water, why is it salt and not sweet? The reason for this,

besides  answering  this  question,  will  ensure  our  having  a  right  first

conception of the nature of the sea.

The earth is surrounded by water, just as that is by the sphere of air, and

that again by the sphere called that of fire (which is the outermost both on the

common  view  and  on  ours).  Now  the  sun,  moving  as  it  does,  sets  up

processes of change and becoming and decay, and by its agency the finest

and sweetest water is every day carried up and is dissolved into vapour and

rises to the upper region, where it is condensed again by the cold and so

returns to the earth. This, as we have said before, is the regular course of

nature.

  Hence all my predecessors who supposed that the sun was nourished by

moisture are absurdly mistaken. Some go on to say that the solstices are due

to this, the reason being that the same places cannot always supply the sunwith  nourishment  and  that  without  it  he  must  perish.  For  the  fire  we  are

familiar with lives as long as it is fed, and the only food for fire is moisture.

As if the moisture that is raised could reach the sun! or this ascent were really

like  that  performed  by  flame  as  it  comes  into  being,  and  to  which  they

supposed the case of the sun to be analogous! Really there is no similarity. A

flame is a process of becoming, involving a constant interchange of moist and

dry. It cannot be said to be nourished since it scarcely persists as one and the

same for a moment. This cannot be true of the sun; for if it were nourished

like that, as they say it is, we should obviously not only have a new sun every

day, as Heraclitus says, but a new sun every moment. Again, when the sun

causes the moisture to rise, this is like fire heating water. So, as the fire is not

fed by the water above it, it is absurd to suppose that the sun feeds on that

moisture, even if its heat made all the water in the world evaporate. Again, it

is absurd, considering the number and size of the stars, that these thinkers

should consider the sun only and overlook the question how the rest of the

heavenly bodies subsist. Again, they are met by the same difficulty as those

who say that at first the earth itself was moist and the world round the earth

was warmed by the sun, and so air was generated and the whole firmament

grew, and the air caused winds and solstices. The objection is that we always

plainly see the water that has been carried up coming down again. Even if the

same amount does not come back in a year or in a given country, yet in a

certain period all that has been carried up is returned. This implies that the

celestial bodies do not feed on it, and that we cannot distinguish between

some air which preserves its character once it is generated and some other

which is generated but becomes water again and so perishes; on the contrary,

all the moisture alike is dissolved and all of it condensed back into water.

The drinkable, sweet water, then, is light and is all of it drawn up: the salt

water is heavy and remains behind, but not in its natural place. For this is a

question  which  has  been  sufficiently  discussed  (I  mean  about  the  natural

place that water, like the other elements, must in reason have), and the answer

is this. The place which we see the sea filling is not its natural place but that

of water. It seems to belong to the sea because the weight of the salt water

makes  it  remain  there,  while  the  sweet,  drinkable  water  which  is  light  is

carried up. The same thing happens in animal bodies. Here, too, the food

when it enters the body is sweet, yet the residuum and dregs of liquid food

are found to be bitter and salt. This is because the sweet and drinkable part of

it has been drawn away by the natural animal heat and has passed into theflesh and the other parts of the body according to their several natures. Now

just as here it would be wrong for any one to refuse to call the belly the place

of liquid food because that disappears from it soon, and to call it the place of

the residuum because this is seen to remain, so in the case of our present

subject. This place, we say, is the place of water. Hence all rivers and all the

water that is generated flow into it: for water flows into the deepest place, and

the deepest part of the earth is filled by the sea. Only all the light and sweet

part of it is quickly carried off by the sun, while herest remains for the reason

we have explained. It is quite natural that some people should have been

puzzled  by  the  old  question  why  such  a  mass  of  water  leaves  no  trace

anywhere (for the sea does not increase though innumerable and vast rivers

are flowing into it every day.) But if one considers the matter the solution is

easy. The same amount of water does not take as long to dry up when it is

spread out as when it is gathered in a body, and indeed the difference is so

great that in the one case it might persist the whole day long while in the

other it might all disappear in a moment-as for instance if one were to spread

out a cup of water over a large table. This is the case with the rivers: all the

time they are flowing their water forms a compact mass, but when it arrives

at a vast wide place it quickly and imperceptibly evaporates.

But the theory of the Phaedo about rivers and the sea is impossible. There

it is said that the earth is pierced by intercommunicating channels and that the

original head and source of all waters is what is called Tartarus-a mass of

water  about  the  centre,  from  which  all  waters,  flowing  and  standing,  are

derived. This primary and original water is always surging to and fro, and so

it causes the rivers to flow on this side of the earth’s centre and on that; for it

has no fixed seat but is always oscillating about the centre. Its motion up and

down is what fills rivers. Many of these form lakes in various places (our sea

is an instance of one of these), but all of them come round again in a circle to

the original source of their flow, many at the same point, but some at a point

opposite to that from which they issued; for instance, if they started from the

other side of the earth’s centre, they might return from this side of it. They

descend only as far as the centre, for after that all motion is upwards. Water

gets its tastes and colours from the kind of earth the rivers happened to flow

through.

But on this theory rivers do not always flow in the same sense. For since

they flow to the centre from which they issue forth they will not be flowing

down any more than up, but in whatever direction the surging of Tartarusinclines to. But at this rate we shall get the proverbial rivers flowing upwards,

which is impossible. Again, where is the water that is generated and what

goes up again as vapour to come from? For this must all of it simply be

ignored, since the quantity of water is always the same and all the water that

flows out from the original source flows back to it again. This itself is not

true, since all rivers are seen to end in the sea except where one flows into

another. Not one of them ends in the earth, but even when one is swallowed

up it comes to the surface again. And those rivers are large which flow for a

long distance through a lowying country, for by their situation and length

they cut off the course of many others and swallow them up. This is why the

Istrus and the Nile are the greatest of the rivers which flow into our sea.

Indeed, so many rivers fall into them that there is disagreement as to the

sources of them both. All of which is plainly impossible on the theory, and

the more so as it derives the sea from Tartarus.

  Enough has been said to prove that this is the natural place of water and

not of the sea, and to explain why sweet water is only found in rivers, while

salt water is stationary, and to show that the sea is the end rather than the

source of water, analogous to the residual matter of all food, and especially

liquid food, in animal bodies.

<

div class="section" title="3">


3


We must now explain why the sea is salt, and ask whether it eternally

exists as identically the same body, or whether it did not exist at all once and

some day will exist no longer, but will dry up as some people think.

  Every one admits this, that if the whole world originated the sea did too;

for they make them come into being at the same time. It follows that if the

universe is eternal the same must be true of the sea. Any one who thinks like

Democritus that the sea is diminishing and will disappear in the end reminds

us of Aesop’s tales. His story was that Charybdis had twice sucked in the sea:

the first time she made the mountains visible; the second time the islands; and

when she sucks it in for the last time she will dry it up entirely. Such a tale is

appropriate enough to Aesop in a rage with the ferryman, but not to serious

inquirers. Whatever made the sea remain at first, whether it was its weight, as

some even of those who hold these views say (for it is easy to see the causehere), or some other reason-clearly the same thing must make it persist for

ever. They must either deny that the water raised by the sun will return at all,

or, if it does, they must admit that the sea persists for ever or as long as this

process goes on, and again, that for the same period of time that sweet water

must have been carried up beforehand. So the sea will never dry up: for

before that can happen the water that has gone up beforehand will return to it:

for if you say that this happens once you must admit its recurrence. If you

stop the sun’s course there is no drying agency. If you let it go on it will draw

up the sweet water as we have said whenever it approaches, and let it descend

again when it recedes. This notion about the sea is derived from the fact that

many places are found to be drier now than they once were. Why this is so

we have explained. The phenomenon is due to temporary excess of rain and

not  to  any  process  of  becoming  in  which  the  universe  or  its  parts  are

involved. Some day the opposite will take place and after that the earth will

grow dry once again. We must recognize that this process always goes on

thus in a cycle, for that is more satisfactory than to suppose a change in the

whole world in order to explain these facts. But we have dwelt longer on this

point than it deserves.

To return to the saltness of the sea: those who create the sea once for all, or

indeed  generate  it  at  all,  cannot  account  for  its  saltness.  It  makes  no

difference whether the sea is the residue of all the moisture that is about the

earth and has been drawn up by the sun, or whether all the flavour existing in

the whole mass of sweet water is due to the admixture of a certain kind of

earth.  Since  the  total  volume  of  the  sea  is  the  same  once  the  water  that

evaporated has returned, it follows that it must either have been salt at first

too,  or,  if  not  at  first,  then  not  now  either.  If  it  was  salt  from  the  very

beginning, then we want to know why that was so; and why, if salt water was

drawn up then, that is not the case now.

  Again, if it is maintained that an admixture of earth makes the sea salt (for

they say that earth has many flavours and is washed down by the rivers and

so makes the sea salt by its admixture), it is strange that rivers should not be

salt too. How can the admixture of this earth have such a striking effect in a

great quantity of water and not in each river singly? For the sea, differing in

nothing from rivers but in being salt, is evidently simply the totality of river

water, and the rivers are the vehicle in which that earth is carried to their

common destination.

It is equally absurd to suppose that anything has been explained by callingthe sea ‘the sweat of the earth’, like Empedicles. Metaphors are poetical and

so that expression of his may satisfy the requirements of a poem, but as a

scientific  theory  it  is  unsatisfactory.  Even  in  the  case  of  the  body  it  is  a

question how the sweet liquid drunk becomes salt sweat whether it is merely

by the departure of some element in it which is sweetest, or by the admixture

of something, as when water is strained through ashes. Actually the saltness

seems to be due to the same cause as in the case of the residual liquid that

gathers in the bladder. That, too, becomes bitter and salt though the liquid we

drink and that contained in our food is sweet. If then the bitterness is due in

these  cases  (as  with  the  water  strained  through  lye)  to  the  presence  of  a

certain sort of stuff that is carried along by the urine (as indeed we actually

find a salt deposit settling in chamber-pots) and is secreted from the flesh in

sweat (as if the departing moisture were washing the stuff out of the body),

then  no  doubt  the  admixture  of  something  earthy  with  the  water  is  what

makes the sea salt.

Now in the body stuff of this kind, viz. the sediment of food, is due to

failure to digest: but how there came to be any such thing in the earth requires

explanation. Besides, how can the drying and warming of the earth cause the

secretion such a great quantity of water; especially as that must be a mere

fragment of what is left in the earth? Again, waiving the question of quantity,

why does not the earth sweat now when it happens to be in process of drying?

If it did so then, it ought to do so now. But it does not: on the contrary, when

it is dry it graws moist, but when it is moist it does not secrete anything at all.

How then was it possible for the earth at the beginning when it was moist to

sweat  as  it  grew  dry?  Indeed,  the  theory  that  maintains  that  most  of  the

moisture departed and was drawn up by the sun and that what was left over is

the sea is more reasonable; but for the earth to sweat when it is moist is

impossible.

  Since  all  the  attempts  to  account  for  the  saltness  of  the  sea  seem

unsuccessful  let  us  explain  it  by  the  help  of  the  principle  we  have  used

already.

  Since we recognize two kinds of evaporation, one moist, the other dry, it is

clear that the latter must be recognized as the source of phenomena like those

we are concerned with.

But there is a question which we must discuss first. Does the sea always

remain numerically one and consisting of the same parts, or is it, too, one in

form and volume while its parts are in continual change, like air and sweetwater and fire? All of these are in a constant state of change, but the form and

the quantity of each of them are fixed, just as they are in the case of a flowing

river or a burning flame. The answer is clear, and there is no doubt that the

same account holds good of all these things alike. They differ in that some of

them  change  more  rapidly  or  more  slowly  than  others;  and  they  all  are

involved in a process of perishing and becoming which yet affects them all in

a regular course.

This being so we must go on to try to explain why the sea is salt. There are

many facts which make it clear that this taste is due to the admixture of

something. First, in animal bodies what is least digested, the residue of liquid

food, is salt and bitter, as we said before. All animal excreta are undigested,

but especially that which gathers in the bladder (its extreme lightness proves

this; for everything that is digested is condensed), and also sweat; in these

then is excreted (along with other matter) an identical substance to which this

flavour  is  due.  The  case  of  things  burnt  is  analogous.  What  heat  fails  to

assimilate becomes the excrementary residue in animal bodies, and, in things

burnt, ashes. That is why some people say that it was burnt earth that made

the sea salt. To say that it was burnt earth is absurd; but to say that it was

something like burnt earth is true. We must suppose that just as in the cases

we have described, so in the world as a whole, everything that grows and is

naturally generated always leaves an undigested residue, like that of things

burnt, consisting of this sort of earth. All the earthy stuff in the dry exhalation

is of this nature, and it is the dry exhalation which accounts for its great

quantity. Now since, as we have said, the moist and the dry evaporations are

mixed, some quantity of this stuff must always be included in the clouds and

the water that are formed by condensation, and must redescend to the earth in

rain. This process must always go on with such regularity as the sublunary

world admits of. and it is the answer to the question how the sea comes to be

salt.

It also explains why rain that comes from the south, and the first rains of

autumn, are brackish. The south is the warmest of winds and it blows from

dry and hot regions. Hence it carries little moist vapour and that is why it is

hot. (It makes no difference even if this is not its true character and it is

originally a cold wind, for it becomes warm on its way by incorporating with

itself a great quantity of dry evaporation from the places it passes over.) The

north wind, on the other hand, comb ing from moist regions, is full of vapour

and therefore cold. It is dry in our part of the world because it drives theclouds away before it, but in the south it is rainy; just as the south is a dry

wind in Libya. So the south wind charges the rain that falls with a great

quantity of this stuff. Autumn rain is brackish because the heaviest water

must fall first; so that that which contains the greatest quantity of this kind of

earth descends quickest.

This, too, is why the sea is warm. Everything that has been exposed to fire

contains heat potentially, as we see in the case of lye and ashes and the dry

and liquid excreta of animals. Indeed those animals which are hottest in the

belly have the hottest excreta.

The action of this cause is continually making the sea more salt, but some

part of its saltness is always being drawn up with the sweet water. This is less

than the sweet water in the same ratio in which the salt and brackish element

in rain is less than the sweet, and so the saltness of the sea remains constant

on the whole. Salt water when it turns into vapour becomes sweet, and the

vapour does not form salt water when it condenses again. This I know by

experiment. The same thing is true in every case of the kind: wine and all

fluids that evaporate and condense back into a liquid state become water.

They  all  are  water  modified  by  a  certain  admixture,  the  nature  of  which

determines their flavour. But this subject must be considered on another more

suitable occasion.

For the present let us say this. The sea is there and some of it is continually

being drawn up and becoming sweet; this returns from above with the rain.

But it is now different from what it was when it was drawn up, and its weight

makes it sink below the sweet water. This process prevents the sea, as it does

rivers, from drying up except from local causes (this must happen to sea and

rivers alike). On the other hand the parts neither of the earth nor of the sea

remain constant but only their whole bulk. For the same thing is true of the

earth as of the sea: some of it is carried up and some comes down with the

rain, and both that which remains on the surface and that which comes down

again change their situations.

  There is more evidence to prove that saltness is due to the admixture of

some substance, besides that which we have adduced. Make a vessel of wax

and put it in the sea, fastening its mouth in such a way as to prevent any

water getting in. Then the water that percolates through the wax sides of the

vessel is sweet, the earthy stuff, the admixture of which makes the water salt,

being separated off as it were by a filter. It is this stuff which make salt water

heavy  (it  weighs  more  than  fresh  water)  and  thick.  The  difference  inconsistency is such that ships with the same cargo very nearly sink in a river

when they are quite fit to navigate in the sea. This circumstance has before

now caused loss to shippers freighting their ships in a river. That the thicker

consistency is due to an admixture of something is proved by the fact that if

you make strong brine by the admixture of salt, eggs, even when they are full,

float in it. It almost becomes like mud; such a quantity of earthy matter is

there in the sea. The same thing is done in salting fish.

  Again if, as is fabled, there is a lake in Palestine, such that if you bind a

man or beast and throw it in it floats and does not sink, this would bear out

what we have said. They say that this lake is so bitter and salt that no fish live

in it and that if you soak clothes in it and shake them it cleans them. The

following facts all of them support our theory that it is some earthy stuff in

the water which makes it salt. In Chaonia there is a spring of brackish water

that flows into a neighbouring river which is sweet but contains no fish. The

local story is that when Heracles came from Erytheia driving the oxen and

gave the inhabitants the choice, they chose salt in preference to fish. They get

the salt from the spring. They boil off some of the water and let the rest stand;

when it has cooled and the heat and moisture have evaporated together it

gives them salt, not in lumps but loose and light like snow. It is weaker than

ordinary salt and added freely gives a sweet taste, and it is not as white as salt

generally is. Another instance of this is found in Umbria. There is a place

there where reeds and rushes grow. They burn some of these, put the ashes

into water and boil it off. When a little water is left and has cooled it gives a

quantity of salt.

  Most salt rivers and springs must once have been hot. Then the original

fire in them was extinguished but the earth through which they percolate

preserves the character of lye or ashes. Springs and rivers with all kinds of

flavours are found in many places. These flavours must in every case be due

to the fire that is or was in them, for if you expose earth to different degrees

of heat it assumes various kinds and shades of flavour. It becomes full of

alum and lye and other things of the kind, and the fresh water percolates

through these and changes its character. Sometimes it becomes acid as in

Sicania, a part of Sicily. There they get a salt and acid water which they use

as vinegar to season some of their dishes. In the neighbourhood of Lyncus,

too, there is a spring of acid water, and in Scythia a bitter spring. The water

from  this  makes  the  whole  of  the  river  into  which  it  flows  bitter.  These

differences  are  explained  by  a  knowledge  of  the  particular  mixtures  thatdetermine  different  savours.  But  these  have  been  explained  in  another

treatise.

We have now given an account of waters and the sea, why they persist,

how  they  change,  what  their  nature  is,  and  have  explained  most  of  their

natural operations and affections.

<

div class="section" title="4">


4


Let us proceed to the theory of winds. Its basis is a distinction we have

already made. We recognize two kinds of evaporation, one moist, the other

dry. The former is called vapour: for the other there is no general name but

we must call it a sort of smoke, applying to the whole of it a word that is

proper to one of its forms. The moist cannot exist without the dry nor the dry

without  the  moist:  whenever  we  speak  of  either  we  mean  that  it

predominates. Now when the sun in its circular course approaches, it draws

up by its heat the moist evaporation: when it recedes the cold makes the

vapour  that  had  been  raised  condense  back  into  water  which  falls  and  is

distributed through the earth. (This explains why there is more rain in winter

and more by night than by day: though the fact is not recognized because rain

by night is more apt to escape observation than by day.) But there is a great

quantity of fire and heat in the earth, and the sun not only draws up the

moisture that lies on the surface of it, but warms and dries the earth itself.

Consequently, since there are two kinds of evaporation, as we have said, one

like vapour, the other like smoke, both of them are necessarily generated.

That in which moisture predominates is the source of rain, as we explained

before, while the dry evaporation is the source and substance of all winds.

That  things  must  necessarily  take  this  course  is  clear  from  the  resulting

phenomena  themselves,  for  the  evaporation  that  is  to  produce  them  must

necessarily differ; and the sun and the warmth in the earth not only can but

must produce these evaporations.

  Since  the  two  evaporations  are  specifically  distinct,  wind  and  rain

obviously  differ  and  their  substance  is  not  the  same,  as  those  say  who

maintain that one and the same air when in motion is wind, but when it

condenses again is water. Air, as we have explained in an earlier book, is

made up of these as constituents. Vapour is moist and cold (for its fluidity isdue to its moistness, and because it derives from water it is naturally cold,

like water that has not been warmed): whereas the smoky evaporation is hot

and dry. Hence each contributes a part, and air is moist and hot. It is absurd

that this air that surrounds us should become wind when in motion, whatever

be the source of its motion on the contrary the case of winds is like that of

rivers. We do not call water that flows anyhow a river, even if there is a great

quantity of it, but only if the flow comes from a spring. So too with the

winds; a great quantity of air might be moved by the fall of some large object

without flowing from any source or spring.

The facts bear out our theory. It is because the evaporation takes place

uninterruptedly  but  differs  in  degree  and  quantity  that  clouds  and  winds

appear in their natural proportion according to the season; and it is because

there  is  now  a  great  excess  of  the  vaporous,  now  of  the  dry  and  smoky

exhalation,  that  some  years  are  rainy  and  wet,  others  windy  and  dry.

Sometimes there is much drought or rain, and it prevails over a great and

continuous  stretch  of  country.  At  other  times  it  is  local;  the  surrounding

country  often  getting  seasonable  or  even  excessive  rains  while  there  is

drought in a certain part; or, contrariwise, all the surrounding country gets

little or even no rain while a certain part gets rain in abundance. The reason

for all this is that while the same affection is generally apt to prevail over a

considerable  district  because  adjacent  places  (unless  there  is  something

special to differentiate them) stand in the same relation to the sun, yet on

occasion the dry evaporation will prevail in one part and the moist in another,

or conversely. Again the reason for this latter is that each evaporation goes

over to that of the neighbouring district: for instance, the dry evaporation

circulates in its own place while the moist migrates to the next district or is

even driven by winds to some distant place: or else the moist evaporation

remains and the dry moves away. Just as in the case of the body when the

stomach is dry the lower belly is often in the contrary state, and when it is dry

the  stomach  is  moist  and  cold,  so  it  often  happens  that  the  evaporations

reciprocally take one another’s place and interchange.

  Further, after rain wind generally rises in those places where the rain fell,

and when rain has come on the wind ceases. These are necessary effects of

the principles we have explained. After rain the earth is being dried by its

own heat and that from above and gives off the evaporation which we saw to

be the material cause of. wind. Again, suppose this secretion is present and

wind prevails; the heat is continually being thrown off, rising to the upperregion, and so the wind ceases; then the fall in temperature makes vapour

form  and  condense  into  water.  Water  also  forms  and  cools  the  dry

evaporation when the clouds are driven together and the cold concentrated in

them. These are the causes that make wind cease on the advent of rain, and

rain fall on the cessation of wind.

The cause of the predominance of winds from the north and from the south

is the same. (Most winds, as a matter of fact, are north winds or south winds.)

These are the only regions which the sun does not visit: it approaches them

and recedes from them, but its course is always over the-west and the east.

Hence clouds collect on either side, and when the sun approaches it provokes

the moist evaporation, and when it recedes to the opposite side there are

storms and rain. So summer and winter are due to the sun’s motion to and

from the solstices, and water ascends and falls again for the same reason.

Now since most rain falls in those regions towards which and from which the

sun turns and these are the north and the south, and since most evaporation

must take place where there is the greatest rainfall, just as green wood gives

most smoke, and since this evaporation is wind, it is natural that the most and

most important winds should come from these quarters. (The winds from the

north are called Boreae, those from the south Noti.)

The course of winds is oblique: for though the evaporation rises straight up

from the earth, they blow round it because all the surrounding air follows the

motion of the heavens. Hence the question might be asked whether winds

originate from above or from below. The motion comes from above: before

we feel the wind blowing the air betrays its presence if there are clouds or a

mist, for their motion shows that the wind has begun to blow before it has

actually reached us; and this implies that the source of winds is above. But

since wind is defined as ‘a quantity of dry evaporation from the earth moving

round the earth’, it is clear that while the origin of the motion is from above,

the  matter  and  the  generation  of  wind  come  from  below.  The  oblique

movement of the rising evaporation is caused from above: for the motion of

the heavens determines the processes that are at a distance from the earth, and

the motion from below is vertical and every cause is more active where it is

nearest to the effect; but in its generation and origin wind plainly derives

from the earth.

The facts bear out the view that winds are formed by the gradual union of

many  evaporations  just  as  rivers  derive  their  sources  from  the  water  that

oozes from the earth. Every wind is weakest in the spot from which it blows;as they proceed and leave their source at a distance they gather strength. Thus

the winter in the north is windless and calm: that is, in the north itself; but,

the breeze that blows from there so gently as to escape observation becomes a

great wind as it passes on.

We  have  explained  the  nature  and  origin  of  wind,  the  occurrence  of

drought and rains, the reason why rain stops wind and wind rises after rain,

the prevalence of north and south winds and also why wind moves in the way

it does.

<

div class="section" title="5">


5


The sun both checks the formation of winds and stimulates it. When the

evaporation is small in amount and faint the sun wastes it and dissipates by

its greater heat the lesser heat contained in the evaporation. It also dries up

the earth, the source of the evaporation, before the latter has appeared in bulk:

just as, when you throw a little fuel into a great fire, it is often burnt up before

giving off any smoke. In these ways the sun checks winds and prevents them

from rising at all: it checks them by wasting the evaporation, and prevents

their rising by drying up the earth quickly. Hence calm is very apt to prevail

about the rising of Orion and lasts until the coming of the Etesiae and their

‘forerunners’.

  Calm  is  due  to  two  causes.  Either  cold  quenches  the  evaporation,  for

instance a sharp frost: or excessive heat wastes it. In the intermediate periods,

too, the causes are generally either that the evaporation has not had time to

develop or that it has passed away and there is none as yet to replace it.

Both the setting and the rising of Orion are considered to be treacherous

and stormy, because they place at a change of season (namely of summer or

winter; and because the size of the constellation makes its rise last over many

days)  and  a  state  of  change  is  always  indefinite  and  therefore  liable  to

disturbance.

The Etesiae blow after the summer solstice and the rising of the dog-star:

not at the time when the sun is closest nor when it is distant; and they blow

by day and cease at night. The reason is that when the sun is near it dries up

the earth before evaporation has taken place, but when it has receded a little

its heat and the evaporation are present in the right proportion; so the icemelts and the earth, dried by its own heat and that of the sun, smokes and

vapours.  They  abate  at  night  because  the  cold  pf  the  nights  checks  the

melting of the ice. What is frozen gives off no evaporation, nor does that

which contains no dryness at all: it is only where something dry contains

moisture that it gives off evaporation under the influence of heat.

The question is sometimes asked: why do the north winds which we call

the Etesiae blow continuously after the summer solstice, when there are no

corresponding south winds after the winter solstice? The facts are reasonable

enough: for the so-called ‘white south winds’ do blow at the corresponding

season, though they are not equally continuous and so escape observation and

give rise to this inquiry. The reason for this is that the north wind I from the

arctic regions which are full of water and snow. The sun thaws them and so

the Etesiae blow: after rather than at the summer solstice. (For the greatest

heat is developed not when the sun is nearest to the north, but when its heat

has been felt for a considerable period and it has not yet receded far. The

‘bird winds’ blow in the same way after the winter solstice. They, too, are

weak Etesiae, but they blow less and later than the Etesiae. They begin to

blow  only  on  the  seventieth  day  because  the  sun  is  distant  and  therefore

weaker. They do not blow so continuously because only things on the surface

of  the  earth  and  offering  little  resistance  evaporate  then,  the  thoroughly

frozen parts requiring greater heat to melt them. So they blow intermittently

till the true Etesiae come on again at the summer solstice: for from that time

onwards the wind tends to blow continuously.) But the south wind blows

from the tropic of Cancer and not from the antarctic region.

  There are two inhabitable sections of the earth: one near our upper, or

nothern pole, the other near the other or southern pole; and their shape is like

that of a tambourine. If you draw lines from the centre of the earth they cut

out a drum-shaped figure. The lines form two cones; the base of the one is the

tropic, of the other the ever visible circle, their vertex is at the centre of the

earth. Two other cones towards the south pole give corresponding segments

of the earth. These sections alone are habitable. Beyond the tropics no one

can live: for there the shade would not fall to the north, whereas the earth is

known to be uninhabitable before the sun is in the zenith or the shade is

thrown  to  the  south:  and  the  regions  below  the  Bear  are  uninhabitable

because of the cold.

  (The Crown, too, moves over this region: for it is in the zenith when it is

on our meridian.)So we see that the way in which they now describe the geography of the

earth  is  ridiculous.  They  depict  the  inhabited  earth  as  round,  but  both

ascertained facts and general considerations show this to be impossible. If we

reflect we see that the inhabited region is limited in breadth, while the climate

admits of its extending all round the earth. For we meet with no excessive

heat or cold in the direction of its length but only in that of its breadth; so that

there is nothing to prevent our travelling round the earth unless the extent of

the sea presents an obstacle anywhere. The records of journeys by sea and

land bear this out. They make the length far greater than the breadth. If we

compute these voyages and journeys the distance from the Pillars of Heracles

to  India  exceeds  that  from  Aethiopia  to  Maeotis  and  the  northernmost

Scythians by a ratio of more than 5 to 3, as far as such matters admit of

accurate statement. Yet we know the whole breadth of the region we dwell in

up to the uninhabited parts: in one direction no one lives because of the cold,

in the other because of the heat.

But it is the sea which divides as it seems the parts beyond India from

those  beyond  the  Pillars  of  Heracles  and  prevents  the  earth  from  being

inhabited all round.

Now since there must be a region bearing the same relation to the southern

pole as the place we live in bears to our pole, it will clearly correspond in the

ordering of its winds as well as in other things. So just as we have a north

wind here, they must have a corresponding wind from the antarctic. This

wind cannot reach us since our own north wind is like a land breeze and does

not even reach the limits of the region we live in. The prevalence of north

winds here is due to our lying near the north. Yet even here they give out and

fail to penetrate far: in the southern sea beyond Libya east and west winds are

always blowing alternately, like north and south winds with us. So it is clear

that the south wind is not the wind that blows from the south pole. It is

neither that nor the wind from the winter tropic. For symmetry would require

another wind blowing from the summer tropic, which there is not, since we

know that only one wind blows from that quarter. So the south wind clearly

blows from the torrid region. Now the sun is so near to that region that it has

no water, or snow which might melt and cause Etesiae. But because that

place is far more extensive and open the south wind is greater and stronger

and warmer than the north and penetrates farther to the north than the north

wind does to the south.

The origin of these winds and their relation to one another has now beenexplained.

<

div class="section" title="6">


6


Let us now explain the position of the winds, their oppositions, which can

blow simultaneously with which, and which cannot, their names and number,

and any other of their affections that have not been treated in the ‘particular

questions’. What we say about their position must be followed with the help

of the figure. For clearness’ sake we have drawn the circle of the horizon,

which is round, but it represents the zone in which we live; for that can be

divided in the same way. Let us also begin by laying down that those things

are locally contrary which are locally most distant from one another, just as

things specifically most remote from one another are specific contraries. Now

things that face one another from opposite ends of a diameter are locally most

distant from one another. (See diagram.)

Let A be the point where the sun sets at the equinox and B, the point

opposite,  the  place  where  it  rises  at  the  equinox.  Let  there  be  another

diameter cutting this at right angles, and let the point H on it be the north and

its diametrical opposite O the south. Let Z be the rising of the sun at the

summer solstice and E its setting at the summer solstice; D its rising at the

winter solstice, and G its setting at the winter solstice. Draw a diameter from

Z to G from D to E. Then since those things are locally contrary which are

most distant from one another in space, and points diametrically opposite are

most distant from one another, those winds must necessarily be contrary to

one another that blow from opposite ends of a diameter.

The names of the winds according to their position are these. Zephyrus is

the wind that blows from A, this being the point where the sun sets at the

equinox. Its contrary is Apeliotes blowing from B the point where the sun

rises at the equinox. The wind blowing from H, the north, is the true north

wind, called Aparctias: while Notus blowing from O is its contrary; for this

point is the south and O is contrary to H, being diametrically opposite to it.

Caecias blows from Z, where the sun rises at the summer solstice. Its contrary

is not the wind blowing from E but Lips blowing from G. For Lips blows

from the point where the sun sets at the winter solstice and is diametrically

opposite to Caecias: so it is its contrary. Eurus blows from D, coming fromthe point where the sun rises at the winter solstice. It borders on Notus, and

so we often find that people speak of ‘Euro-Noti’. Its contrary is not Lips

blowing from G but the wind that blows from E which some call Argestes,

some Olympias, and some Sciron. This blows from the point where the sun

sets at the summer solstice, and is the only wind that is diametrically opposite

to Eurus. These are the winds that are diametrically opposite to one another

and their contraries.

  There  are  other  winds  which  have  no  contraries.  The  wind  they  call

Thrascias, which lies between Argestes and Aparctias, blows from I; and the

wind called Meses, which lies between Caecias and Aparctias, from K. (The

line IK nearly coincides with the ever visible circle, but not quite.) These

winds  have  no  contraries.  Meses  has  not,  or  else  there  would  be  a  wind

blowing  from  the  point  M  which  is  diametrically  opposite.  Thrascias

corresponding to the point I has not, for then there would be a wind blowing

from N, the point which is diametrically opposite. (But perhaps a local wind

which the inhabitants of those parts call Phoenicias blows from that point.)

  These are the most important and definite winds and these their places.

  There are more winds from the north than from the south. The reason for

this is that the region in which we live lies nearer to the north. Also, much

more water and snow is pushed aside into this quarter because the other lies

under the sun and its course. When this thaws and soaks into the earth and is

exposed to the heat of the sun and the earth it necessarily causes evaporation

to rise in greater quantities and over a greater space.

Of the winds we have described Aparctias is the north wind in the strict

sense. Thrascias and Meses are north winds too. (Caecias is half north and

half east.) South are that which blows from due south and Lips. East, the

wind from the rising of the sun at the equinox and Eurus. Phoenicias is half

south  and  half  east.  West,  the  wind  from  the  true  west  and  that  called

Argestes. More generally these winds are classified as northerly or southerly.

The west winds are counted as northerly, for they blow from the place of

sunset  and  are  therefore  colder;  the  east  winds  as  southerly,  for  they  are

warmer because they blow from the place of sunrise. So the distinction of

cold and hot or warm is the basis for the division of the winds into northerly

and southerly. East winds are warmer than west winds because the sun shines

on the east longer, whereas it leaves the west sooner and reaches it later.

  Since this is the distribution of the winds it is clear that contrary winds

cannot blow simultaneously. They are diametrically opposite to one anotherand  one  of  the  two  must  be  overpowered  and  cease.  Winds  that  are  not

diametrically opposite to one another may blow simultaneously: for instance

the winds from Z and from D. Hence it sometimes happens that both of them,

though different winds and blowing from different quarters, are favourable to

sailors making for the same point.

  Contrary winds commonly blow at opposite seasons. Thus Caecias and in

general the winds north of the summer solstice blow about the time of the

spring equinox, but about the autumn equinox Lips; and Zephyrus about the

summer solstice, but about the winter solstice Eurus.

  Aparctias, Thrascias, and Argestes are the winds that fall on others most

and stop them. Their source is so close to us that they are greater and stronger

than other winds. They bring fair weather most of all winds for the same

reason, for, blowing as they do, from close at hand, they overpower the other

winds and stop them; they also blow away the clouds that are forming and

leave a clear sky-unless they happen to be very cold. Then they do not bring

fair weather, but being colder than they are strong they condense the clouds

before driving them away.

  Caecias does not bring fair weather because it returns upon itself. Hence

the saying: ‘Bringing it on himself as Caecias does clouds.’

  When they cease, winds are succeeded by their neighbours in the direction

of the movement of the sun. For an effect is most apt to be produced in the

neighbourhood of its cause, and the cause of winds moves with the sun.

  Contrary winds have either the same or contrary effects. Thus Lips and

Caecias, sometimes called Hellespontias, are both rainy gestes and Eurus are

dry: the latter being dry at first and rainy afterwards. Meses and Aparctias are

coldest and bring most snow. Aparctias, Thrascias, and Argestes bring hail.

Notus,  Zephyrus,  and  Eurus  are  hot.  Caecias  covers  the  sky  with  heavy

clouds, Lips with lighter ones. Caecias does this because it returns upon itself

and combines the qualities of Boreas and Eurus. By being cold it condenses

and gathers the vaporous air, and because it is easterly it carries with it and

drives before it a great quantity of such matter. Aparctias, Thrascias, and

Argestes bring fair weather for the reason we have explained before. These

winds and Meses are most commonly accompanied by lightning. They are

cold because they blow from the north, and lightning is due to cold, being

ejected when the clouds contract. Some of these same bring hail with them

for the same reason; namely, that they cause a sudden condensation.

  Hurricanes  are  commonest  in  autumn,  and  next  in  spring:  Aparctias,Thrascias, and Argestes give rise to them most. This is because hurricanes are

generally formed when some winds are blowing and others fall on them; and

these are the winds which are most apt to fall on others that are blowing; the

reason for which, too, we have explained before.

The  Etesiae  veer  round:  they  begin  from  the  north,  and  become  for

dwellers  in  the  west  Thrasciae,  Argestae,  and  Zephyrus  (for  Zephyrus

belongs  to  the  north).  For  dwellers  in  the  east  they  veer  round  as  far  as

Apeliotes.

So much for the winds, their origin and nature and the properties common

to them all or peculiar to each.

<

div class="section" title="7">


7


We must go on to discuss earthquakes next, for their cause is akin to our

last subject.

The theories that have been put forward up to the present date are three,

and  their  authors  three  men,  Anaxagoras  of  Clazomenae,  and  before  him

Anaximenes of Miletus, and later Democritus of Abdera.

  Anaxagoras says that the ether, which naturally moves upwards, is caught

in hollows below the earth and so shakes it, for though the earth is really all

of it equally porous, its surface is clogged up by rain. This implies that part of

the whole sphere is ‘above’ and part ‘below’: ‘above’ being the part on which

we live, ‘below’ the other.

This theory is perhaps too primitive to require refutation. It is absurd to

think of up and down otherwise than as meaning that heavy bodies move to

the  earth  from  every  quarter,  and  light  ones,  such  as  fire,  away  from  it;

especially as we see that, as far as our knowledge of the earth goes, the

horizon always changes with a change in our position, which proves that the

earth is convex and spherical. It is absurd, too, to maintain that the earth rests

on the air because of its size, and then to say that impact upwards from below

shakes it right through. Besides he gives no account of the circumstances

attendant on earthquakes: for not every country or every season is subject to

them.

  Democritus says that the earth is full of water and that when a quantity of

rain-water is added to this an earthquake is the result. The hollows in theearth being unable to admit the excess of water it forces its way in and so

causes an earthquake. Or again, the earth as it dries draws the water from the

fuller to the emptier parts, and the inrush of the water as it changes its place

causes the earthquake.

  Anaximenes says that the earth breaks up when it grows wet or dry, and

earthquakes are due to the fall of these masses as they break away. Hence

earthquakes take place in times of drought and again of heavy rain, since, as

we have explained, the earth grows dry in time of drought and breaks up,

whereas the rain makes it sodden and destroys its cohesion.

But if this were the case the earth ought to be found to be sinking in many

places. Again, why do earthquakes frequently occur in places which are not

excessively subject to drought or rain, as they ought to be on the theory?

Besides, on this view, earthquakes ought always to be getting fewer, and

should  come  to  an  end  entirely  some  day:  the  notion  of  contraction  by

packing  together  implies  this.  So  this  is  impossible  the  theory  must  be

impossible too.

<

div class="section" title="8">


8


We  have  already  shown  that  wet  and  dry  must  both  give  rise  to  an

evaporation: earthquakes are a necessary consequence of this fact. The earth

is essentially dry, but rain fills it with moisture. Then the sun and its own fire

warm it and give rise to a quantity of wind both outside and inside it. This

wind sometimes flows outwards in a single body, sometimes inwards, and

sometimes it is divided. All these are necessary laws. Next we must find out

what body has the greatest motive force. This will certainly be the body that

naturally moves farthest and is most violent. Now that which has the most

rapid motion is necessarily the most violent; for its swiftness gives its impact

the greatest force. Again, the rarest body, that which can most readily pass

through  every  other  body,  is  that  which  naturally  moves  farthest.  Wind

satisfies these conditions in the highest degree (fire only becomes flame and

moves rapidly when wind accompanies it): so that not water nor earth is the

cause of earthquakes but wind-that is, the inrush of the external evaporation

into the earth.

  Hence, since the evaporation generally follows in a continuous body in thedirection in which it first started, and either all of it flows inwards or all

outwards, most earthquakes and the greatest are accompanied by calm. It is

true  that  some  take  place  when  a  wind  is  blowing,  but  this  presents  no

difficulty. We sometimes find several winds blowing simultaneously. If one

of these enters the earth we get an earthquake attended by wind. Only these

earthquakes are less severe because their source and cause is divided.

  Again, most earthquakes and the severest occur at night or, if by day, about

noon, that being generally the calmest part of the day. For when the sun

exerts its full power (as it does about noon) it shuts the evaporation into the

earth.  Night,  too,  is  calmer  than  day.  The  absence  of  the  sun  makes  the

evaporation return into the earth like a sort of ebb tide, corresponding to the

outward flow; especially towards dawn, for the winds, as a rule, begin to

blow  then,  and  if  their  source  changes  about  like  the  Euripus  and  flows

inwards  the  quantity  of  wind  in  the  earth  is  greater  and  a  more  violent

earthquake results.

The severest earthquakes take place where the sea is full of currents or the

earth spongy and cavernous: so they occur near the Hellespont and in Achaea

and Sicily, and those parts of Euboea which correspond to our description-

where  the  sea  is  supposed  to  flow  in  channels  below  the  earth.  The  hot

springs, too, near Aedepsus are due to a cause of this kind. It is the confined

character of these places that makes them so liable to earthquakes. A great

and therefore violent wind is developed, which would naturally blow away

from the earth: but the onrush of the sea in a great mass thrusts it back into

the earth. The countries that are spongy below the surface are exposed to

earthquakes because they have room for so much wind.

For the same reason earthquakes usually take place in spring and autumn

and in times of wet and of drought-because these are the windiest seasons.

Summer with its heat and winter with its frost cause calm: winter is too cold,

summer too dry for winds to form. In time of drought the air is full of wind;

drought  is  just  the  predominance  of  the  dry  over  the  moist  evaporation.

Again, excessive rain causes more of the evaporation to form in the earth.

Then this secretion is shut up in a narrow compass and forced into a smaller

space by the water that fills the cavities. Thus a great wind is compressed into

a smaller space and so gets the upper hand, and then breaks out and beats

against the earth and shakes it violently.

We must suppose the action of the wind in the earth to be analogous to the

tremors and throbbings caused in us by the force of the wind contained in ourbodies.  Thus  some  earthquakes  are  a  sort  of  tremor,  others  a  sort  of

throbbing.  Again,  we  must  think  of  an  earthquake  as  something  like  the

tremor  that  often  runs  through  the  body  after  passing  water  as  the  wind

returns inwards from without in one volume.

The force wind can have may be gathered not only from what happens in

the air (where one might suppose that it owed its power to produce such

effects  to  its  volume),  but  also  from  what  is  observed  in  animal  bodies.

Tetanus and spasms are motions of wind, and their force is such that the

united efforts of many men do not succeed in overcoming the movements of

the patients. We must suppose, then (to compare great things with small), that

what happens in the earth is just like that. Our theory has been verified by

actual  observation  in  many  places.  It  has  been  known  to  happen  that  an

earthquake has continued until the wind that caused it burst through the earth

into the air and appeared visibly like a hurricane. This happened lately near

Heracleia in Pontus and some time past at the island Hiera, one of the group

called the Aeolian islands. Here a portion of the earth swelled up and a lump

like a mound rose with a noise: finally it burst, and a great wind came out of

it and threw up live cinders and ashes which buried the neighbouring town of

Lipara and reached some of the towns in Italy. The spot where this eruption

occurred is still to be seen.

  Indeed, this must be recognized as the cause of the fire that is generated in

the earth: the air is first broken up in small particles and then the wind is

beaten about and so catches fire.

A phenomenon in these islands affords further evidence of the fact that

winds move below the surface of the earth. When a south wind is going to

blow there is a premonitory indication: a sound is heard in the places from

which the eruptions issue. This is because the sea is being pushed on from a

distance and its advance thrusts back into the earth the wind that was issuing

from  it.  The  reason  why  there  is  a  noise  and  no  earthquake  is  that  the

underground spaces are so extensive in proportion to the quantity of the air

that is being driven on that the wind slips away into the void beyond.

  Again, our theory is supported by the facts that the sun appears hazy and is

darkened in the absence of clouds, and that there is sometimes calm and

sharp frost before earthquakes at sunrise. The sun is necessarily obscured and

darkened when the evaporation which dissolves and rarefies the air begins to

withdraw into the earth. The calm, too, and the cold towards sunrise and

dawn follow from the theory. The calm we have already explained. Theremust as a rule be calm because the wind flows back into the earth: again, it

must be most marked before the more violent earthquakes, for when the wind

is not part outside earth, part inside, but moves in a single body, its strength

must be greater. The cold comes because the evaporation which is naturally

and  essentially  hot  enters  the  earth.  (Wind  is  not  recognized  to  be  hot,

because it sets the air in motion, and that is full of a quantity of cold vapour.

It is the same with the breath we blow from our mouth: close by it is warm,

as it is when we breathe out through the mouth, but there is so little of it that

it is scarcely noticed, whereas at a distance it is cold for the same reason as

wind.) Well, when this evaporation disappears into the earth the vaporous

exhalation  concentrates  and  causes  cold  in  any  place  in  which  this

disappearance occurs.

A  sign  which  sometimes  precedes  earthquakes  can  be  explained  in  the

same way. Either by day or a little after sunset, in fine weather, a little, light,

long-drawn cloud is seen, like a long very straight line. This is because the

wind is leaving the air and dying down. Something analogous to this happens

on the sea-shore. When the sea breaks in great waves the marks left on the

sand are very thick and crooked, but when the sea is calm they are slight and

straight (because the secretion is small). As the sea is to the shore so the wind

is to the cloudy air; so, when the wind drops, this very straight and thin cloud

is left, a sort of wave-mark in the air.

An earthquake sometimes coincides with an eclipse of the moon for the

same reason. When the earth is on the point of being interposed, but the light

and heat of the sun has not quite vanished from the air but is dying away, the

wind which causes the earthquake before the eclipse, turns off into the earth,

and calm ensues. For there often are winds before eclipses: at nightfall if the

eclipse is at midnight, and at midnight if the eclipse is at dawn. They are

caused  by  the  lessening  of  the  warmth  from  the  moon  when  its  sphere

approaches  the  point  at  which  the  eclipse  is  going  to  take  place.  So  the

influence which restrained and quieted the air weakens and the air moves

again and a wind rises, and does so later, the later the eclipse.

A severe earthquake does not stop at once or after a single shock, but first

the shocks go on, often for about forty days; after that, for one or even two

years it gives premonitory indications in the same place. The severity of the

earthquake  is  determined  by  the  quantity  of  wind  and  the  shape  of  the

passages through which it flows. Where it is beaten back and cannot easily

find its way out the shocks are most violent, and there it must remain in acramped space like water that cannot escape. Any throbbing in the body does

not  cease  suddenly  or  quickly,  but  by  degrees  according  as  the  affection

passes off. So here the agency which created the evaporation and gave it an

impulse to motion clearly does not at once exhaust the whole of the material

from which it forms the wind which we call an earthquake. So until the rest

of this is exhausted the shocks must continue, though more gently, and they

must  go  on  until  there  is  too  little  of  the  evaporation  left  to  have  any

perceptible effect on the earth at all.

  Subterranean  noises,  too,  are  due  to  the  wind;  sometimes  they  portend

earthquakes  but  sometimes  they  have  been  heard  without  any  earthquake

following. Just as the air gives off various sounds when it is struck, so it does

when it strikes other things; for striking involves being struck and so the two

cases are the same. The sound precedes the shock because sound is thinner

and passes through things more readily than wind. But when the wind is too

weak by reason of thinness to cause an earthquake the absence of a shock is

due to its filtering through readily, though by striking hard and hollow masses

of different shapes it makes various noises, so that the earth sometimes seems

to ‘bellow’ as the portentmongers say.

  Water has been known to burst out during an earthquake. But that does not

make  water  the  cause  of  the  earthquake.  The  wind  is  the  efficient  cause

whether it drives the water along the surface or up from below: just as winds

are the causes of waves and not waves of winds. Else we might as well say

that earth was the cause; for it is upset in an earthquake, just like water (for

effusion  is  a  form  of  upsetting).  No,  earth  and  water  are  material  causes

(being patients, not agents): the true cause is the wind.

The combination of a tidal wave with an earthquake is due to the presence

of contrary winds. It occurs when the wind which is shaking the earth does

not entirely succeed in driving off the sea which another wind is bringing on,

but pushes it back and heaps it up in a great mass in one place. Given this

situation it follows that when this wind gives way the whole body of the sea,

driven on by the other wind, will burst out and overwhelm the land. This is

what happened in Achaea. There a south wind was blowing, but outside a

north wind; then there was a calm and the wind entered the earth, and then

the tidal wave came on and simultaneously there was an earthquake. This was

the more violent as the sea allowed no exit to the wind that had entered the

earth, but shut it in. So in their struggle with one another the wind caused the

earthquake, and the wave by its settling down the inundation.  Earthquakes are local and often affect a small district only; whereas winds

are not local. Such phenomena are local when the evaporations at a given

place are joined by those from the next and unite; this, as we explained, is

what  happens  when  there  is  drought  or  excessive  rain  locally.  Now

earthquakes do come about in this way but winds do not. For earthquakes,

rains, and droughts have their source and origin inside the earth, so that the

sun is not equally able to direct all the evaporations in one direction. But on

the evaporations in the air the sun has more influence so that, when once they

have been given an impulse by its motion, which is determined by its various

positions, they flow in one direction.

  When the wind is present in sufficient quantity there is an earthquake. The

shocks  are  horizontal  like  a  tremor;  except  occasionally,  in  a  few  places,

where they act vertically, upwards from below, like a throbbing. It is the

vertical direction which makes this kind of earthquake so rare. The motive

force does not easily accumulate in great quantity in the position required,

since the surface of the earth secretes far more of the evaporation than its

depths. Wherever an earthquake of this kind does occur a quantity of stones

comes  to  the  surface  of  the  earth  (as  when  you  throw  up  things  in  a

winnowing fan), as we see from Sipylus and the Phlegraean plain and the

district in Liguria, which were devastated by this kind of earthquake.

  Islands in the middle of the sea are less exposed to earthquakes than those

near land. First, the volume of the sea cools the evaporations and overpowers

them by its weight and so crushes them. Then, currents and not shocks are

produced in the sea by the action of the winds. Again, it is so extensive that

evaporations  do  not  collect  in  it  but  issue  from  it,  and  these  draw  the

evaporations from the earth after them. Islands near the continent really form

part of it: the intervening sea is not enough to make any difference; but those

in the open sea can only be shaken if the whole of the sea that surrounds them

is shaken too.

We have now explained earthquakes, their nature and cause, and the most

important of the circumstances attendant on their appearance.

<

div class="section" title="9">


9


Let us go on to explain lightning and thunder, and further whirlwind, fire-wind, and thunderbolts: for the cause of them all is the same.

As we have said, there are two kinds of exhalation, moist and dry, and the

atmosphere  contains  them  both  potentially.  It,  as  we  have  said  before,

condenses into cloud, and the density of the clouds is highest at their upper

limit. (For they must be denser and colder on the side where the heat escapes

to  the  upper  region  and  leaves  them.  This  explains  why  hurricanes  and

thunderbolts and all analogous phenomena move downwards in spite of the

fact that everything hot has a natural tendency upwards. Just as the pips that

we squeeze between our fingers are heavy but often jump upwards: so these

things are necessarily squeezed out away from the densest part of the cloud.)

Now the heat that escapes disperses to the up region. But if any of the dry

exhalation is caught in the process as the air cools, it is squeezed out as the

clouds contract, and collides in its rapid course with the neighbouring clouds,

and  the  sound  of  this  collision  is  what  we  call  thunder.  This  collision  is

analogous, to compare small with great, to the sound we hear in a flame

which men call the laughter or the threat of Hephaestus or of Hestia. This

occurs when the wood dries and cracks and the exhalation rushes on the

flame in a body. So in the clouds, the exhalation is projected and its impact

on  dense  clouds  causes  thunder:  the  variety  of  the  sound  is  due  to  the

irregularity of the clouds and the hollows that intervene where their density is

interrupted. This then, is thunder, and this its cause.

It usually happens that the exhalation that is ejected is inflamed and burns

with a thin and faint fire: this is what we call lightning, where we see as it

were the exhalation coloured in the act of its ejection. It comes into existence

after the collision and the thunder, though we see it earlier because sight is

quicker  than  hearing.  The  rowing  of  triremes  illustrates  this:  the  oars  are

going back again before the sound of their striking the water reaches us.

  However, there are some who maintain that there is actually fire in the

clouds. Empedocles says that it consists of some of the sun’s rays which are

intercepted: Anaxagoras that it is part of the upper ether (which he calls fire)

which has descended from above. Lightning, then, is the gleam of this fire,

and thunder the hissing noise of its extinction in the cloud.

But this involves the view that lightning actually is prior to thunder and

does  not  merely  appear  to  be  so.  Again,  this  intercepting  of  the  fire  is

impossible on either theory, but especially it is said to be drawn down from

the upper ether. Some reason ought to be given why that which naturally

ascends should descend, and why it should not always do so, but only when itis cloudy. When the sky is clear there is no lightning: to say that there is, is

altogether wanton.

The view that the heat of the sun’s rays intercepted in the clouds is the

cause of these phenomena is equally unattractive: this, too, is a most careless

explanation.  Thunder,  lightning,  and  the  rest  must  have  a  separate  and

determinate cause assigned to them on which they ensue. But this theory does

nothing of the sort. It is like supposing that water, snow, and hail existed all

along and were produced when the time came and not generated at all, as if

the atmosphere brought each to hand out of its stock from time to time. They

are concretions in the same way as thunder and lightning are discretions, so

that if it is true of either that they are not generated but pre-exist, the same

must be true of the other. Again, how can any distinction be made about the

intercepting between this case and that of interception in denser substances

such as water? Water, too, is heated by the sun and by fire: yet when it

contracts again and grows cold and freezes no such ejection as they describe

occurs, though it ought on their the. to take place on a proportionate scale.

Boiling is due to the exhalation generated by fire: but it is impossible for it to

exist in the water beforehand; and besides they call the noise ‘hissing’, not

‘boiling’. But hissing is really boiling on a small scale: for when that which is

brought into contact with moisture and is in process of being extinguished

gets the better of it, then it boils and makes the noise in question. Some-

Cleidemus is one of them-say that lightning is nothing objective but merely

an appearance. They compare it to what happens when you strike the sea with

a rod by night and the water is seen to shine. They say that the moisture in the

cloud is beaten about in the same way, and that lightning is the appearance of

brightness that ensues.

This theory is due to ignorance of the theory of reflection, which is the real

cause of that phenomenon. The water appears to shine when struck because

our sight is reflected from it to some bright object: hence the phenomenon

occurs  mainly  by  night:  the  appearance  is  not  seen  by  day  because  the

daylight is too in, tense and obscures it.

  These  are  the  theories  of  others  about  thunder  and  lightning:  some

maintaining  that  lightning  is  a  reflection,  the  others  that  lightning  is  fire

shining  through  the  cloud  and  thunder  its  extinction,  the  fire  not  being

generated in each case but existing beforehand. We say that the same stuff is

wind on the earth, and earthquake under it, and in the clouds thunder. The

essential constituent of all these phenomena is the same: namely, the dryexhalation.  If  it  flows  in  one  direction  it  is  wind,  in  another  it  causes

earthquakes; in the clouds, when they are in a process of change and contract

and condense into water, it is ejected and causes thunder and lightning and

the other phenomena of the same nature.

So much for thunder and lightning.                              Meteorology, Book III


Translated by E. W. Webster


<

div class="section" title="1">


1


Let us explain the remaining operations of this secretion in the same way

as we have treated the rest. When this exhalation is secreted in small and

scattered quantities and frequently, and is transitory, and its constitution rare,

it gives rise to thunder and lightning. But if it is secreted in a body and is

denser, that is, less rare, we get a hurricane. The fact that it issues in body

explains its violence: it is due to the rapidity of the secretion. Now when this

secretion issues in a great and continuous current the result corresponds to

what  we  get  when  the  opposite  development  takes  place  and  rain  and  a

quantity of water are produced. As far as the matter from which they are

developed goes both sets of phenomena are the same. As soon as a stimulus

to the development of either potentiality appears, that of which there is the

greater quantity present in the cloud is at once secreted from it, and there

results either rain, or, if the other exhalation prevails, a hurricane.

  Sometimes the exhalation in the cloud, when it is being secreted, collides

with another under circumstances like those found when a wind is forced

from an open into a narrow space in a gateway or a road. It often happens in

such cases that the first part of the moving body is deflected because of the

resistance due either to the narrowness or to a contrary current, and so the

wind forms a circle and eddy. It is prevented from advancing in a straight

line: at the same time it is pushed on from behind; so it is compelled to move

sideways in the direction of least resistance. The same thing happens to the

next part, and the next, and so on, till the series becomes one, that is, till a

circle is formed: for if a figure is described by a single motion that figure

must itself be one. This is how eddies are generated on the earth, and the case

is the same in the clouds as far as the beginning of them goes. Only here (as

in the case of the hurricane which shakes off the cloud without cessation andbecomes a continuous wind) the cloud follows the exhalation unbroken, and

the exhalation, failing to break away from the cloud because of its density,

first moves in a circle for the reason given and then descends, because clouds

are always densest on the side where the heat escapes. This phenomenon is

called  a  whirlwind  when  it  is  colourless;  and  it  is  a  sort  of  undigested

hurricane. There is never a whirlwind when the weather is northerly, nor a

hurricane when there is snow. The reason is that all these phenomena are

‘wind’, and wind is a dry and warm evaporation. Now frost and cold prevail

over this principle and quench it at its birth: that they do prevail is clear or

there could be no snow or northerly rain, since these occur when the cold

does prevail.

So  the  whirlwind  originates  in  the  failure  of  an  incipient  hurricane  to

escape from its cloud: it is due to the resistance which generates the eddy,

and it consists in the spiral which descends to the earth and drags with it the

cloud which it cannot shake off. It moves things by its wind in the direction

in which it is blowing in a straight line, and whirls round by its circular

motion and forcibly snatches up whatever it meets.

  When  the  cloud  burns  as  it  is  drawn  downwards,  that  is,  when  the

exhalation  becomes  rarer,  it  is  called  a  fire-wind,  for  its  fire  colours  the

neighbouring air and inflames it.

  When there is a great quantity of exhalation and it is rare and is squeezed

out in the cloud itself we get a thunderbolt. If the exhalation is exceedingly

rare this rareness prevents the thunderbolt from scorching and the poets call it

‘bright’: if the rareness is less it does scorch and they call it ‘smoky’. The

former  moves  rapidly  because  of  its  rareness,  and  because  of  its  rapidity

passes through an object before setting fire to it or dwelling on it so as to

blacken  it:  the  slower  one  does  blacken  the  object,  but  passes  through  it

before  it  can  actually  burn  it.  Further,  resisting  substances  are  affected,

unresisting ones are not. For instance, it has happened that the bronze of a

shield  has  been  melted  while  the  woodwork  remained  intact  because  its

texture was so loose that the exhalation filtered through without affecting it.

So it has passed through clothes, too, without burning them, and has merely

reduced them to shreds.

  Such evidence is enough by itself to show that the exhalation is at work in

all these cases, but we sometimes get direct evidence as well, as in the case of

the conflagration of the temple at Ephesus which we lately witnessed. There

independent sheets of flame left the main fire and were carried bodily inmany  directions.  Now  that  smoke  is  exhalation  and  that  smoke  burns  is

certain,  and  has  been  stated  in  another  place  before;  but  when  the  flame

moves bodily, then we have ocular proof that smoke is exhalation. On this

occasion what is seen in small fires appeared on a much larger scale because

of the quantity of matter that was burning. The beams which were the source

of the exhalation split, and a quantity of it rushed in a body from the place

from which it issued forth and went up in a blaze: so that the flame was

actually seen moving through the air away and falling on the houses. For we

must  recognize  that  exhalation  accompanies  and  precedes  thunderbolts

though it is colourless and so invisible. Hence, where the thunderbolt is going

to strike, the object moves before it is struck, showing that the exhalation

leads the way and falls on the object first. Thunder, too, splits things not by

its noise but because the exhalation that strikes the object and that which

makes the noise are ejected simultaneously. This exhalation splits the thing it

strikes but does not scorch it at all.

We have now explained thunder and lightning and hurricane, and further

firewinds, whirlwinds, and thunderbolts, and shown that they are all of them

forms of the same thing and wherein they all differ.

<

div class="section" title="2">


2


Let us now explain the nature and cause of halo, rainbow, mock suns, and

rods, since the same account applies to them all.

We  must  first  describe  the  phenomena  and  the  circumstances  in  which

each of them occurs. The halo often appears as a complete circle: it is seen

round the sun and the moon and bright stars, by night as well as by day, and

at midday or in the afternoon, more rarely about sunrise or sunset.

The  rainbow  never  forms  a  full  circle,  nor  any  segment  greater  than  a

semicircle.  At  sunset  and  sunrise  the  circle  is  smallest  and  the  segment

largest: as the sun rises higher the circle is larger and the segment smaller.

After the autumn equinox in the shorter days it is seen at every hour of the

day,  in  the  summer  not  about  midday.  There  are  never  more  than  two

rainbows at one time. Each of them is three-coloured; the colours are the

same in both and their number is the same, but in the outer rainbow they are

fainter and their position is reversed. In the inner rainbow the first and largestband is red; in the outer rainbow the band that is nearest to this one and

smallest  is  of  the  same  colour:  the  other  bands  correspond  on  the  same

principle.  These  are  almost  the  only  colours  which  painters  cannot

manufacture:  for  there  are  colours  which  they  create  by  mixing,  but  no

mixing will give red, green, or purple. These are the colours of the rainbow,

though between the red and the green an orange colour is often seen.

  Mock suns and rods are always seen by the side of the sun, not above or

below it nor in the opposite quarter of the sky. They are not seen at night but

always in the neighbourhood of the sun, either as it is rising or setting but

more commonly towards sunset. They have scarcely ever appeared when the

sun was on the meridian, though this once happened in Bosporus where two

mock suns rose with the sun and followed it all through the day till sunset.

  These are the facts about each of these phenomena: the cause of them all is

the same, for they are all reflections. But they are different varieties, and are

distinguished by the surface from which and the way in which the reflection

to the sun or some other bright object takes place.

The rainbow is seen by day, and it was formerly thought that it never

appeared by night as a moon rainbow. This opinion was due to the rarity of

the occurrence: it was not observed, for though it does happen it does so

rarely. The reason is that the colours are not so easy to see in the dark and

that many other conditions must coincide, and all that in a single day in the

month. For if there is to be one it must be at full moon, and then as the moon

is either rising or setting. So we have only met with two instances of a moon

rainbow in more than fifty years.

We must accept from the theory of optics the fact that sight is reflected

from air and any object with a smooth surface just as it is from water; also

that in some mirrors the forms of things are reflected, in others only their

colours.  Of  the  latter  kind  are  those  mirrors  which  are  so  small  as  to  be

indivisible for sense. It is impossible that the figure of a thing should be

reflected  in  them,  for  if  it  is  the  mirror  will  be  sensibly  divisible  since

divisibility is involved in the notion of figure. But since something must be

reflected in them and figure cannot be, it remains that colour alone should be

reflected.  The  colour  of  a  bright  object  sometimes  appears  bright  in  the

reflection, but it sometimes, either owing to the admixture of the colour of the

mirror or to weakness of sight, gives rise to the appearance of another colour.

  However, we must accept the account we have given of these things in the

theory  of  sensation,  and  take  some  things  for  granted  while  we  explainothers.

<

div class="section" title="3">


3


Let us begin by explaining the shape of the halo; why it is a circle and why

it appears round the sun or the moon or one of the other stars: the explanation

being in all these cases the same.

  Sight is reflected in this way when air and vapour are condensed into a

cloud and the condensed matter is uniform and consists of small parts. Hence

in itself it is a sign of rain, but if it fades away, of fine weather, if it is broken

up, of wind. For if it does not fade away and is not broken up but is allowed

to attain its normal state, it is naturally a sign of rain since it shows that a

process of condensation is proceeding which must, when it is carried to an

end, result in rain. For the same reason these haloes are the darkest. It is a

sign of wind when it is broken up because its breaking up is due to a wind

which exists there but has not reached us. This view finds support in the fact

that the wind blows from the quarter in which the main division appears in

the halo. Its fading away is a sign of fine weather because if the air is not yet

in a state to get the better of the heat it contains and proceed to condense into

water, this shows that the moist vapour has not yet separated from the dry and

firelike exhalation: and this is the cause of fine weather.

So much for the atmospheric conditions under which the reflection takes

place. The reflection is from the mist that forms round the sun or the moon,

and that is why the halo is not seen opposite the sun like the rainbow.

  Since the reflection takes place in the same way from every point the result

is necessarily a circle or a segment of a circle: for if the lines start from the

same point and end at the same point and are equal, the points where they

form an angle will always lie on a circle.

Let AGB and AZB and ADB be lines each of which goes from the point A

to the point B and forms an angle. Let the lines AG, AZ, AD be equal and

those at B, GB, ZB, DB equal too. (See diagram.)

  Draw the line AEB. Then the triangles are equal; for their base AEB is

equal. Draw perpendiculars to AEB from the angles; GE from G, ZE from Z,

DE from D. Then these perpendiculars are equal, being in equal triangles.

And they are all in one plane, being all at right angles to AEB and meeting ata single point E. So if you draw the line it will be a circle and E its centre.

Now B is the sun, A the eye, and the circumference passing through the

points GZD the cloud from which the line of sight is reflected to the sun.

The mirrors must be thought of as contiguous: each of them is too small to

be visible, but their contiguity makes the whole made up of them all to seem

one.  The  bright  band  is  the  sun,  which  is  seen  as  a  circle,  appearing

successively in each of the mirrors as a point indivisible to sense. The band of

cloud next to it is black, its colour being intensified by contrast with the

brightness of the halo. The halo is formed rather near the earth because that is

calmer:  for  where  there  is  wind  it  is  clear  that  no  halo  can  maintain  its

position.

  Haloes are commoner round the moon because the greater heat of the sun

dissolves the condensations of the air more rapidly.

  Haloes  are  formed  round  stars  for  the  same  reasons,  but  they  are  not

prognostic  in  the  same  way  because  the  condensation  they  imply  is  so

insignificant as to be barren.

<

div class="section" title="4">


4


We have already stated that the rainbow is a reflection: we have now to

explain what sort of reflection it is, to describe its various concomitants, and

to assign their causes.

  Sight  is  reflected  from  all  smooth  surfaces,  such  as  are  air  and  water

among others. Air must be condensed if it is to act as a mirror, though it often

gives a reflection even uncondensed when the sight is weak. Such was the

case of a man whose sight was faint and indistinct. He always saw an image

in front of him and facing him as he walked. This was because his sight was

reflected back to him. Its morbid condition made it so weak and delicate that

the air close by acted as a mirror, just as distant and condensed air normally

does, and his sight could not push it back. So promontories in the sea ‘loom’

when there is a south-east wind, and everything seems bigger, and in a mist,

too, things seem bigger: so, too, the sun and the stars seem bigger when rising

and setting than on the meridian. But things are best reflected from water, and

even in process of formation it is a better mirror than air, for each of the

particles, the union of which constitutes a raindrop, is necessarily a bettermirror than mist. Now it is obvious and has already been stated that a mirror

of this kind renders the colour of an object only, but not its shape. Hence it

follows that when it is on the point of raining and the air in the clouds is in

process of forming into raindrops but the rain is not yet actually there, if the

sun is opposite, or any other object bright enough to make the cloud a mirror

and  cause  the  sight  to  be  reflected  to  the  object  then  the  reflection  must

render the colour of the object without its shape. Since each of the mirrors is

so small as to be invisible and what we see is the continuous magnitude made

up of them all, the reflection necessarily gives us a continuous magnitude

made up of one colour; each of the mirrors contributing the same colour to

the whole. We may deduce that since these conditions are realizable there

will be an appearance due to reflection whenever the sun and the cloud are

related in the way described and we are between them. But these are just the

conditions under which the rainbow appears. So it is clear that the rainbow is

a reflection of sight to the sun.

So the rainbow always appears opposite the sun whereas the halo is round

it. They are both reflections, but the rainbow is distinguished by the variety of

its colours. The reflection in the one case is from water which is dark and

from a distance; in the other from air which is nearer and lighter in colour.

White  light  through  a  dark  medium  or  on  a  dark  surface  (it  makes  no

difference) looks red. We know how red the flame of green wood is: this is

because so much smoke is mixed with the bright white firelight: so, too, the

sun  appears  red  through  smoke  and  mist.  That  is  why  in  the  rainbow

reflection  the  outer  circumference  is  red  (the  reflection  being  from  small

particles of water), but not in the case of the halo. The other colours shall be

explained  later.  Again,  a  condensation  of  this  kind  cannot  persist  in  the

neighbourhood of the sun: it must either turn to rain or be dissolved, but

opposite to the sun there is an interval during which the water is formed. If

there were not this distinction haloes would be coloured like the rainbow.

Actually no complete or circular halo presents this colour, only small and

fragmentary appearances called ‘rods’. But if a haze due to water or any other

dark substance formed there we should have had, as we maintain, a complete

rainbow like that which we do find lamps. A rainbow appears round these in

winter, generally with southerly winds. Persons whose eyes are moist see it

most clearly because their sight is weak and easily reflected. It is due to the

moistness of the air and the soot which the flame gives off and which mixes

with the air and makes it a mirror, and to the blackness which that mirrorderives from the smoky nature of the soot. The light of the lamp appears as a

circle which is not white but purple. It shows the colours of the rainbow; but

because the sight that is reflected is too weak and the mirror too dark, red is

absent. The rainbow that is seen when oars are raised out of the sea involves

the same relative positions as that in the sky, but its colour is more like that

round the lamps, being purple rather than red. The reflection is from very

small particles continuous with one another, and in this case the particles are

fully formed water. We get a rainbow, too, if a man sprinkles fine drops in a

room turned to the sun so that the sun is shining in part of the room and

throwing  a  shadow  in  the  rest.  Then  if  one  man  sprinkles  in  the  room,

another, standing outside, sees a rainbow where the sun’s rays cease and

make the shadow. Its nature and colour is like that from the oars and its cause

is the same, for the sprinkling hand corresponds to the oar.

That the colours of the rainbow are those we described and how the other

colours come to appear in it will be clear from the following considerations.

We must recognize, as we have said, and lay down: first, that white colour on

a black surface or seen through a black medium gives red; second, that sight

when strained to a distance becomes weaker and less; third, that black is in a

sort the negation of sight: an object is black because sight fails; so everything

at a distance looks blacker, because sight does not reach it. The theory of

these  matters  belongs  to  the  account  of  the  senses,  which  are  the  proper

subjects of such an inquiry; we need only state about them what is necessary

for us. At all events, that is the reason why distant objects and objects seen in

a mirror look darker and smaller and smoother, why the reflection of clouds

in water is darker than the clouds themselves. This latter is clearly the case:

the reflection diminishes the sight that reaches them. It makes no difference

whether the change is in the object seen or. in the sight, the result being in

either case the same. The following fact further is worth noticing. When there

is a cloud near the sun and we look at it does not look coloured at all but

white,  but  when  we  look  at  the  same  cloud  in  water  it  shows  a  trace  of

rainbow colouring. Clearly, then, when sight is reflected it is weakened and,

as it makes dark look darker, so it makes white look less white, changing it

and bringing it nearer to black. When the sight is relatively strong the change

is to red; the next stage is green, and a further degree of weakness gives

violet. No further change is visible, but three completes the series of colours

(as we find three does in most other things), and the change into the rest is

imperceptible to sense. Hence also the rainbow appears with three colours;this is true of each of the two, but in a contrary way. The outer band of the

primary rainbow is red: for the largest band reflects most sight to the sun, and

the outer band is largest. The middle band and the third go on the same

principle. So if the principles we laid down about the appearance of colours

are true the rainbow necessarily has three colours, and these three and no

others. The appearance of yellow is due to contrast, for the red is whitened by

its juxtaposition with green. We can see this from the fact that the rainbow is

purest  when  the  cloud  is  blackest;  and  then  the  red  shows  most  yellow.

(Yellow in the rainbow comes between red and green.) So the whole of the

red shows white by contrast with the blackness of the cloud around: for it is

white  compared  to  the  cloud  and  the  green.  Again,  when  the  rainbow  is

fading away and the red is dissolving, the white cloud is brought into contact

with the green and becomes yellow. But the moon rainbow affords the best

instance of this colour contrast. It looks quite white: this is because it appears

on the dark cloud and at night. So, just as fire is intensified by added fire,

black  beside  black  makes  that  which  is  in  some  degree  white  look  quite

white. Bright dyes too show the effect of contrast. In woven and embroidered

stuffs the appearance of colours is profoundly affected by their juxtaposition

with one another (purple, for instance, appears different on white and on

black wool), and also by differences of illumination. Thus embroiderers say

that they often make mistakes in their colours when they work by lamplight,

and use the wrong ones.

We have now shown why the rainbow has three colours and that these are

its  only  colours.  The  same  cause  explains  the  double  rainbow  and  the

faintness of the colours in the outer one and their inverted order. When sight

is strained to a great distance the appearance of the distant object is affected

in a certain way: and the same thing holds good here. So the reflection from

the outer rainbow is weaker because it takes place from a greater distance and

less of it reaches the sun, and so the colours seen are fainter. Their order is

reversed  because  more  reflection  reaches  the  sun  from  the  smaller,  inner

band. For that reflection is nearer to our sight which is reflected from the

band which is nearest to the primary rainbow. Now the smallest band in the

outer rainbow is that which is nearest, and so it will be red; and the second

and the third will follow the same principle. Let B be the outer rainbow, A

the inner one; let R stand for the red colour, G for green, V for violet; yellow

appears at the point Y. Three rainbows or more are not found because even

the  second  is  fainter,  so  that  the  third  reflection  can  have  no  strengthwhatever and cannot reach the sun at all. (See diagram.)

<

div class="section" title="5">


5


The rainbow can never be a circle nor a segment of a circle greater than a

semicircle. The consideration of the diagram will prove this and the other

properties of the rainbow. (See diagram.)

Let A be a hemisphere resting on the circle of the horizon, let its centre be

K and let H be another point appearing on the horizon. Then, if the lines that

fall in a cone from K have HK as their axis, and, K and M being joined, the

lines KM are reflected from the hemisphere to H over the greater angle, the

lines from K will fall on the circumference of a circle. If the reflection takes

place when the luminous body is rising or setting the segment of the circle

above the earth which is cut off by the horizon will be a semi-circle; if the

luminous body is above the horizon it will always be less than a semicircle,

and  it  will  be  smallest  when  the  luminous  body  culminates.  First  let  the

luminous body be appearing on the horizon at the point H, and let KM be

reflected to H, and let the plane in which A is, determined by the triangle

HKM, be produced. Then the section of the sphere will be a great circle. Let

it be A (for it makes no difference which of the planes passing through the

line HK and determined by the triangle KMH is produced). Now the lines

drawn from H and K to a point on the semicircle A are in a certain ratio to

one another, and no lines drawn from the same points to another point on that

semicircle can have the same ratio. For since both the points H and K and the

line KH are given, the line MH will be given too; consequently the ratio of

the line MH to the line MK will be given too. So M will touch a given

circumference. Let this be NM. Then the intersection of the circumferences is

given, and the same ratio cannot hold between lines in the same plane drawn

from the same points to any other circumference but MN.

  Draw a line DB outside of the figure and divide it so that D:B=MH:MK.

But MH is greater than MK since the reflection of the cone is over the greater

angle (for it subtends the greater angle of the triangle KMH). Therefore D is

greater than B. Then add to B a line Z such that B+Z:D=D:B. Then make

another line having the same ratio to B as KH has to Z, and join MI.

  Then I is the pole of the circle on which the lines from K fall. For the ratioof D to IM is the same as that of Z to KH and of B to KI. If not, let D be in

the same ratio to a line indifferently lesser or greater than IM, and let this line

be IP. Then HK and KI and IP will have the same ratios to one another as Z,

B, and D. But the ratios between Z, B, and D were such that Z+B:D=D: B.

Therefore IH:IP=IP:IK. Now, if the points K, H be joined with the point P by

the lines HP, KP, these lines will be to one another as IH is to IP, for the sides

of the triangles HIP, KPI about the angle I are homologous. Therefore, HP

too will be to KP as HI is to IP. But this is also the ratio of MH to MK, for

the ratio both of HI to IP and of MH to MK is the same as that of D to B.

Therefore, from the points H, K there will have been drawn lines with the

same ratio to one another, not only to the circumference MN but to another

point as well, which is impossible. Since then D cannot bear that ratio to any

line either lesser or greater than IM (the proof being in either case the same),

it follows that it must stand in that ratio to MI itself. Therefore as MI is to IK

so IH will be to MI and finally MH to MK.

If, then, a circle be described with I as pole at the distance MI it will touch

all the angles which the lines from H and K make by their reflection. If not, it

can be shown, as before, that lines drawn to different points in the semicircle

will have the same ratio to one another, which was impossible. If, then, the

semicircle A be revolved about the diameter HKI, the lines reflected from the

points H, K at the point M will have the same ratio, and will make the angle

KMH equal, in every plane. Further, the angle which HM and MI make with

HI will always be the same. So there are a number of triangles on HI and KI

equal to the triangles HMI and KMI. Their perpendiculars will fall on HI at

the same point and will be equal. Let O be the point on which they fall. Then

O is the centre of the circle, half of which, MN, is cut off by the horizon. (See

diagram.)

Next let the horizon be ABG but let H have risen above the horizon. Let

the axis now be HI. The proof will be the same for the rest as before, but the

pole I of the circle will be below the horizon AG since the point H has risen

above the horizon. But the pole, and the centre of the circle, and the centre of

that circle (namely HI) which now determines the position of the sun are on

the same line. But since KH lies above the diameter AG, the centre will be at

O on the line KI below the plane of the circle AG determined the position of

the sun before. So the segment YX which is above the horizon will be less

than a semicircle. For YXM was a semicircle and it has now been cut off by

the horizon AG. So part of it, YM, will be invisible when the sun has risenabove the horizon, and the segment visible will be smallest when the sun is

on the meridian; for the higher H is the lower the pole and the centre of the

circle will be.

In the shorter days after the autumn equinox there may be a rainbow at any

time of the day, but in the longer days from the spring to the autumn equinox

there cannot be a rainbow about midday. The reason for this is that when the

sun is north of the equator the visible arcs of its course are all greater than a

semicircle, and go on increasing, while the invisible arc is small, but when

the sun is south of the equator the visible arc is small and the invisible arc

great, and the farther the sun moves south of the equator the greater is the

invisible arc. Consequently, in the days near the summer solstice, the size of

the visible arc is such that before the point H reaches the middle of that arc,

that is its point of culmination, the point is well below the horizon; the reason

for this being the great size of the visible arc, and the consequent distance of

the  point  of  culmination  from  the  earth.  But  in  the  days  near  the  winter

solstice the visible arcs are small, and the contrary is necessarily the case: for

the sun is on the meridian before the point H has risen far.

<

div class="section" title="6">


6


  Mock suns, and rods too, are due to the causes we have described. A mock

sun is caused by the reflection of sight to the sun. Rods are seen when sight

reaches the sun under circumstances like those which we described, when

there are clouds near the sun and sight is reflected from some liquid surface

to the cloud. Here the clouds themselves are colourless when you look at

them directly, but in the water they are full of rods. The only difference is

that in this latter case the colour of the cloud seems to reside in the water, but

in the case of rods on the cloud itself. Rods appear when the composition of

the cloud is uneven, dense in part and in part rare, and more and less watery

in different parts. Then the sight is reflected to the sun: the mirrors are too

small for the shape of the sun to appear, but, the bright white light of the sun,

to which the sight is reflected, being seen on the uneven mirror, its colour

appears partly red, partly green or yellow. It makes no difference whether

sight passes through or is reflected from a medium of that kind; the colour is

the same in both cases; if it is red in the first case it must be the same in theother.

  Rods  then  are  occasioned  by  the  unevenness  of  the  mirror-as  regards

colour, not form. The mock sun, on the contrary, appears when the air is very

uniform, and of the same density throughout. This is why it is white: the

uniform character of the mirror gives the reflection in it a single colour, while

the fact that the sight is reflected in a body and is thrown on the sun all

together by the mist, which is dense and watery though not yet quite water,

causes the sun’s true colour to appear just as it does when the reflection is

from the dense, smooth surface of copper. So the sun’s colour being white,

the mock sun is white too. This, too, is the reason why the mock sun is a

surer sign of rain than the rods; it indicates, more than they do, that the air is

ripe for the production of water. Further a mock sun to the south is a surer

sign of rain than one to the north, for the air in the south is readier to turn into

water than that in the north.

  Mock suns and rods are found, as we stated, about sunset and sunrise, not

above the sun nor below it, but beside it. They are not found very close to the

sun, nor very far from it, for the sun dissolves the cloud if it is near, but if it is

far  off  the  reflection  cannot  take  place,  since  sight  weakens  when  it  is

reflected from a small mirror to a very distant object. (This is why a halo is

never found opposite to the sun.) If the cloud is above the sun and close to it

the sun will dissolve it; if it is above the sun but at a distance the sight is too

weak for the reflection to take place, and so it will not reach the sun. But at

the side of the sun, it is possible for the mirror to be at such an interval that

the sun does not dissolve the cloud, and yet sight reaches it undiminished

because it moves close to the earth and is not dissipated in the immensity of

space. It cannot subsist below the sun because close to the earth the sun’s

rays would dissolve it, but if it were high up and the sun in the middle of the

heavens, sight would be dissipated. Indeed, even by the side of the sun, it is

not found when the sun is in the middle of the sky, for then the line of vision

is not close to the earth, and so but little sight reaches the mirror and the

reflection from it is altogether feeble.

  Some account has now been given of the effects of the secretion above the

surface of the earth; we must go on to describe its operations below, when it

is shut up in the parts of the earth.

Just as its twofold nature gives rise to various effects in the upper region,

so here it causes two varieties of bodies. We maintain that there are two

exhalations, one vaporous the other smoky, and there correspond two kindsof bodies that originate in the earth, ‘fossiles’ and metals. The heat of the dry

exhalation is the cause of all ‘fossiles’. Such are the kinds of stones that

cannot be melted, and realgar, and ochre, and ruddle, and sulphur, and the

other things of that kind, most ‘fossiles’ being either coloured lye or, like

cinnabar, a stone compounded of it. The vaporous exhalation is the cause of

all metals, those bodies which are either fusible or malleable such as iron,

copper,  gold.  All  these  originate  from  the  imprisonment  of  the  vaporous

exhalation in the earth, and especially in stones. Their dryness compresses it,

and it congeals just as dew or hoar-frost does when it has been separated off,

though in the present case the metals are generated before that segregation

occurs. Hence, they are water in a sense, and in a sense not. Their matter was

that which might have become water, but it can no longer do so: nor are they,

like savours, due to a qualitative change in actual water. Copper and gold are

not formed like that, but in every case the evaporation congealed before water

was  formed.  Hence,  they  all  (except  gold)  are  affected  by  fire,  and  they

possess an admixture of earth; for they still contain the dry exhalation.

This is the general theory of all these bodies, but we must take up each

kind of them and discuss it separately.                              Meteorology, Book IV


Translated by E. W. Webster


<

div class="section" title="1">


1


We have explained that the qualities that constitute the elements are four,

and that their combinations determine the number of the elements to be four.

Two of the qualities, the hot and the cold, are active; two, the dry and the

moist, passive. We can satisfy ourselves of this by looking at instances. In

every case heat and cold determine, conjoin, and change things of the same

kind  and  things  of  different  kinds,  moistening,  drying,  hardening,  and

softening them. Things dry and moist, on the other hand, both in isolation and

when present together in the same body are the subjects of that determination

and of the other affections enumerated. The account we give of the qualities

when we define their character shows this too. Hot and cold we describe as

active, for ‘congregating’ is essentially a species of ‘being active’: moist and

dry are passive, for it is in virtue of its being acted upon in a certain way that

a thing is said to be ‘easy to determine’ or ‘difficult to determine’. So it is

clear that some of the qualities are active and some passive.

Next we must describe the operations of the active qualities and the forms

taken by the passive. First of all, true becoming, that is, natural change, is

always  the  work  of  these  powers  and  so  is  the  corresponding  natural

destruction; and this becoming and this destruction are found in plants and

animals and their parts. True natural becoming is a change introduced by

these powers into the matter underlying a given thing when they are in a

certain ratio to that matter, which is the passive qualities we have mentioned.

When the hot and the cold are masters of the matter they generate a thing: if

they are not, and the failure is partial, the object is imperfectly boiled or

otherwise unconcocted. But the strictest general opposite of true becoming is

putrefaction. All natural destruction is on the way to it, as are, for instance,

growing old or growing dry. Putrescence is the end of all these things, that isof all natural objects, except such as are destroyed by violence: you can burn,

for instance, flesh, bone, or anything else, but the natural course of their

destruction ends in putrefaction. Hence things that putrefy begin by being

moist and end by being dry. For the moist and the dry were their matter, and

the operation of the active qualities caused the dry to be determined by the

moist.

  Destruction  supervenes  when  the  determined  gets  the  better  of  the

determining by the help of the environment (though in a special sense the

word putrefaction is applied to partial destruction, when a thing’s nature is

perverted). Hence everything, except fire, is liable to putrefy; for earth, water,

and air putrefy, being all of them matter relatively to fire. The definition of

putrefaction is: the destruction of the peculiar and natural heat in any moist

subject by external heat, that is, by the heat of the environment. So since lack

of heat is the ground of this affection and everything in as far as it lacks heat

is cold, both heat and cold will be the causes of putrefaction, which will be

due  indifferently  to  cold  in  the  putrefying  subject  or  to  heat  in  the

environment.

This  explains  why  everything  that  putrefies  grows  drier  and  ends  by

becoming  earth  or  dung.  The  subject’s  own  heat  departs  and  causes  the

natural moisture to evaporate with it, and then there is nothing left to draw in

moisture, for it is a thing’s peculiar heat that attracts moisture and draws it in.

Again, putrefaction takes place less in cold that in hot seasons, for in winter

the surrounding air and water contain but little heat and it has no power, but

in summer there is more. Again, what is frozen does not putrefy, for its cold

is greater that the heat of the air and so is not mastered, whereas what affects

a thing does master it. Nor does that which is boiling or hot putrefy, for the

heat in the air being less than that in the object does not prevail over it or set

up any change. So too anything that is flowing or in motion is less apt to

putrefy than a thing at rest, for the motion set up by the heat in the air is

weaker than that pre-existing in the object, and so it causes no change. For

the same reason a great quantity of a thing putrefies less readily than a little,

for  the  greater  quantity  contains  too  much  proper  fire  and  cold  for  the

corresponding qualities in the environment to get the better of. Hence, the sea

putrefies quickly when broken up into parts, but not as a whole; and all other

waters likewise. Animals too are generated in putrefying bodies, because the

heat that has been secreted, being natural, organizes the particles secreted

with it.So much for the nature of becoming and of destruction.

<

div class="section" title="2">


2


We must now describe the next kinds of processes which the qualities

already mentioned set up in actually existing natural objects as matter.

Of  these  concoction  is  due  to  heat;  its  species  are  ripening,  boiling,

broiling. Inconcoction is due to cold and its species are rawness, imperfect

boiling,  imperfect  broiling.  (We  must  recognize  that  the  things  are  not

properly denoted by these words: the various classes of similar objects have

no names universally applicable to them; consequently we must think of the

species enumerated as being not what those words denote but something like

it.) Let us say what each of them is. Concoction is a process in which the

natural  and  proper  heat  of  an  object  perfects  the  corresponding  passive

qualities,  which  are  the  proper  matter  of  any  given  object.  For  when

concoction has taken place we say that a thing has been perfected and has

come to be itself. It is the proper heat of a thing that sets up this perfecting,

though external influences may contribute in some degrees to its fulfilment.

Baths, for instance, and other things of the kind contribute to the digestion of

food, but the primary cause is the proper heat of the body. In some cases of

concoction the end of the process is the nature of the thing-nature, that is, in

the sense of the formal cause and essence. In other cases it leads to some

presupposed state which is attained when the moisture has acquired certain

properties or a certain magnitude in the process of being broiled or boiled or

of putrefying, or however else it is being heated. This state is the end, for

when it has been reached the thing has some use and we say that concoction

has taken place. Must is an instance of this, and the matter in boils when it

becomes purulent, and tears when they become rheum, and so with the rest.

  Concoction ensues whenever the matter, the moisture, is mastered. For the

matter is what is determined by the heat connatural to the object, and as long

as the ratio between them exists in it a thing maintains its nature. Hence

things like the liquid and solid excreta and ejecta in general are signs of

health, and concoction is said to have taken place in them, for they show that

the proper heat has got the better of the indeterminate matter.

  Things that undergo a process of concoction necessarily become thickerand hotter, for the action of heat is to make things more compact, thicker, and

drier.

This then is the nature of concoction: but inconcoction is an imperfect state

due to lack of proper heat, that is, to cold. That of which the imperfect state

is,  is  the  corresponding  passive  qualities  which  are  the  natural  matter  of

anything.

So much for the definition of concoction and inconcoction.

<

div class="section" title="3">


3


  Ripening is a sort of concoction; for we call it ripening when there is a

concoction  of  the  nutriment  in  fruit.  And  since  concoction  is  a  sort  of

perfecting, the process of ripening is perfect when the seeds in fruit are able

to reproduce the fruit in which they are found; for in all other cases as well

this is what we mean by ‘perfect’. This is what ‘ripening’ means when the

word is applied to fruit. However, many other things that have undergone

concoction are said to be ‘ripe’, the general character of the process being the

same, though the word is applied by an extension of meaning. The reason for

this extension is, as we explained before, that the various modes in which

natural  heat  and  cold  perfect  the  matter  they  determine  have  not  special

names appropriated to them. In the case of boils and phlegm, and the like, the

process of ripening is the concoction of the moisture in them by their natural

heat,  for  only  that  which  gets  the  better  of  matter  can  determine  it.  So

everything that ripens is condensed from a spirituous into a watery state, and

from a watery into an earthy state, and in general from being rare becomes

dense. In this process the nature of the thing that is ripening incorporates

some of the matter in itself, and some it rejects. So much for the definition of

ripening.

  Rawness is its opposite and is therefore an imperfect concoction of the

nutriment in the fruit, namely, of the undetermined moisture. Consequently a

raw thing is either spirituous or watery or contains both spirit and water.

Ripening being a kind of perfecting, rawness will be an imperfect state, and

this state is due to a lack of natural heat and its disproportion to the moisture

that is undergoing the process of ripening. (Nothing moist ripens without the

admixture of some dry matter: water alone of liquids does not thicken.) Thisdisproportion may be due either to defect of heat or to excess of the matter to

be determined: hence the juice of raw things is thin, cold rather than hot, and

unfit for food or drink. Rawness, like ripening, is used to denote a variety of

states. Thus the liquid and solid excreta and catarrhs are called raw for the

same reason, for in every case the word is applied to things because their heat

has not got the mastery in them and compacted them. If we go further, brick

is called raw and so is milk and many other things too when they are such as

to  admit  of  being  changed  and  compacted  by  heat  but  have  remained

unaffected. Hence, while we speak of ‘boiled’ water, we cannot speak of raw

water, since it does not thicken. We have now defined ripening and rawness

and assigned their causes.

  Boiling  is,  in  general,  a  concoction  by  moist  heat  of  the  indeterminate

matter contained in the moisture of the thing boiled, and the word is strictly

applicable only to things boiled in the way of cooking. The indeterminate

matter,  as  we  said,  will  be  either  spirituous  or  watery.  The  cause  of  the

concoction  is  the  fire  contained  in  the  moisture;  for  what  is  cooked  in  a

frying-pan  is  broiled:  it  is  the  heat  outside  that  affects  it  and,  as  for  the

moisture in which it is contained, it dries this up and draws it into itself. But a

thing that is being boiled behaves in the opposite way: the moisture contained

in it is drawn out of it by the heat in the liquid outside. Hence boiled meats

are drier than broiled; for, in boiling, things do not draw the moisture into

themselves,  since  the  external  heat  gets  the  better  of  the  internal:  if  the

internal heat had got the better it would have drawn the moisture to itself. Not

every body admits of the process of boiling: if there is no moisture in it, it

does not (for instance, stones), nor does it if there is moisture in it but the

density of the body is too great for it-to-be mastered, as in the case of wood.

But only those bodies can be boiled that contain moisture which can be acted

on by the heat contained in the liquid outside. It is true that gold and wood

and many other things are said to be ‘boiled’: but this is a stretch of the

meaning of the word, though the kind of thing intended is the same, the

reason for the usage being that the various cases have no names appropriated

to them. Liquids too, like milk and must, are said to undergo a process of

‘boiling’ when the external fire that surrounds and heats them changes the

savour in the liquid into a given form, the process being thus in a way like

what we have called boiling.

The  end  of  the  things  that  undergo  boiling,  or  indeed  any  form  of

concoction, is not always the same: some are meant to be eaten, some drunk,and some are intended for other uses; for instance dyes, too, are said to be

‘boiled’.

All those things then admit of ‘boiling’ which can grow denser, smaller, or

heavier; also those which do that with a part of themselves and with a part do

the opposite, dividing in such a way that one portion thickens while the other

grows thinner, like milk when it divides into whey and curd. Oil by itself is

affected  in  none  of  these  ways,  and  therefore  cannot  be  said  to  admit  of

‘boiling’. Such then is the pfcies of concoction known as ‘boiling’, and the

process is the same in an artificial and in a natural instrument, for the cause

will be the same in every case.

  Imperfect boiling is the form of inconcoction opposed to boiling. Now the

opposite of boiling properly so called is an inconcoction of the undetermined

matter in a body due to lack of heat in the surrounding liquid. (Lack of heat

implies, as we have pointed out, the presence of cold.) The motion which

causes imperfect boiling is different from that which causes boiling, for the

heat which operates the concoction is driven out. The lack of heat is due

either to the amount of cold in the liquid or to the quantity of moisture in the

object undergoing the process of boiling. Where either of these conditions is

realized the heat in the surrounding liquid is too great to have no effect at all,

but  too  small  to  carry  out  the  process  of  concocting  uniformly  and

thoroughly. Hence things are harder when they are imperfectly boiled than

when they are boiled, and the moisture in them more distinct from the solid

parts. So much for the definition and causes of boiling and imperfect boiling.

  Broiling is concoction by dry foreign heat. Hence if a man were to boil a

thing but the change and concoction in it were due, not to the heat of the

liquid but to that of the fire, the thing will have been broiled and not boiled

when the process has been carried to completion: if the process has gone too

far we use the word ‘scorched’ to describe it. If the process leaves the thing

drier at the end the agent has been dry heat. Hence the outside is drier than

the inside, the opposite being true of things boiled. Where the process is

artificial, broiling is more difficult than boiling, for it is difficult to heat the

inside and the outside uniformly, since the parts nearer to the fire are the first

to get dry and consequently get more intensely dry. In this way the outer

pores contract and the moisture in the thing cannot be secreted but is shut in

by the closing of the pores. Now broiling and boiling are artificial processes,

but the same general kind of thing, as we said, is found in nature too. The

affections  produced  are  similar  though  they  lack  a  name;  for  art  imitatesnature. For instance, the concoction of food in the body is like boiling, for it

takes place in a hot and moist medium and the agent is the heat of the body.

So, too, certain forms of indigestion are like imperfect boiling. And it is not

true that animals are generated in the concoction of food, as some say. Really

they are generated in the excretion which putrefies in the lower belly, and

they ascend afterwards. For concoction goes on in the upper belly but the

excretion  putrefies  in  the  lower:  the  reason  for  this  has  been  explained

elsewhere.

We have seen that the opposite of boiling is imperfect boiling: now there is

something  correspondingly  opposed  to  the  species  of  concoction  called

broiling, but it is more difficult to find a name for it. It would be the kind of

thing that would happen if there were imperfect broiling instead of broiling

proper through lack of heat due to deficiency in the external fire or to the

quantity of water in the thing undergoing the process. For then we should get

too much heat for no effect to be produced, but too little for concoction to

take place.

We  have  now  explained  concoction  and  inconcoction,  ripening  and

rawness, boiling and broiling, and their opposites.

<

div class="section" title="4">


4


We must now describe the forms taken by the passive qualities the moist

and the dry. The elements of bodies, that is, the passive ones, are the moist

and the dry; the bodies themselves are compounded of them and whichever

predominates determines the nature of the body; thus some bodies partake

more of the dry, others of the moist. All the forms to be described will exist

either  actually,  or  potentially  and  in  their  opposite:  for  instance,  there  is

actual melting and on the other hand that which admits of being melted.

  Since the moist is easily determined and the dry determined with difficulty,

their relation to one another is like that of a dish and its condiments. The

moist is what makes the dry determinable, and each serves as a sort of glue to

the other-as Empedocles said in his poem on Nature, ‘glueing meal together

by means of water.’ Thus the determined body involves them both. Of the

elements earth is especially representative of the dry, water of the moist, and

therefore all determinate bodies in our world involve earth and water. Everybody shows the quality of that element which predominates in it. It is because

earth and water are the material elements of all bodies that animals live in

them alone and not in air or fire.

Of  the  qualities  of  bodies  hardness  and  softness  are  those  which  must

primarily belong to a determined thing, for anything made up of the dry and

the moist is necessarily either hard or soft. Hard is that the surface of which

does not yield into itself; soft that which does yield but not by interchange of

place: water, for instance, is not soft, for its surface does not yield to pressure

or sink in but there is an interchange of place. Those things are absolutely

hard  and  soft  which  satisfy  the  definition  absolutely,  and  those  things

relatively so which do so compared with another thing. Now relatively to one

another hard and soft are indefinable, because it is a matter of degree, but

since all the objects of sense are determined by reference to the faculty of

sense it is clearly the relation to touch which determines that which is hard

and soft absolutely, and touch is that which we use as a standard or mean. So

we call that which exceeds it hard and that which falls short of it soft.

<

div class="section" title="5">


5


A body determined by its own boundary must be either hard or soft; for it

either yields or does not.

It  must  also  be  concrete:  or  it  could  not  be  so  determined.  So  since

everything  that  is  determined  and  solid  is  either  hard  or  soft  and  these

qualities are due to concretion, all composite and determined bodies must

involve concretion. Concretion therefore must be discussed.

Now there are two causes besides matter, the agent and the quality brought

about, the agent being the efficient cause, the quality the formal cause. Hence

concretion and disaggregation, drying and moistening, must have these two

causes.

But since concretion is a form of drying let us speak of the latter first.

As we have explained, the agent operates by means of two qualities and

the patient is acted on in virtue of two qualities: action takes place by means

of heat or cold, and the quality is produced either by the presence or by the

absence of heat or cold; but that which is acted upon is moist or dry or a

compound of both. Water is the element characterized by the moist, earth thatcharacterized  by  the  dry,  for  these  among  the  elements  that  admit  the

qualities moist and dry are passive. Therefore cold, too, being found in water

and earth (both of which we recognize to be cold), must be reckoned rather as

a  passive  quality.  It  is  active  only  as  contributing  to  destruction  or

incidentally in the manner described before; for cold is sometimes actually

said to burn and to warm, but not in the same way as heat does, but by

collecting and concentrating heat.

The subjects of drying are water and the various watery fluids and those

bodies which contain water either foreign or connatural. By foreign I mean

like the water in wool, by connatural, like that in milk. The watery fluids are

wine, urine, whey, and in general those fluids which have no sediment or

only a little, except where this absence of sediment is due to viscosity. For in

some cases, in oil and pitch for instance, it is the viscosity which prevents

any sediment from appearing.

It is always a process of heating or cooling that dries things, but the agent

in both cases is heat, either internal or external. For even when things are

dried by cooling, like a garment, where the moisture exists separately it is the

internal heat that dries them. It carries off the moisture in the shape of vapour

(if there is not too much of it), being itself driven out by the surrounding cold.

So everything is dried, as we have said, by a process either of heating or

cooling, but the agent is always heat, either internal or external, carrying off

the moisture in vapour. By external heat I mean as where things are boiled:

by  internal  where  the  heat  breathes  out  and  takes  away  and  uses  up  its

moisture. So much for drying.

<

div class="section" title="6">


6


  Liquefaction is, first, condensation into water; second, the melting of a

solidified body. The first, condensation, is due to the cooling of vapour: what

melting is will appear from the account of solidification.

  Whatever solidifies is either water or a mixture of earth and water, and the

agent is either dry heat or cold. Hence those of the bodies solidified by heat

or  cold  which  are  soluble  at  all  are  dissolved  by  their  opposites.  Bodies

solidified by the dry-hot are dissolved by water, which is the moist-cold,

while bodies solidified by cold are dissolved by fire, which is hot. Somethings seem to be solidified by water, e.g. boiled honey, but really it is not the

water  but  the  cold  in  the  water  which  effects  the  solidification.  Aqueous

bodies are not solidified by fire: for it is fire that dissolves them, and the

same cause in the same relation cannot have opposite effects upon the same

thing. Again, water solidifies owing to the departure of heat; so it will clearly

be dissolved by the entry into it of heat: cold, therefore, must be the agent in

solidifying it.

  Hence aqueous bodies do not thicken when they solidify; for thickening

occurs when the moisture goes off and the dry matter comes together, but

water is the only liquid that does not thicken. Those bodies that are made up

of both earth and water are solidified both by fire and by cold and in either

case are thickened. The operation of the two is in a way the same and in a

way different. Heat acts by drawing off the moisture, and as the moisture

goes off in vapour the dry matter thickens and collects. Cold acts by driving

out the heat, which is accompanied by the moisture as this goes off in vapour

with it. Bodies that are soft but not liquid do not thicken but solidify when the

moisture leaves them, e.g. potter’s clay in process of baking: but those mixed

bodies that are liquid thicken besides solidifying, like milk. Those bodies

which have first been thickened or hardened by cold often begin by becoming

moist: thus potter’s clay at first in the process of baking steams and grows

softer, and is liable to distortion in the ovens for that reason.

Now of the bodies solidified by cold which are made up both of earth and

water  but  in  which  the  earth  preponderates,  those  which  solidify  by  the

departure of heat melt by heat when it enters into them again; this is the case

with frozen mud. But those which solidify by refrigeration, where all the

moisture has gone off in vapour with the heat, like iron and horn, cannot be

dissolved  except  by  excessive  heat,  but  they  can  be  softened-though

manufactured  iron  does  melt,  to  the  point  of  becoming  fluid  and  then

solidifying again. This is how steel is made. The dross sinks to the bottom

and is purged away: when this has been done often and the metal is pure we

have steel. The process is not repeated often because the purification of the

metal involves great waste and loss of weight. But the iron that has less dross

is the better iron. The stone pyrimachus, too, melts and forms into drops and

becomes fluid; after having been in a fluid state it solidifies and becomes

hard  again.  Millstones,  too,  melt  and  become  fluid:  when  the  fluid  mass

begins to solidify it is black but its consistency comes to be like that of lime.

and earth, tooOf the bodies which are solidified by dry heat some are insoluble, others

are dissolved by liquid. Pottery and some kinds of stone that are formed out

of earth burnt up by fire, such as millstones, cannot be dissolved. Natron and

salt are soluble by liquid, but not all liquid but only such as is cold. Hence

water and any of its varieties melt them, but oil does not. For the opposite of

the  dry-hot  is  the  cold-moist  and  what  the  one  solidified  the  other  will

dissolve, and so opposites will have opposite effects.

<

div class="section" title="7">


7


If a body contains more water than earth fire only thickens it: if it contains

more earth fire solidifies it. Hence natron and salt and stone and potter’s clay

must contain more earth.

The nature of oil presents the greatest problem. If water preponderated in

it, cold ought to solidify it; if earth preponderated, then fire ought to do so.

Actually neither solidifies, but both thicken it. The reason is that it is full of

air (hence it floats on the top of water, since air tends to rise). Cold thickens it

by turning the air in it into water, for any mixture of oil and water is thicker

than either. Fire and the lapse of time thicken and whiten it. The whitening

follows on the evaporation of any water that may have been in it; the is due to

the change of the air into water as the heat in the oil is dissipated. The effect

in both cases is the same and the cause is the same, but the manner of its

operation  is  different.  Both  heat  and  cold  thicken  it,  but  neither  dries  it

(neither  the  sun  nor  cold  dries  oil),  not  only  because  it  is  glutinous  but

because it contains air. Its glutinous nature prevents it from giving off vapour

and so fire does not dry it or boil it off.

  Those bodies which are made up of earth and water may be classified

according  to  the  preponderance  of  either.  There  is  a  kind  of  wine,  for

instance,  which  both  solidifies  and  thickens  by  boiling-I  mean,  must.  All

bodies of this kind lose their water as they That it is their water may be seen

from the fact that the vapour from them condenses into water when collected.

So wherever some sediment is left this is of the nature of earth. Some of these

bodies, as we have said, are also thickened and dried by cold. For cold not

only solidifies but also dries water, and thickens things by turning air into

water. (Solidifying, as we have said, is a form of drying.) Now those thingsthat are not thickened by cold, but solidified, belong rather to water, e.g..

wine, urine, vinegar, lye, whey. But those things that are thickened (not by

evaporation due to fire) are made up either of earth or of water and air: honey

of earth, while oil contains air. Milk and blood, too, are made up of both

water and earth, though earth generally predominates in them. So, too, are the

liquids out of which natron and salt are formed; and stones are also formed

from some mixtures of this kind. Hence, if the whey has not been separated,

it burns away if you boil it over a fire. But the earthy element in milk can also

be  coagulated  by  the  help  of  fig-juice,  if  you  boil  it  in  a  certain  way  as

doctors do when they treat it with fig-juice, and this is how the whey and the

cheese are commonly separated. Whey, once separated, does not thicken, as

the milk did, but boils away like water. Sometimes, however, there is little or

no cheese in milk, and such milk is not nutritive and is more like water. The

case of blood is similar: cold dries and so solidifies it. Those kinds of blood

that do not solidify, like that of the stag, belong rather to water and are very

cold. Hence they contain no fibres: for the fibres are of earth and solid, and

blood from which they have been removed does not solidify. This is because

it cannot dry; for what remains is water, just as what remains of milk when

cheese  has  been  removed  is  water.  The  fact  that  diseased  blood  will  not

solidify is evidence of the same thing, for such blood is of the nature of

serum and that is phlegm and water, the nature of the animal having failed to

get the better of it and digest it.

  Some of these bodies are soluble, e.g. natron, some insoluble, e.g. pottery:

of the latter, some, like horn, can be softened by heat, others, like pottery and

stone,  cannot.  The  reason  is  that  opposite  causes  have  opposite  effects:

consequently, if solidification is due to two causes, the cold and the dry,

solution must be due to the hot and the moist, that is, to fire and to water

(these being opposites): water dissolving what was solidified by fire alone,

fire what was solidified by cold alone. Consequently, if any things happen to

be solidified by the action of both, these are least apt to be soluble. Such a

case we find where things have been heated and are then solidified by cold.

When the heat in leaving them has caused most of the moisture to evaporate,

the cold so compacts these bodies together again as to leave no entrance even

for moisture. Therefore heat does not dissolve them (for it only dissolves

those bodies that are solidified by cold alone), nor does water (for it does not

dissolve what cold solidifies, but only what is solidified by dry heat). But iron

is melted by heat and solidified by cold. Wood consists of earth and air and istherefore  combustible  but  cannot  be  melted  or  softened  by  heat.  (For  the

same reason it floats in water-all except ebony. This does not, for other kinds

of  wood  contain  a  preponderance  of  air,  but  in  black  ebony  the  air  has

escaped  and  so  earth  preponderates  in  it.)  Pottery  consists  of  earth  alone

because it solidified gradually in the process of drying. Water cannot get into

it, for the pores were only large enough to admit of vapour escaping: and

seeing that fire solidified it, that cannot dissolve it either.

So solidification and melting, their causes, and the kinds of subjects in

which they occur have been described.

<

div class="section" title="8">


8


All this makes it clear that bodies are formed by heat and cold and that

these  agents  operate  by  thickening  and  solidifying.  It  is  because  these

qualities fashion bodies that we find heat in all of them, and in some cold in

so far as heat is absent. These qualities, then, are present as active, and the

moist and the dry as passive, and consequently all four are found in mixed

bodies. So water and earth are the constituents of homogeneous bodies both

in plants and in animals and of metals such as gold, silver, and the rest-water

and earth and their respective exhalations shut up in the compound bodies, as

we have explained elsewhere.

All these mixed bodies are distinguished from one another, firstly by the

qualities special to the various senses, that is, by their capacities of action.

(For a thing is white, fragrant, sonant, sweet, hot, cold in virtue of a power of

acting  on  sense).  Secondly  by  other  more  characteristic  affections  which

express their aptitude to be affected: I mean, for instance, the aptitude to melt

or solidify or bend and so forth, all these qualities, like moist and dry, being

passive. These are the qualities that differentiate bone, flesh, sinew, wood,

bark,  stone  and  all  other  homogeneous  natural  bodies.  Let  us  begin  by

enumerating these qualities expressing the aptitude or inaptitude of a thing to

be  affected  in  a  certain  way.  They  are  as  follows:  to  be  apt  or  inapt  to

solidify, melt, be softened by heat, be softened by water, bend, break, be

comminuted,  impressed,  moulded,  squeezed;  to  be  tractile  or  non-tractile,

malleable or non-malleable, to be fissile or non-fissile, apt or inapt to be cut;

to  be  viscous  or  friable,  compressible  or  incompressible,  combustible  orincombustible;  to  be  apt  or  inapt  to  give  off  fumes.  These  affections

differentiate most bodies from one another. Let us go on to explain the nature

of each of them. We have already given a general account of that which is apt

or inapt to solidify or to melt, but let us return to them again now. Of all the

bodies that admit of solidification and hardening, some are brought into this

state by heat, others by cold. Heat does this by drying up their moisture, cold

by driving out their heat. Consequently some bodies are affected in this way

by defect of moisture, some by defect of heat: watery bodies by defect of

heat, earthy bodies of moisture. Now those bodies that are so affected by

defect of moisture are dissolved by water, unless like pottery they have so

contracted that their pores are too small for the particles of water to enter. All

those bodies in which this is not the case are dissolved by water, e.g. natron,

salt, dry mud. Those bodies that solidified through defect of heat are melted

by  heat,  e.g.  ice,  lead,  copper.  So  much  for  the  bodies  that  admit  of

solidification and of melting, and those that do not admit of melting.

The bodies which do not admit of solidification are those which contain no

aqueous  moisture  and  are  not  watery,  but  in  which  heat  and  earth

preponderate,  like  honey  and  must  (for  these  are  in  a  sort  of  state  of

effervescence),  and  those  which  do  possess  some  water  but  have  a

preponderance of air, like oil and quicksilver, and all viscous substances such

as pitch and birdlime.

<

div class="section" title="9">


9


  Those bodies admit of softening which are not (like ice) made up of water,

but in which earth predominates. All their moisture must not have left them

(as in the case of natron and salt), nor must the relation of dry to moist in

them  be  incongruous  (as  in  the  case  of  pottery).  They  must  be  tractile

(without admitting water) or malleable (without consisting of water), and the

agent in softening them is fire. Such are iron and horn.

Both of bodies that can melt and of bodies that cannot, some do and some

do  not  admit  of  softening  in  water.  Copper,  for  instance,  which  can  be

melted, cannot be softened in water, whereas wool and earth can be softened

in water, for they can be soaked. (It is true that though copper can be melted

the agent in its case is not water, but some of the bodies that can be melted bywater too such as natron and salt cannot be softened in water: for nothing is

said to be so affected unless the water soaks into it and makes it softer.) Some

things, on the other hand, such as wool and grain, can be softened by water

though they cannot be melted. Any body that is to be softened by water must

be of earth and must have its pores larger than the particles of water, and the

pores themselves must be able to resist the action of water, whereas bodies

that can be ‘melted’ by water must have pores throughout.

  (Why  is  it  that  earth  is  both  ‘melted’  and  softened  by  moisture,  while

natron is ‘melted’ but not softened? Because natron is pervaded throughout

by pores so that the parts are immediately divided by the water, but earth has

also  pores  which  do  not  connect  and  is  therefore  differently  affected

according as the water enters by one or the other set of pores.)

  Some bodies can be bent or straightened, like the reed or the withy, some

cannot,  like  pottery  and  stone.  Those  bodies  are  apt  to  be  bent  and

straightened which can change from being curved to being straight and from

being straight to being curved, and bending and straightening consist in the

change or motion to the straight or to a curve, for a thing is said to be in

process of being bent whether it is being made to assume a convex or a

concave shape. So bending is defined as motion to the convex or the concave

without a change of length. For if we added ‘or to the straight’, we should

have a thing bent and straight at once, and it is impossible for that which is

straight to be bent. And if all bending is a bending back or a bending down,

the former being a change to the convex, the latter to the concave, a motion

that  leads  to  the  straight  cannot  be  called  bending,  but  bending  and

straightening are two different things. These, then, are the things that can, and

those that cannot be bent, and be straightened.

  Some things can be both broken and comminuted, others admit only one or

the other. Wood, for instance, can be broken but not comminuted, ice and

stone  can  be  comminuted  but  not  broken,  while  pottery  may  either  be

comminuted or broken. The distinction is this: breaking is a division and

separation into large parts, comminution into parts of any size, but there must

be  more  of  them  than  two.  Now  those  solids  that  have  many  pores  not

communicating  with  one  another  are  comminuible  (for  the  limit  to  their

subdivision is set by the pores), but those whose pores stretch continuously

for a long way are breakable, while those which have pores of both kinds are

both comminuible and breakable.

  Some things, e.g. copper and wax, are impressible, others, e.g. pottery andwater, are not. The process of being impressed is the sinking of a part of the

surface of a thing in response to pressure or a blow, in general to contact.

Such bodies are either soft, like wax, where part of the surface is depressed

while the rest remains, or hard, like copper. Non-impressible bodies are either

hard, like pottery (its surface does not give way and sink in), or liquid, like

water (for though water does give way it is not in a part of it, for there is a

reciprocal change of place of all its parts). Those impressibles that retain the

shape  impressed  on  them  and  are  easily  moulded  by  the  hand  are  called

‘plastic’; those that are not easily moulded, such as stone or wood, or are

easily moulded but do not retain the shape impressed, like wool or a sponge,

are  not  plastic.  The  last  group  are  said  to  be  ‘squeezable’.  Things  are

‘squeezable’ when they can contract into themselves under pressure, their

surface sinking in without being broken and without the parts interchanging

position as happens in the case of water. (We speak of pressure when there is

movement and the motor remains in contact with the thing moved, of impact

when  the  movement  is  due  to  the  local  movement  of  the  motor.)  Those

bodies are subject to squeezing which have empty pores-empty, that is, of the

stuff of which the body itself consists-and that can sink upon the void spaces

within them, or rather upon their pores. For sometimes the pores upon which

a body sinks in are not empty (a wet sponge, for instance, has its pores full).

But the pores, if full, must be full of something softer than the body itself

which is to contract. Examples of things squeezable are the sponge, wax,

flesh. Those things are not squeezable which cannot be made to contract upon

their own pores by pressure, either because they have no pores or because

their pores are full of something too hard. Thus iron, stone, water and all

liquids are incapable of being squeezed.

  Things are tractile when their surface can be made to elongate, for being

drawn out is a movement of the surface, remaining unbroken, in the direction

of  the  mover.  Some  things  are  tractile,  e.g.  hair,  thongs,  sinew,  dough,

birdlime, and some are not, e.g. water, stone. Some things are both tractile

and squeezable, e.g. wool; in other cases the two qualities do not coincide;

phlegm, for instance, is tractile but not squeezable, and a sponge squeezable

but not tractile.

  Some things are malleable, like copper. Some are not, like stone and wood.

Things are malleable when their surface can be made to move (but only in

part) both downwards and sideways with one and the same blow: when this is

not possible a body is not malleable. All malleable bodies are impressible,but not all impressible bodies are malleable, e.g. wood, though on the whole

the two go together. Of squeezable things some are malleable and some not:

wax and mud are malleable, wool is not. Some things are fissile, e.g. wood,

some are not, e.g. potter’s clay. A thing is fissile when it is apt to divide in

advance  of  the  instrument  dividing  it,  for  a  body  is  said  to  split  when  it

divides to a further point than that to which the dividing instrument divides it

and the act of division advances: which is not the case with cutting. Those

bodies which cannot behave like this are non-fissile. Nothing soft is fissile

(by  soft  I  mean  absolutely  soft  and  not  relatively:  for  iron  itself  may  be

relatively soft); nor are all hard things fissile, but only such as are neither

liquid nor impressible nor comminuible. Such are the bodies that have the

pores along which they cohere lengthwise and not crosswise.

  Those hard or soft solids are apt to be cut which do not necessarily either

split in advance of the instrument or break into minute fragments when they

are being divided. Those that necessarily do so and liquids cannot be cut.

Some  things  can  be  both  split  and  cut,  like  wood,  though  generally  it  is

lengthwise that a thing can be split and crosswise that it can be cut. For, a

body being divided into many parts fin so far as its unity is made up of many

lengths it is apt to be split, in so far as it is made up of many breadths it is apt

to be cut.

A thing is viscous when, being moist or soft, it is tractile. Bodies owe this

property  to  the  interlocking  of  their  parts  when  they  are  composed  like

chains, for then they can be drawn out to a great length and contracted again.

Bodies that are not like this are friable. Bodies are compressible when they

are  squeezable  and  retain  the  shape  they  have  been  squeezed  into;

incompressible when they are either inapt to be squeezed at all or do not

retain the shape they have been squeezed into.

  Some bodies are combustible and some are not. Wood, wool, bone are

combustible; stone, ice are not. Bodies are combustible when their pores are

such as to admit fire and their longitudinal pores contain moisture weaker

than fire. If they have no moisture, or if, as in ice or very green wood, the

moisture is stronger than fire, they are not combustible.

  Those bodies give off fumes which contain moisture, but in such a form

that it does not go off separately in vapour when they are exposed to fire. For

vapour is a moist secretion tending to the nature of air produced from a liquid

by the agency of burning heat. Bodies that give off fumes give off secretions

of the nature of air by the lapse of time: as they perish away they dry up orbecome earth. But the kind of secretion we are concerned with now differs

from  others  in  that  it  is  not  moist  nor  does  it  become  wind  (which  is  a

continuous flow of air in a given direction). Fumes are common secretion of

dry and moist together caused by the agency of burning heat. Hence they do

not moisten things but rather colour them.

The fumes of a woody body are called smoke. (I mean to include bones

and hair and everything of this kind in the same class. For there is no name

common to all the objects that I mean, but, for all that, these things are all in

the same class by analogy. Compare what Empedocles says: They are one

and the same, hair and leaves and the thick wings of birds and scales that

grow on stout limbs.) The fumes of fat are a sooty smoke and those of oily

substances a greasy steam. Oil does not boil away or thicken by evaporation

because it does not give off vapour but fumes. Water on the other hand does

not  give  off  fumes,  but  vapour.  Sweet  wine  does  give  off  fumes,  for  it

contains fat and behaves like oil. It does not solidify under the influence of

cold and it is apt to burn. Really it is not wine at all in spite of its name: for it

does not taste like wine and consequently does not inebriate as ordinary wine

does. It contains but little fumigable stuff and consequently is inflammable.

All bodies are combustible that dissolve into ashes, and all bodies do this

that solidify under the influence either of heat or of both heat and cold; for we

find that all these bodies are mastered by fire. Of stones the precious stone

called carbuncle is least amenable to fire.

Of combustible bodies some are inflammable and some are not, and some

of the former are reduced to coals. Those are called ‘inflammable’ which

produce flame and those which do not are called ‘non-inflammable’. Those

fumigable bodies that are not liquid are inflammable, but pitch, oil, wax are

inflammable  in  conjunction  with  other  bodies  rather  than  by  themselves.

Most inflammable are those bodies that give off smoke. Of bodies of this

kind those that contain more earth than smoke are apt to be reduced to coals.

Some bodies that can be melted are not inflammable, e.g. copper; and some

bodies that cannot be melted are inflammable, e.g. wood; and some bodies

can be melted and are also inflammable, e.g. frankincense. The reason is that

wood has its moisture all together and this is continuous throughout and so it

burns  up:  whereas  copper  has  it  in  each  part  but  not  continuous,  and

insufficient in quantity to give rise to flame. In frankincense it is disposed in

both  of  these  ways.  Fumigable  bodies  are  inflammable  when  earth

predominates in them and they are consequently such as to be unable to melt.These are inflammable because they are dry like fire. When this dry comes to

be hot there is fire. This is why flame is burning smoke or dry exhalation.

The fumes of wood are smoke, those of wax and frankincense and such-like,

and pitch and whatever contains pitch or such-like are sooty smoke, while the

fumes  of  oil  and  oily  substances  are  a  greasy  steam;  so  are  those  of  all

substances which are not at all combustible by themselves because there is

too little of the dry in them (the dry being the means by which the transition

to fire is effected), but burn very readily in conjunction with something else.

(For the fat is just the conjunction of the oily with the dry.) So those bodies

that give off fumes, like oil and pitch, belong rather to the moist, but those

that burn to the dry.

<

div class="section" title="10">


10


  Homogeneous bodies differ to touch-by these affections and differences, as

we have said. They also differ in respect of their smell, taste, and colour.

By  homogeneous  bodies  I  mean,  for  instance,  ‘metals’,  gold,  copper,

silver, tin, iron, stone, and everything else of this kind and the bodies that are

extracted from them; also the substances found in animals and plants, for

instance, flesh, bones, sinew, skin, viscera, hair, fibres, veins (these are the

elements of which the non-homogeneous bodies like the face, a hand, a foot,

and everything of that kind are made up), and in plants, wood, bark, leaves,

roots, and the rest like them.

The homogeneous bodies, it is true, are constituted by a different cause,

but the matter of which they are composed is the dry and the moist, that is,

water and earth (for these bodies exhibit those qualities most clearly). The

agents are the hot and the cold, for they constitute and make concrete the

homogeneous bodies out of earth and water as matter. Let us consider, then,

which of the homogeneous bodies are made of earth and which of water, and

which of both.

Of organized bodies some are liquid, some soft, some hard. The soft and

the hard are constituted by a process of solidification, as we have already

explained.

  Those liquids that go off in vapour are made of water, those that do not are

either of the nature of earth, or a mixture either of earth and water, like milk,or of earth and air, like wood, or of water and air, like oil. Those liquids

which are thickened by heat are a mixture. (Wine is a liquid which raises a

difficulty: for it is both liable to evaporation and it also thickens; for instance

new wine does. The reason is that the word ‘wine’ is ambiguous and different

‘wines’ behave in different ways. New wine is more earthy than old, and for

this reason it is more apt to be thickened by heat and less apt to be congealed

by cold. For it contains much heat and a great proportion of earth, as in

Arcadia, where it is so dried up in its skins by the smoke that you scrape it to

drink. If all wine has some sediment in it then it will belong to earth or to

water according to the quantity of the sediment it possesses.) The liquids that

are thickened by cold are of the nature of earth; those that are thickened either

by heat or by cold consist of more than one element, like oil and honey, and

‘sweet wine’.

Of solid bodies those that have been solidified by cold are of water, e.g.

ice, snow, hail, hoar-frost. Those solidified by heat are of earth, e.g. pottery,

cheese, natron, salt. Some bodies are solidified by both heat and cold. Of this

kind are those solidified by refrigeration, that is by the privation both of heat

and of the moisture which departs with the heat. For salt and the bodies that

are purely of earth solidify by the privation of moisture only, ice by that of

heat only, these bodies by that of both. So both the active qualities and both

kinds of matter were involved in the process. Of these bodies those from

which  all  the  moisture  has  gone  are  all  of  them  of  earth,  like  pottery  or

amber.  (For  amber,  also,  and  the  bodies  called  ‘tears’  are  formed  by

refrigeration, like myrrh, frankincense, gum. Amber, too, appears to belong

to this class of things: the animals enclosed in it show that it is formed by

solidification. The heat is driven out of it by the cold of the river and causes

the moisture to evaporate with it, as in the case of honey when it has been

heated and is immersed in water.) Some of these bodies cannot be melted or

softened; for instance, amber and certain stones, e.g. the stalactites in caves.

(For these stalactites, too, are formed in the same way: the agent is not fire,

but cold which drives out the heat, which, as it leaves the body, draws out the

moisture with it: in the other class of bodies the agent is external fire.) In

those from which the moisture has not wholly gone earth still preponderates,

but they admit of softening by heat, e.g. iron and horn.

Now  since  we  must  include  among  ‘meltables’  those  bodies  which  are

melted by fire, these contain some water: indeed some of them, like wax, are

common to earth and water alike. But those that are melted by water are ofearth. Those that are not melted either by fire or water are of earth, or of earth

and water.

  Since, then, all bodies are either liquid or solid, and since the things that

display the affections we have enumerated belong to these two classes and

there  is  nothing  intermediate,  it  follows  that  we  have  given  a  complete

account of the criteria for distinguishing whether a body consists of earth or

of water or of more elements than one, and whether fire was the agent in its

formation, or cold, or both.

  Gold, then, and silver and copper and tin and lead and glass and many

nameless stone are of water: for they are all melted by heat. Of water, too, are

some wines and urine and vinegar and lye and whey and serum: for they are

all congealed by cold. In iron, horn, nails, bones, sinews, wood, hair, leaves,

bark, earth preponderates. So, too, in amber, myrrh, frankincense, and all the

substances called ‘tears’, and stalactites, and fruits, such as leguminous plants

and corn. For things of this kind are, to a greater or less degree, of earth. For

of all these bodies some admit of softening by heat, the rest give off fumes

and are formed by refrigeration. So again in natron, salt, and those kinds of

stones that are not formed by refrigeration and cannot be melted. Blood, on

the other hand, and semen, are made up of earth and water and air. If the

blood contains fibres, earth preponderates in it: consequently its solidifies by

refrigeration and is melted by liquids; if not, it is of water and therefore does

not solidify. Semen solidifies by refrigeration, its moisture leaving it together

with its heat.

<

div class="section" title="11">


11


We must investigate in the light of the results we have arrived at what solid

or liquid bodies are hot and what cold.

  Bodies  consisting  of  water  are  commonly  cold,  unless  (like  lye,  urine,

wine) they contain foreign heat. Bodies consisting of earth, on the other hand,

are commonly hot because heat was active in forming them: for instance lime

and ashes.

We must recognize that cold is in a sense the matter of bodies. For the dry

and the moist are matter (being passive) and earth and water are the elements

that  primarily  embody  them,  and  they  are  characterized  by  cold.Consequently cold must predominate in every body that consists of one or

other of the elements simply, unless such a body contains foreign heat as

water does when it boils or when it has been strained through ashes. This

latter, too, has acquired heat from the ashes, for everything that has been

burnt contains more or less heat. This explains the generation of animals in

putrefying bodies: the putrefying body contains the heat which destroyed its

proper heat.

  Bodies made up of earth and water are hot, for most of them derive their

existence from concoction and heat, though some, like the waste products of

the body, are products of putrefaction. Thus blood, semen, marrow, figjuice,

and all things of the kinds are hot as long as they are in their natural state, but

when they perish and fall away from that state they are so no longer. For

what is left of them is their matter and that is earth and water. Hence both

views are held about them, some people maintaining them to be cold and

others to be warm; for they are observed to be hot when they are in their

natural state, but to solidify when they have fallen away from it. That, then, is

the case of mixed bodies. However, the distinction we laid down holds good:

if its matter is predominantly water a body is cold (water being the complete

opposite of fire), but if earth or air it tends to be warm.

It sometimes happens that the coldest bodies can be raised to the highest

temperature by foreign heat; for the most solid and the hardest bodies are

coldest when deprived of heat and most burning after exposure to fire: thus

water is more burning than smoke and stone than water.

<

div class="section" title="12">


12


  Having explained all this we must describe the nature of flesh, bone, and

the other homogeneous bodies severally.

Our account of the formation of the homogeneous bodies has given us the

elements out of which they are compounded and the classes into which they

fall, and has made it clear to which class each of those bodies belongs. The

homogeneous bodies are made up of the elements, and all the works of nature

in turn of the homogeneous bodies as matter. All the homogeneous bodies

consist  of  the  elements  described,  as  matter,  but  their  essential  nature  is

determined by their definition. This fact is always clearer in the case of thelater products of those, in fact, that are instruments, as it were, and have an

end: it is clearer, for instance, that a dead man is a man only in name. And so

the hand of a dead man, too, will in the same way be a hand in name only,

just as stone flutes might still be called flutes: for these members, too, are

instruments of a kind. But in the case of flesh and bone the fact is not so clear

to see, and in that of fire and water even less. For the end is least obvious

there where matter predominates most. If you take the extremes, matter is

pure matter and the essence is pure definition; but the bodies intermediate

between the two are matter or definition in proportion as they are near to

either. For each of those elements has an end and is not water or fire in any

and every condition of itself, just as flesh is not flesh nor viscera viscera, and

the same is true in a higher degree with face and hand. What a thing is always

determined by its function: a thing really is itself when it can perform its

function; an eye, for instance, when it can see. When a thing cannot do so it is

that thing only in name, like a dead eye or one made of stone, just as a

wooden saw is no more a saw than one in a picture. The same, then, is true of

flesh, except that its function is less clear than that of the tongue. So, too,

with  fire;  but  its  function  is  perhaps  even  harder  to  specify  by  physical

inquiry  than  that  of  flesh.  The  parts  of  plants,  and  inanimate  bodies  like

copper and silver, are in the same case. They all are what they are in virtue of

a certain power of action or passion-just like flesh and sinew. But we cannot

state their form accurately, and so it is not easy to tell when they are really

there and when they are not unless the body is thoroughly corrupted and its

shape only remains. So ancient corpses suddenly become ashes in the grave

and very old fruit preserves its shape only but not its taste: so, too, with the

solids that form from milk.

Now heat and cold and the motions they set up as the bodies are solidified

by  the  hot  and  the  cold  are  sufficient  to  form  all  such  parts  as  are  the

homogeneous bodies, flesh, bone, hair, sinew, and the rest. For they are all of

them  differentiated  by  the  various  qualities  enumerated  above,  tension,

tractility,  comminuibility,  hardness,  softness,  and  the  rest  of  them:  all  of

which are derived from the hot and the cold and the mixture of their motions.

But no one would go as far as to consider them sufficient in the case of the

non-homogeneous parts (like the head, the hand, or the foot) which these

homogeneous parts go to make up. Cold and heat and their motion would be

admitted to account for the formation of copper or silver, but not for that of a

saw, a bowl, or a box. So here, save that in the examples given the cause isart, but in the nonhomogeneous bodies nature or some other cause.

  Since, then, we know to what element each of the homogeneous bodies

belongs, we must now find the definition of each of them, the answer, that is,

to the question, ‘what is’ flesh, semen, and the rest? For we know the cause

of a thing and its definition when we know the material or the formal or,

better,  both  the  material  and  the  formal  conditions  of  its  generation  and

destruction, and the efficient cause of it.

  After the homogeneous bodies have been explained we must consider the

non-homogeneous too, and lastly the bodies made up of these, such as man,

plants, and the rest.                                    Part 3


                          Human Physics                              On the Soul, Book I


Translated by J. A. Smith


<

div id="book1" class="book">


1


  Holding  as  we  do  that,  while  knowledge  of  any  kind  is  a  thing  to  be

honoured  and  prized,  one  kind  of  it  may,  either  by  reason  of  its  greater

exactness or of a higher dignity and greater wonderfulness in its objects, be

more  honourable  and  precious  than  another,  on  both  accounts  we  should

naturally  be  led  to  place  in  the  front  rank  the  study  of  the  soul.  The

knowledge of the soul admittedly contributes greatly to the advance of truth

in general, and, above all, to our understanding of Nature, for the soul is in

some sense the principle of animal life. Our aim is to grasp and understand,

first its essential nature, and secondly its properties; of these some are taught

to be affections proper to the soul itself, while others are considered to attach

to the animal owing to the presence within it of soul.

To attain any assured knowledge about the soul is one of the most difficult

things in the world. As the form of question which here presents itself, viz.

the question ‘What is it?’, recurs in other fields, it might be supposed that

there  was  some  single  method  of  inquiry  applicable  to  all  objects  whose

essential  nature  (as  we  are  endeavouring  to  ascertain  there  is  for  derived

properties the single method of demonstration); in that case what we should

have to seek for would be this unique method. But if there is no such single

and general method for solving the question of essence, our task becomes still

more difficult; in the case of each different subject we shall have to determine

the appropriate process of investigation. If to this there be a clear answer, e.g.

that  the  process  is  demonstration  or  division,  or  some  known  method,

difficulties and hesitations still beset us-with what facts shall we begin the

inquiry?  For  the  facts  which  form  the  starting-points  in  different  subjects

must be different, as e.g. in the case of numbers and surfaces.

First, no doubt, it is necessary to determine in which of the summa generasoul lies, what it is; is it ‘a this-somewhat, ‘a substance, or is it a quale or a

quantum, or some other of the remaining kinds of predicates which we have

distinguished? Further, does soul belong to the class of potential existents, or

is it not rather an actuality? Our answer to this question is of the greatest

importance.

We must consider also whether soul is divisible or is without parts, and

whether  it  is  everywhere  homogeneous  or  not;  and  if  not  homogeneous,

whether its various forms are different specifically or generically: up to the

present time those who have discussed and investigated soul seem to have

confined themselves to the human soul. We must be careful not to ignore the

question whether soul can be defined in a single unambiguous formula, as is

the case with animal, or whether we must not give a separate formula for

each of it, as we do for horse, dog, man, god (in the latter case the ‘universal’

animal-and so too every other ‘common predicate’-being treated either as

nothing at all or as a later product). Further, if what exists is not a plurality of

souls, but a plurality of parts of one soul, which ought we to investigate first,

the whole soul or its parts? (It is also a difficult problem to decide which of

these parts are in nature distinct from one another.) Again, which ought we to

investigate first, these parts or their functions, mind or thinking, the faculty or

the act of sensation, and so on? If the investigation of the functions precedes

that of the parts, the further question suggests itself: ought we not before

either to consider the correlative objects, e.g. of sense or thought? It seems

not only useful for the discovery of the causes of the derived properties of

substances to be acquainted with the essential nature of those substances (as

in  mathematics  it  is  useful  for  the  understanding  of  the  property  of  the

equality of the interior angles of a triangle to two right angles to know the

essential nature of the straight and the curved or of the line and the plane) but

also conversely, for the knowledge of the essential nature of a substance is

largely promoted by an acquaintance with its properties: for, when we are

able  to  give  an  account  conformable  to  experience  of  all  or  most  of  the

properties of a substance, we shall be in the most favourable position to say

something  worth  saying  about  the  essential  nature  of  that  subject;  in  all

demonstration a definition of the essence is required as a starting-point, so

that definitions which do not enable us to discover the derived properties, or

which fail to facilitate even a conjecture about them, must obviously, one and

all, be dialectical and futile.

A further problem presented by the affections of soul is this: are they allaffections of the complex of body and soul, or is there any one among them

peculiar to the soul by itself? To determine this is indispensable but difficult.

If we consider the majority of them, there seems to be no case in which the

soul can act or be acted upon without involving the body; e.g. anger, courage,

appetite,  and  sensation  generally.  Thinking  seems  the  most  probable

exception;  but  if  this  too  proves  to  be  a  form  of  imagination  or  to  be

impossible without imagination, it too requires a body as a condition of its

existence. If there is any way of acting or being acted upon proper to soul,

soul  will  be  capable  of  separate  existence;  if  there  is  none,  its  separate

existence is impossible. In the latter case, it will be like what is straight,

which has many properties arising from the straightness in it, e.g. that of

touching a bronze sphere at a point, though straightness divorced from the

other constituents of the straight thing cannot touch it in this way; it cannot

be so divorced at all, since it is always found in a body. It therefore seems

that all the affections of soul involve a body-passion, gentleness, fear, pity,

courage, joy, loving, and hating; in all these there is a concurrent affection of

the body. In support of this we may point to the fact that, while sometimes on

the occasion of violent and striking occurrences there is no excitement or fear

felt,  on  others  faint  and  feeble  stimulations  produce  these  emotions,  viz.

when the body is already in a state of tension resembling its condition when

we are angry. Here is a still clearer case: in the absence of any external cause

of terror we find ourselves experiencing the feelings of a man in terror. From

all this it is obvious that the affections of soul are enmattered formulable

essences.

  Consequently their definitions ought to correspond, e.g. anger should be

defined as a certain mode of movement of such and such a body (or part or

faculty of a body) by this or that cause and for this or that end. That is

precisely why the study of the soul must fall within the science of Nature, at

least so far as in its affections it manifests this double character. Hence a

physicist would define an affection of soul differently from a dialectician; the

latter would define e.g. anger as the appetite for returning pain for pain, or

something like that, while the former would define it as a boiling of the blood

or  warm  substance  surround  the  heart.  The  latter  assigns  the  material

conditions, the former the form or formulable essence; for what he states is

the formulable essence of the fact, though for its actual existence there must

be embodiment of it in a material such as is described by the other. Thus the

essence  of  a  house  is  assigned  in  such  a  formula  as  ‘a  shelter  againstdestruction  by  wind,  rain,  and  heat’;  the  physicist  would  describe  it  as

‘stones, bricks, and timbers’; but there is a third possible description which

would say that it was that form in that material with that purpose or end.

Which, then, among these is entitled to be regarded as the genuine physicist?

The  one  who  confines  himself  to  the  material,  or  the  one  who  restricts

himself  to  the  formulable  essence  alone?  Is  it  not  rather  the  one  who

combines both in a single formula? If this is so, how are we to characterize

the other two? Must we not say that there is no type of thinker who concerns

himself with those qualities or attributes of the material which are in fact

inseparable  from  the  material,  and  without  attempting  even  in  thought  to

separate  them?  The  physicist  is  he  who  concerns  himself  with  all  the

properties  active  and  passive  of  bodies  or  materials  thus  or  thus  defined;

attributes not considered as being of this character he leaves to others, in

certain cases it may be to a specialist, e.g. a carpenter or a physician, in others

(a) where they are inseparable in fact, but are separable from any particular

kind of body by an effort of abstraction, to the mathematician, (b) where they

are separate both in fact and in thought from body altogether, to the First

Philosopher or metaphysician. But we must return from this digression, and

repeat that the affections of soul are inseparable from the material substratum

of animal life, to which we have seen that such affections, e.g. passion and

fear, attach, and have not the same mode of being as a line or a plane.


2


For our study of soul it is necessary, while formulating the problems of

which in our further advance we are to find the solutions, to call into council

the views of those of our predecessors who have declared any opinion on this

subject, in order that we may profit by whatever is sound in their suggestions

and avoid their errors.

The starting-point of our inquiry is an exposition of those characteristics

which  have  chiefly  been  held  to  belong  to  soul  in  its  very  nature.  Two

characteristic marks have above all others been recognized as distinguishing

that which has soul in it from that which has not-movement and sensation. It

may be said that these two are what our predecessors have fixed upon as

characteristic of soul.

  Some  say  that  what  originates  movement  is  both  pre-eminently  and

primarily  soul;  believing  that  what  is  not  itself  moved  cannot  originatemovement in another, they arrived at the view that soul belongs to the class

of things in movement. This is what led Democritus to say that soul is a sort

of fire or hot substance; his ‘forms’ or atoms are infinite in number; those

which are spherical he calls fire and soul, and compares them to the motes in

the air which we see in shafts of light coming through windows; the mixture

of seeds of all sorts he calls the elements of the whole of Nature (Leucippus

gives a similar account); the spherical atoms are identified with soul because

atoms of that shape are most adapted to permeate everywhere, and to set all

the others moving by being themselves in movement. This implies the view

that soul is identical with what produces movement in animals. That is why,

further,  they  regard  respiration  as  the  characteristic  mark  of  life;  as  the

environment compresses the bodies of animals, and tends to extrude those

atoms which impart movement to them, because they themselves are never at

rest, there must be a reinforcement of these by similar atoms coming in from

without in the act of respiration; for they prevent the extrusion of those which

are already within by counteracting the compressing and consolidating force

of the environment; and animals continue to live only so long as they are able

to maintain this resistance.

The doctrine of the Pythagoreans seems to rest upon the same ideas; some

of them declared the motes in air, others what moved them, to be soul. These

motes were referred to because they are seen always in movement, even in a

complete calm.

The same tendency is shown by those who define soul as that which moves

itself; all seem to hold the view that movement is what is closest to the nature

of soul, and that while all else is moved by soul, it alone moves itself. This

belief arises from their never seeing anything originating movement which is

not first itself moved.

  Similarly also Anaxagoras (and whoever agrees with him in saying that

mind set the whole in movement) declares the moving cause of things to be

soul. His position must, however, be distinguished from that of Democritus.

Democritus roundly identifies soul and mind, for he identifies what appears

with what is true-that is why he commends Homer for the phrase ‘Hector lay

with  thought  distraught’;  he  does  not  employ  mind  as  a  special  faculty

dealing with truth, but identifies soul and mind. What Anaxagoras says about

them is more obscure; in many places he tells us that the cause of beauty and

order is mind, elsewhere that it is soul; it is found, he says, in all animals,

great and small, high and low, but mind (in the sense of intelligence) appearsnot to belong alike to all animals, and indeed not even to all human beings.

All those, then, who had special regard to the fact that what has soul in it is

moved, adopted the view that soul is to be identified with what is eminently

originative of movement. All, on the other hand, who looked to the fact that

what has soul in it knows or perceives what is, identify soul with the principle

or principles of Nature, according as they admit several such principles or

one only. Thus Empedocles declares that it is formed out of all his elements,

each of them also being soul; his words are:

For ‘tis by Earth we see Earth, by Water Water,

By Ether Ether divine, by Fire destructive Fire,

By Love Love, and Hate by cruel Hate.

In the same way Plato in the Timaeus fashions soul out of his elements; for

like, he holds, is known by like, and things are formed out of the principles or

elements,  so  that  soul  must  be  so  too.  Similarly  also  in  his  lectures  ‘On

Philosophy’ it was set forth that the Animal-itself is compounded of the Idea

itself  of  the  One  together  with  the  primary  length,  breadth,  and  depth,

everything  else,  the  objects  of  its  perception,  being  similarly  constituted.

Again he puts his view in yet other terms: Mind is the monad, science or

knowledge  the  dyad  (because  it  goes  undeviatingly  from  one  point  to

another), opinion the number of the plane, sensation the number of the solid;

the numbers are by him expressly identified with the Forms themselves or

principles, and are formed out of the elements; now things are apprehended

either by mind or science or opinion or sensation, and these same numbers

are the Forms of things.

  Some  thinkers,  accepting  both  premisses,  viz.  that  the  soul  is  both

originative  of  movement  and  cognitive,  have  compounded  it  of  both  and

declared the soul to be a self-moving number.

As to the nature and number of the first principles opinions differ. The

difference is greatest between those who regard them as corporeal and those

who regard them as incorporeal, and from both dissent those who make a

blend and draw their principles from both sources. The number of principles

is also in dispute; some admit one only, others assert several. There is a

consequent diversity in their several accounts of soul; they assume, naturally

enough,  that  what  is  in  its  own  nature  originative  of  movement  must  be

among what is primordial. That has led some to regard it as fire, for fire is the

subtlest of the elements and nearest to incorporeality; further, in the most

primary sense, fire both is moved and originates movement in all the others.  Democritus has expressed himself more ingeniously than the rest on the

grounds for ascribing each of these two characters to soul; soul and mind are,

he says, one and the same thing, and this thing must be one of the primary

and indivisible bodies, and its power of originating movement must be due to

its fineness of grain and the shape of its atoms; he says that of all the shapes

the spherical is the most mobile, and that this is the shape of the particles of

fire and mind.

  Anaxagoras,  as  we  said  above,  seems  to  distinguish  between  soul  and

mind, but in practice he treats them as a single substance, except that it is

mind that he specially posits as the principle of all things; at any rate what he

says is that mind alone of all that is simple, unmixed, and pure. He assigns

both  characteristics,  knowing  and  origination  of  movement,  to  the  same

principle, when he says that it was mind that set the whole in movement.

  Thales, too, to judge from what is recorded about him, seems to have held

soul to be a motive force, since he said that the magnet has a soul in it

because it moves the iron.

  Diogenes (and others) held the soul to be air because he believed air to be

finest  in  grain  and  a  first  principle;  therein  lay  the  grounds  of  the  soul’s

powers of knowing and originating movement. As the primordial principle

from which all other things are derived, it is cognitive; as finest in grain, it

has the power to originate movement.

  Heraclitus too says that the first principle-the ‘warm exhalation’ of which,

according  to  him,  everything  else  is  composed-is  soul;  further,  that  this

exhalation  is  most  incorporeal  and  in  ceaseless  flux;  that  what  is  in

movement requires that what knows it should be in movement; and that all

that  is  has  its  being  essentially  in  movement  (herein  agreeing  with  the

majority).

  Alcmaeon also seems to have held a similar view about soul; he says that it

is immortal because it resembles ‘the immortals,’ and that this immortality

belongs to it in virtue of its ceaseless movement; for all the ‘things divine,’

moon, sun, the planets, and the whole heavens, are in perpetual movement.

of More superficial writers, some, e.g. Hippo, have pronounced it to be

water; they seem to have argued from the fact that the seed of all animals is

fluid, for Hippo tries to refute those who say that the soul is blood, on the

ground that the seed, which is the primordial soul, is not blood.

  Another group (Critias, for example) did hold it to be blood; they take

perception  to  be  the  most  characteristic  attribute  of  soul,  and  hold  thatperceptiveness is due to the nature of blood.

Each of the elements has thus found its partisan, except earth-earth has

found no supporter unless we count as such those who have declared soul to

be,  or  to  be  compounded  of,  all  the  elements.  All,  then,  it  may  be  said,

characterize the soul by three marks, Movement, Sensation, Incorporeality,

and each of these is traced back to the first principles. That is why (with one

exception) all those who define the soul by its power of knowing make it

either an element or constructed out of the elements. The language they all

use is similar; like, they say, is known by like; as the soul knows everything,

they construct it out of all the principles. Hence all those who admit but one

cause or element, make the soul also one (e.g. fire or air), while those who

admit a multiplicity of principles make the soul also multiple. The exception

is  Anaxagoras;  he  alone  says  that  mind  is  impassible  and  has  nothing  in

common with anything else. But, if this is so, how or in virtue of what cause

can it know? That Anaxagoras has not explained, nor can any answer be

inferred from his words. All who acknowledge pairs of opposites among their

principles, construct the soul also out of these contraries, while those who

admit as principles only one contrary of each pair, e.g. either hot or cold,

likewise make the soul some one of these. That is why, also, they allow

themselves to be guided by the names; those who identify soul with the hot

argue that sen (to live) is derived from sein (to boil), while those who identify

it  with  the  cold  say  that  soul  (psuche)  is  so  called  from  the  process  of

respiration  and  (katapsuxis).  Such  are  the  traditional  opinions  concerning

soul, together with the grounds on which they are maintained.


3


We must begin our examination with movement; for doubtless, not only is

it false that the essence of soul is correctly described by those who say that it

is what moves (or is capable of moving) itself, but it is an impossibility that

movement should be even an attribute of it.

We have already pointed out that there is no necessity that what originates

movement should itself be moved. There are two senses in which anything

may be moved-either (a) indirectly, owing to something other than itself, or

(b) directly, owing to itself. Things are ‘indirectly moved’ which are moved

as being contained in something which is moved, e.g. sailors in a ship, for

they are moved in a different sense from that in which the ship is moved; theship is ‘directly moved’, they are ‘indirectly moved’, because they are in a

moving vessel. This is clear if we consider their limbs; the movement proper

to the legs (and so to man) is walking, and in this case the sailors tare not

walking. Recognizing the double sense of ‘being moved’, what we have to

consider now is whether the soul is ‘directly moved’ and participates in such

direct movement.

  There  are  four  species  of  movement-locomotion,  alteration,  diminution,

growth; consequently if the soul is moved, it must be moved with one or

several or all of these species of movement. Now if its movement is not

incidental,  there  must  be  a  movement  natural  to  it,  and,  if  so,  as  all  the

species  enumerated  involve  place,  place  must  be  natural  to  it.  But  if  the

essence of soul be to move itself, its being moved cannot be incidental to-as it

is to what is white or three cubits long; they too can be moved, but only

incidentally-what is moved is that of which ‘white’ and ‘three cubits long’ are

the attributes, the body in which they inhere; hence they have no place: but if

the soul naturally partakes in movement, it follows that it must have a place.

  Further,  if  there  be  a  movement  natural  to  the  soul,  there  must  be  a

counter-movement unnatural to it, and conversely. The same applies to rest as

well as to movement; for the terminus ad quem of a thing’s natural movement

is the place of its natural rest, and similarly the terminus ad quem of its

enforced movement is the place of its enforced rest. But what meaning can be

attached to enforced movements or rests of the soul, it is difficult even to

imagine.

  Further, if the natural movement of the soul be upward, the soul must be

fire; if downward, it must be earth; for upward and downward movements are

the definitory characteristics of these bodies. The same reasoning applies to

the intermediate movements, termini, and bodies. Further, since the soul is

observed to originate movement in the body, it is reasonable to suppose that

it transmits to the body the movements by which it itself is moved, and so,

reversing the order, we may infer from the movements of the body back to

similar movements of the soul. Now the body is moved from place to place

with movements of locomotion. Hence it would follow that the soul too must

in accordance with the body change either its place as a whole or the relative

places of its parts. This carries with it the possibility that the soul might even

quit its body and re-enter it, and with this would be involved the possibility of

a resurrection of animals from the dead. But, it may be contended, the soul

can be moved indirectly by something else; for an animal can be pushed outof its course. Yes, but that to whose essence belongs the power of being

moved by itself, cannot be moved by something else except incidentally, just

as what is good by or in itself cannot owe its goodness to something external

to it or to some end to which it is a means.

If  the  soul  is  moved,  the  most  probable  view  is  that  what  moves  it  is

sensible things.

We must note also that, if the soul moves itself, it must be the mover itself

that  is  moved,  so  that  it  follows  that  if  movement  is  in  every  case  a

displacement of that which is in movement, in that respect in which it is said

to be moved, the movement of the soul must be a departure from its essential

nature, at least if its self-movement is essential to it, not incidental.

  Some go so far as to hold that the movements which the soul imparts to the

body in which it is are the same in kind as those with which it itself is moved.

An example of this is Democritus, who uses language like that of the comic

dramatist Philippus, who accounts for the movements that Daedalus imparted

to  his  wooden  Aphrodite  by  saying  that  he  poured  quicksilver  into  it;

similarly Democritus says that the spherical atoms which according to him

constitute  soul,  owing  to  their  own  ceaseless  movements  draw  the  whole

body after them and so produce its movements. We must urge the question

whether it is these very same atoms which produce rest also-how they could

do so, it is difficult and even impossible to say. And, in general, we may

object that it is not in this way that the soul appears to originate movement in

animals-it is through intention or process of thinking.

It is in the same fashion that the Timaeus also tries to give a physical

account  of  how  the  soul  moves  its  body;  the  soul,  it  is  there  said,  is  in

movement, and so owing to their mutual implication moves the body also.

After compounding the soul-substance out of the elements and dividing it in

accordance with the harmonic numbers, in order that it may possess a connate

sensibility for ‘harmony’ and that the whole may move in movements well

attuned, the Demiurge bent the straight line into a circle; this single circle he

divided  into  two  circles  united  at  two  common  points;  one  of  these  he

subdivided into seven circles. All this implies that the movements of the soul

are identified with the local movements of the heavens.

Now, in the first place, it is a mistake to say that the soul is a spatial

magnitude. It is evident that Plato means the soul of the whole to be like the

sort of soul which is called mind not like the sensitive or the desiderative

soul, for the movements of neither of these are circular. Now mind is one andcontinuous in the sense in which the process of thinking is so, and thinking is

identical with the thoughts which are its parts; these have a serial unity like

that of number, not a unity like that of a spatial magnitude. Hence mind

cannot  have  that  kind  of  unity  either;  mind  is  either  without  parts  or  is

continuous  in  some  other  way  than  that  which  characterizes  a  spatial

magnitude. How, indeed, if it were a spatial magnitude, could mind possibly

think? Will it think with any one indifferently of its parts? In this case, the

‘part’ must be understood either in the sense of a spatial magnitude or in the

sense of a point (if a point can be called a part of a spatial magnitude). If we

accept the latter alternative, the points being infinite in number, obviously the

mind  can  never  exhaustively  traverse  them;  if  the  former,  the  mind  must

think the same thing over and over again, indeed an infinite number of times

(whereas it is manifestly possible to think a thing once only). If contact of

any part whatsoever of itself with the object is all that is required, why need

mind move in a circle, or indeed possess magnitude at all? On the other hand,

if contact with the whole circle is necessary, what meaning can be given to

the contact of the parts? Further, how could what has no parts think what has

parts, or what has parts think what has none? We must identify the circle

referred to with mind; for it is mind whose movement is thinking, and it is the

circle whose movement is revolution, so that if thinking is a movement of

revolution, the circle which has this characteristic movement must be mind.

If the circular movement is eternal, there must be something which mind is

always thinking-what can this be? For all practical processes of thinking have

limits-they all go on for the sake of something outside the process, and all

theoretical  processes  come  to  a  close  in  the  same  way  as  the  phrases  in

speech which express processes and results of thinking. Every such linguistic

phrase  is  either  definitory  or  demonstrative.  Demonstration  has  both  a

starting-point and may be said to end in a conclusion or inferred result; even

if the process never reaches final completion, at any rate it never returns upon

itself again to its starting-point, it goes on assuming a fresh middle term or a

fresh extreme, and moves straight forward, but circular movement returns to

its starting-point. Definitions, too, are closed groups of terms.

  Further, if the same revolution is repeated, mind must repeatedly think the

same object.

  Further, thinking has more resemblance to a coming to rest or arrest than to

a movement; the same may be said of inferring.

It might also be urged that what is difficult and enforced is incompatiblewith blessedness; if the movement of the soul is not of its essence, movement

of the soul must be contrary to its nature. It must also be painful for the soul

to be inextricably bound up with the body; nay more, if, as is frequently said

and widely accepted, it is better for mind not to be embodied, the union must

be for it undesirable.

  Further, the cause of the revolution of the heavens is left obscure. It is not

the  essence  of  soul  which  is  the  cause  of  this  circular  movement-that

movement is only incidental to soul-nor is, a fortiori, the body its cause.

Again, it is not even asserted that it is better that soul should be so moved;

and yet the reason for which God caused the soul to move in a circle can only

have been that movement was better for it than rest, and movement of this

kind  better  than  any  other.  But  since  this  sort  of  consideration  is  more

appropriate to another field of speculation, let us dismiss it for the present.

The view we have just been examining, in company with most theories

about the soul, involves the following absurdity: they all join the soul to a

body, or place it in a body, without adding any specification of the reason of

their union, or of the bodily conditions required for it. Yet such explanation

can scarcely be omitted; for some community of nature is presupposed by the

fact that the one acts and the other is acted upon, the one moves and the other

is moved; interaction always implies a special nature in the two interagents.

All, however, that these thinkers do is to describe the specific characteristics

of the soul; they do not try to determine anything about the body which is to

contain it, as if it were possible, as in the Pythagorean myths, that any soul

could be clothed upon with any body-an absurd view, for each body seems to

have a form and shape of its own. It is as absurd as to say that the art of

carpentry could embody itself in flutes; each art must use its tools, each soul

its body.


4


  There is yet another theory about soul, which has commended itself to

many as no less probable than any of those we have hitherto mentioned, and

has rendered public account of itself in the court of popular discussion. Its

supporters say that the soul is a kind of harmony, for (a) harmony is a blend

or  composition  of  contraries,  and  (b)  the  body  is  compounded  out  of

contraries. Harmony, however, is a certain proportion or composition of the

constituents blended, and soul can be neither the one nor the other of these.Further, the power of originating movement cannot belong to a harmony,

while almost all concur in regarding this as a principal attribute of soul. It is

more appropriate to call health (or generally one of the good states of the

body) a harmony than to predicate it of the soul. The absurdity becomes most

apparent when we try to attribute the active and passive affections of the soul

to a harmony; the necessary readjustment of their conceptions is difficult.

Further, in using the word ‘harmony’ we have one or other of two cases in

our mind; the most proper sense is in relation to spatial magnitudes which

have  motion  and  position,  where  harmony  means  the  disposition  and

cohesion of their parts in such a manner as to prevent the introduction into

the whole of anything homogeneous with it, and the secondary sense, derived

from the former, is that in which it means the ratio between the constituents

so blended; in neither of these senses is it plausible to predicate it of soul.

That soul is a harmony in the sense of the mode of composition of the parts

of the body is a view easily refutable; for there are many composite parts and

those variously compounded; of what bodily part is mind or the sensitive or

the appetitive faculty the mode of composition? And what is the mode of

composition which constitutes each of them? It is equally absurd to identify

the soul with the ratio of the mixture; for the mixture which makes flesh has a

different  ratio  between  the  elements  from  that  which  makes  bone.  The

consequence of this view will therefore be that distributed throughout the

whole body there will be many souls, since every one of the bodily parts is a

different mixture of the elements, and the ratio of mixture is in each case a

harmony, i.e. a soul.

  From Empedocles at any rate we might demand an answer to the following

question for he says that each of the parts of the body is what it is in virtue of

a ratio between the elements: is the soul identical with this ratio, or is it not

rather something over and above this which is formed in the parts? Is love the

cause of any and every mixture, or only of those that are in the right ratio? Is

love this ratio itself, or is love something over and above this? Such are the

problems raised by this account. But, on the other hand, if the soul is different

from the mixture, why does it disappear at one and the same moment with

that relation between the elements which constitutes flesh or the other parts of

the animal body? Further, if the soul is not identical with the ratio of mixture,

and it is consequently not the case that each of the parts has a soul, what is

that which perishes when the soul quits the body?

That the soul cannot either be a harmony, or be moved in a circle, is clearfrom what we have said. Yet that it can be moved incidentally is, as we said

above, possible, and even that in a sense it can move itself, i.e. in the sense

that the vehicle in which it is can be moved, and moved by it; in no other

sense can the soul be moved in space.

  More legitimate doubts might remain as to its movement in view of the

following facts. We speak of the soul as being pained or pleased, being bold

or fearful, being angry, perceiving, thinking. All these are regarded as modes

of movement, and hence it might be inferred that the soul is moved. This,

however, does not necessarily follow. We may admit to the full that being

pained  or  pleased,  or  thinking,  are  movements  (each  of  them  a  ‘being

moved’), and that the movement is originated by the soul. For example we

may  regard  anger  or  fear  as  such  and  such  movements  of  the  heart,  and

thinking as such and such another movement of that organ, or of some other;

these modifications may arise either from changes of place in certain parts or

from qualitative alterations (the special nature of the parts and the special

modes of their changes being for our present purpose irrelevant). Yet to say

that it is the soul which is angry is as inexact as it would be to say that it is

the soul that weaves webs or builds houses. It is doubtless better to avoid

saying that the soul pities or learns or thinks and rather to say that it is the

man who does this with his soul. What we mean is not that the movement is

in the soul, but that sometimes it terminates in the soul and sometimes starts

from  it,  sensation  e.g.  coming  from  without  inwards,  and  reminiscence

starting from the soul and terminating with the movements, actual or residual,

in the sense organs.

The case of mind is different; it seems to be an independent substance

implanted within the soul and to be incapable of being destroyed. If it could

be destroyed at all, it would be under the blunting influence of old age. What

really happens in respect of mind in old age is, however, exactly parallel to

what happens in the case of the sense organs; if the old man could recover the

proper  kind  of  eye,  he  would  see  just  as  well  as  the  young  man.  The

incapacity of old age is due to an affection not of the soul but of its vehicle,

as occurs in drunkenness or disease. Thus it is that in old age the activity of

mind or intellectual apprehension declines only through the decay of some

other inward part; mind itself is impassible. Thinking, loving, and hating are

affections not of mind, but of that which has mind, so far as it has it. That is

why, when this vehicle decays, memory and love cease; they were activities

not of mind, but of the composite which has perished; mind is, no doubt,something more divine and impassible. That the soul cannot be moved is

therefore clear from what we have said, and if it cannot be moved at all,

manifestly it cannot be moved by itself.

Of all the opinions we have enumerated, by far the most unreasonable is

that which declares the soul to be a self-moving number; it involves in the

first place all the impossibilities which follow from regarding the soul as

moved, and in the second special absurdities which follow from calling it a

number. How we to imagine a unit being moved? By what agency? What sort

of  movement  can  be  attributed  to  what  is  without  parts  or  internal

differences? If the unit is both originative of movement and itself capable of

being moved, it must contain difference.

  Further, since they say a moving line generates a surface and a moving

point a line, the movements of the psychic units must be lines (for a point is a

unit having position, and the number of the soul is, of course, somewhere and

has position).

  Again, if from a number a number or a unit is subtracted, the remainder is

another number; but plants and many animals when divided continue to live,

and each segment is thought to retain the same kind of soul.

It must be all the same whether we speak of units or corpuscles; for if the

spherical  atoms  of  Democritus  became  points,  nothing  being  retained  but

their being a quantum, there must remain in each a moving and a moved part,

just as there is in what is continuous; what happens has nothing to do with the

size of the atoms, it depends solely upon their being a quantum. That is why

there must be something to originate movement in the units. If in the animal

what originates movement is the soul, so also must it be in the case of the

number, so that not the mover and the moved together, but the mover only,

will be the soul. But how is it possible for one of the units to fulfil this

function of originating movement? There must be some difference between

such a unit and all the other units, and what difference can there be between

one placed unit and another except a difference of position? If then, on the

other hand, these psychic units within the body are different from the points

of the body, there will be two sets of units both occupying the same place; for

each unit will occupy a point. And yet, if there can be two, why cannot there

be an infinite number? For if things can occupy an indivisible lace, they must

themselves be indivisible. If, on the other hand, the points of the body are

identical with the units whose number is the soul, or if the number of the

points in the body is the soul, why have not all bodies souls? For all bodiescontain points or an infinity of points.

  Further, how is it possible for these points to be isolated or separated from

their bodies, seeing that lines cannot be resolved into points?


5


The  result  is,  as  we  have  said,  that  this  view,  while  on  the  one  side

identical with that of those who maintain that soul is a subtle kind of body, is

on  the  other  entangled  in  the  absurdity  peculiar  to  Democritus’  way  of

describing the manner in which movement is originated by soul. For if the

soul is present throughout the whole percipient body, there must, if the soul

be a kind of body, be two bodies in the same place; and for those who call it a

number, there must be many points at one point, or every body must have a

soul, unless the soul be a different sort of number-other, that is, than the sum

of the points existing in a body. Another consequence that follows is that the

animal must be moved by its number precisely in the way that Democritus

explained its being moved by his spherical psychic atoms. What difference

does it make whether we speak of small spheres or of large units, or, quite

simply, of units in movement? One way or another, the movements of the

animal  must  be  due  to  their  movements.  Hence  those  who  combine

movement and number in the same subject lay themselves open to these and

many other similar absurdities. It is impossible not only that these characters

should give the definition of soul-it is impossible that they should even be

attributes of it. The point is clear if the attempt be made to start from this as

the account of soul and explain from it the affections and actions of the soul,

e.g. reasoning, sensation, pleasure, pain, &c. For, to repeat what we have said

earlier, movement and number do not facilitate even conjecture about the

derivative properties of soul.

  Such are the three ways in which soul has traditionally been defined; one

group  of  thinkers  declared  it  to  be  that  which  is  most  originative  of

movement because it moves itself, another group to be the subtlest and most

nearly incorporeal of all kinds of body. We have now sufficiently set forth

the difficulties and inconsistencies to which these theories are exposed. It

remains now to examine the doctrine that soul is composed of the elements.

The reason assigned for this doctrine is that thus the soul may perceive or

come to know everything that is, but the theory necessarily involves itself in

many impossibilities. Its upholders assume that like is known only by like,and imagine that by declaring the soul to be composed of the elements they

succeed  in  identifying  the  soul  with  all  the  things  it  is  capable  of

apprehending. But the elements are not the only things it knows; there are

many others, or, more exactly, an infinite number of others, formed out of the

elements. Let us admit that the soul knows or perceives the elements out of

which each of these composites is made up; but by what means will it know

or perceive the composite whole, e.g. what God, man, flesh, bone (or any

other  compound)  is?  For  each  is,  not  merely  the  elements  of  which  it  is

composed, but those elements combined in a determinate mode or ratio, as

Empedocles himself says of bone,


The kindly Earth in its broad-bosomed moulds

Won of clear Water two parts out of eight,

And four of Fire; and so white bones were formed.


  Nothing, therefore, will be gained by the presence of the elements in the

soul, unless there be also present there the various formulae of proportion and

the various compositions in accordance with them. Each element will indeed

know its fellow outside, but there will be no knowledge of bone or man,

unless they too are present in the constitution of the soul. The impossibility of

this needs no pointing out; for who would suggest that stone or man could

enter into the constitution of the soul? The same applies to ‘the good’ and

‘the not-good’, and so on.

  Further, the word ‘is’ has many meanings: it may be used of a ‘this’ or

substance, or of a quantum, or of a quale, or of any other of the kinds of

predicates we have distinguished. Does the soul consist of all of these or not?

It does not appear that all have common elements. Is the soul formed out of

those elements alone which enter into substances? so how will it be able to

know each of the other kinds of thing? Will it be said that each kind of thing

has elements or principles of its own, and that the soul is formed out of the

whole of these? In that case, the soul must be a quantum and a quale and a

substance. But all that can be made out of the elements of a quantum is a

quantum, not a substance. These (and others like them) are the consequences

of the view that the soul is composed of all the elements.

It is absurd, also, to say both (a) that like is not capable of being affected

by like, and (b) that like is perceived or known by like, for perceiving, and

also both thinking and knowing, are, on their own assumption, ways of beingaffected or moved.

  There are many puzzles and difficulties raised by saying, as Empedocles

does, that each set of things is known by means of its corporeal elements and

by  reference  to  something  in  soul  which  is  like  them,  and  additional

testimony  is  furnished  by  this  new  consideration;  for  all  the  parts  of  the

animal body which consist wholly of earth such as bones, sinews, and hair

seem  to  be  wholly  insensitive  and  consequently  not  perceptive  even  of

objects earthy like themselves, as they ought to have been.

  Further,  each  of  the  principles  will  have  far  more  ignorance  than

knowledge, for though each of them will know one thing, there will be many

of which it will be ignorant. Empedocles at any rate must conclude that his

God is the least intelligent of all beings, for of him alone is it true that there is

one  thing,  Strife,  which  he  does  not  know,  while  there  is  nothing  which

mortal beings do not know, for ere is nothing which does not enter into their

composition.

In general, we may ask, Why has not everything a soul, since everything

either is an element, or is formed out of one or several or all of the elements?

Each must certainly know one or several or all.

The problem might also be raised, What is that which unifies the elements

into a soul? The elements correspond, it would appear, to the matter; what

unites  them,  whatever  it  is,  is  the  supremely  important  factor.  But  it  is

impossible that there should be something superior to, and dominant over, the

soul (and a fortiori over the mind); it is reasonable to hold that mind is by

nature  most  primordial  and  dominant,  while  their  statement  that  it  is  the

elements which are first of all that is.

All,  both  those  who  assert  that  the  soul,  because  of  its  knowledge  or

perception of what is compounded out of the elements, and is those who

assert that it is of all things the most originative of movement, fail to take into

consideration all kinds of soul. In fact (1) not all beings that perceive can

originate movement; there appear to be certain animals which stationary, and

yet local movement is the only one, so it seems, which the soul originates in

animals. And (2) the same object-on holds against all those who construct

mind and the perceptive faculty out of the elements; for it appears that plants

live, and yet are not endowed with locomotion or perception, while a large

number of animals are without discourse of reason. Even if these points were

waived and mind admitted to be a part of the soul (and so too the perceptive

faculty), still, even so, there would be kinds and parts of soul of which theyhad failed to give any account.

The same objection lies against the view expressed in the ‘Orphic’ poems:

there it is said that the soul comes in from the whole when breathing takes

place, being borne in upon the winds. Now this cannot take place in the case

of  plants,  nor  indeed  in  the  case  of  certain  classes  of  animal,  for  not  all

classes of animal breathe. This fact has escaped the notice of the holders of

this view.

If we must construct the soul out of the elements, there is no necessity to

suppose that all the elements enter into its construction; one element in each

pair of contraries will suffice to enable it to know both that element itself and

its contrary. By means of the straight line we know both itself and the curved-

the carpenter’s rule enables us to test both-but what is curved does not enable

us to distinguish either itself or the straight. Certain thinkers say that soul is

intermingled  in  the  whole  universe,  and  it  is  perhaps  for  that  reason  that

Thales came to the opinion that all things are full of gods. This presents some

difficulties: Why does the soul when it resides in air or fire not form an

animal, while it does so when it resides in mixtures of the elements, and that

although it is held to be of higher quality when contained in the former? (One

might add the question, why the soul in air is maintained to be higher and

more immortal than that in animals.) Both possible ways of replying to the

former question lead to absurdity or paradox; for it is beyond paradox to say

that fire or air is an animal, and it is absurd to refuse the name of animal to

what has soul in it. The opinion that the elements have soul in them seems to

have arisen from the doctrine that a whole must be homogeneous with its

parts. If it is true that animals become animate by drawing into themselves a

portion of what surrounds them, the partisans of this view are bound to say

that the soul of the Whole too is homogeneous with all its parts. If the air

sucked in is homogeneous, but soul heterogeneous, clearly while some part of

soul will exist in the inbreathed air, some other part will not. The soul must

either be homogeneous, or such that there are some parts of the Whole in

which it is not to be found.

  From what has been said it is now clear that knowing as an attribute of soul

cannot be explained by soul’s being composed of the elements, and that it is

neither sound nor true to speak of soul as moved. But since (a) knowing,

perceiving, opining, and further (b) desiring, wishing, and generally all other

modes of appetition, belong to soul, and (c) the local movements of animals,

and (d) growth, maturity, and decay are produced by the soul, we must askwhether each of these is an attribute of the soul as a whole, i.e. whether it is

with the whole soul we think, perceive, move ourselves, act or are acted

upon, or whether each of them requires a different part of the soul? So too

with  regard  to  life.  Does  it  depend  on  one  of  the  parts  of  soul?  Or  is  it

dependent on more than one? Or on all? Or has it some quite other cause?

  Some  hold  that  the  soul  is  divisible,  and  that  one  part  thinks,  another

desires. If, then, its nature admits of its being divided, what can it be that

holds the parts together? Surely not the body; on the contrary it seems rather

to be the soul that holds the body together; at any rate when the soul departs

the body disintegrates and decays. If, then, there is something else which

makes the soul one, this unifying agency would have the best right to the

name of soul, and we shall have to repeat for it the question: Is it one or

multipartite? If it is one, why not at once admit that ‘the soul’ is one? If it has

parts, once more the question must be put: What holds its parts together, and

so ad infinitum?

The question might also be raised about the parts of the soul: What is the

separate role of each in relation to the body? For, if the whole soul holds

together  the  whole  body,  we  should  expect  each  part  of  the  soul  to  hold

together a part of the body. But this seems an impossibility; it is difficult even

to imagine what sort of bodily part mind will hold together, or how it will do

this.

It is a fact of observation that plants and certain insects go on living when

divided into segments; this means that each of the segments has a soul in it

identical  in  species,  though  not  numerically  identical  in  the  different

segments, for both of the segments for a time possess the power of sensation

and local movement. That this does not last is not surprising, for they no

longer possess the organs necessary for self-maintenance. But, all the same,

in each of the bodily parts there are present all the parts of soul, and the souls

so present are homogeneous with one another and with the whole; this means

that  the  several  parts  of  the  soul  are  indisseverable  from  one  another,

although the whole soul is divisible. It seems also that the principle found in

plants is also a kind of soul; for this is the only principle which is common to

both animals and plants; and this exists in isolation from the principle of

sensation, though there nothing which has the latter without the former.                              On the Soul, Book II


Translated by J. A. Smith


<

div id="book2" class="book">


1


Let the foregoing suffice as our account of the views concerning the soul

which have been handed on by our predecessors; let us now dismiss them and

make  as  it  were  a  completely  fresh  start,  endeavouring  to  give  a  precise

answer  to  the  question,  What  is  soul?  i.e.  to  formulate  the  most  general

possible definition of it.

We are in the habit of recognizing, as one determinate kind of what is,

substance, and that in several senses, (a) in the sense of matter or that which

in itself is not ‘a this’, and (b) in the sense of form or essence, which is that

precisely in virtue of which a thing is called ‘a this’, and thirdly (c) in the

sense  of  that  which  is  compounded  of  both  (a)  and  (b).  Now  matter  is

potentiality, form actuality; of the latter there are two grades related to one

another as e.g. knowledge to the exercise of knowledge.

  Among substances are by general consent reckoned bodies and especially

natural  bodies;  for  they  are  the  principles  of  all  other  bodies.  Of  natural

bodies some have life in them, others not; by life we mean self-nutrition and

growth (with its correlative decay). It follows that every natural body which

has life in it is a substance in the sense of a composite.

But since it is also a body of such and such a kind, viz. having life, the

body cannot be soul; the body is the subject or matter, not what is attributed

to it. Hence the soul must be a substance in the sense of the form of a natural

body having life potentially within it. But substance is actuality, and thus soul

is the actuality of a body as above characterized. Now the word actuality has

two senses corresponding respectively to the possession of knowledge and

the actual exercise of knowledge. It is obvious that the soul is actuality in the

first sense, viz. that of knowledge as possessed, for both sleeping and waking

presuppose the existence of soul, and of these waking corresponds to actualknowing,  sleeping  to  knowledge  possessed  but  not  employed,  and,  in  the

history  of  the  individual,  knowledge  comes  before  its  employment  or

exercise.

That is why the soul is the first grade of actuality of a natural body having

life potentially in it. The body so described is a body which is organized. The

parts of plants in spite of their extreme simplicity are ‘organs’; e.g. the leaf

serves to shelter the pericarp, the pericarp to shelter the fruit, while the roots

of  plants  are  analogous  to  the  mouth  of  animals,  both  serving  for  the

absorption of food. If, then, we have to give a general formula applicable to

all kinds of soul, we must describe it as the first grade of actuality of a natural

organized  body.  That  is  why  we  can  wholly  dismiss  as  unnecessary  the

question whether the soul and the body are one: it is as meaningless as to ask

whether the wax and the shape given to it by the stamp are one, or generally

the matter of a thing and that of which it is the matter. Unity has many senses

(as many as ‘is’ has), but the most proper and fundamental sense of both is

the relation of an actuality to that of which it is the actuality. We have now

given an answer to the question, What is soul?-an answer which applies to it

in  its  full  extent.  It  is  substance  in  the  sense  which  corresponds  to  the

definitive formula of a thing’s essence. That means that it is ‘the essential

whatness’  of  a  body  of  the  character  just  assigned.  Suppose  that  what  is

literally an ‘organ’, like an axe, were a natural body, its ‘essential whatness’,

would have been its essence, and so its soul; if this disappeared from it, it

would have ceased to be an axe, except in name. As it is, it is just an axe; it

wants the character which is required to make its whatness or formulable

essence a soul; for that, it would have had to be a natural body of a particular

kind, viz. one having in itself the power of setting itself in movement and

arresting itself. Next, apply this doctrine in the case of the ‘parts’ of the living

body. Suppose that the eye were an animal-sight would have been its soul, for

sight is the substance or essence of the eye which corresponds to the formula,

the eye being merely the matter of seeing; when seeing is removed the eye is

no longer an eye, except in name-it is no more a real eye than the eye of a

statue or of a painted figure. We must now extend our consideration from the

‘parts’ to the whole living body; for what the departmental sense is to the

bodily part which is its organ, that the whole faculty of sense is to the whole

sensitive body as such.

We must not understand by that which is ‘potentially capable of living’

what has lost the soul it had, but only what still retains it; but seeds and fruitsare bodies which possess the qualification. Consequently, while waking is

actuality in a sense corresponding to the cutting and the seeing, the soul is

actuality in the sense corresponding to the power of sight and the power in

the tool; the body corresponds to what exists in potentiality; as the pupil plus

the power of sight constitutes the eye, so the soul plus the body constitutes

the animal.

  From this it indubitably follows that the soul is inseparable from its body,

or at any rate that certain parts of it are (if it has parts) for the actuality of

some of them is nothing but the actualities of their bodily parts. Yet some

may be separable because they are not the actualities of any body at all.

Further, we have no light on the problem whether the soul may not be the

actuality of its body in the sense in which the sailor is the actuality of the

ship.

This must suffice as our sketch or outline determination of the nature of

soul.


2


  Since what is clear or logically more evident emerges from what in itself is

confused but more observable by us, we must reconsider our results from this

point of view. For it is not enough for a definitive formula to express as most

now do the mere fact; it must include and exhibit the ground also. At present

definitions are given in a form analogous to the conclusion of a syllogism;

e.g. What is squaring? The construction of an equilateral rectangle equal to a

given  oblong  rectangle.  Such  a  definition  is  in  form  equivalent  to  a

conclusion. One that tells us that squaring is the discovery of a line which is a

mean  proportional  between  the  two  unequal  sides  of  the  given  rectangle

discloses the ground of what is defined.

We resume our inquiry from a fresh starting-point by calling attention to

the fact that what has soul in it differs from what has not, in that the former

displays life. Now this word has more than one sense, and provided any one

alone of these is found in a thing we say that thing is living. Living, that is,

may mean thinking or perception or local movement and rest, or movement

in the sense of nutrition, decay and growth. Hence we think of plants also as

living, for they are observed to possess in themselves an originative power

through which they increase or decrease in all spatial directions; they grow

up  and  down,  and  everything  that  grows  increases  its  bulk  alike  in  bothdirections or indeed in all, and continues to live so long as it can absorb

nutriment.

This  power  of  self-nutrition  can  be  isolated  from  the  other  powers

mentioned, but not they from it-in mortal beings at least. The fact is obvious

in plants; for it is the only psychic power they possess.

This is the originative power the possession of which leads us to speak of

things as living at all, but it is the possession of sensation that leads us for the

first time to speak of living things as animals; for even those beings which

possess no power of local movement but do possess the power of sensation

we call animals and not merely living things.

The primary form of sense is touch, which belongs to all animals. just as

the  power  of  self-nutrition  can  be  isolated  from  touch  and  sensation

generally, so touch can be isolated from all other forms of sense. (By the

power of self-nutrition we mean that departmental power of the soul which is

common to plants and animals: all animals whatsoever are observed to have

the sense of touch.) What the explanation of these two facts is, we must

discuss later. At present we must confine ourselves to saying that soul is the

source of these phenomena and is characterized by them, viz. by the powers

of self-nutrition, sensation, thinking, and motivity.

Is each of these a soul or a part of a soul? And if a part, a part in what

sense? A part merely distinguishable by definition or a part distinct in local

situation as well? In the case of certain of these powers, the answers to these

questions are easy, in the case of others we are puzzled what to say. just as in

the case of plants which when divided are observed to continue to live though

removed to a distance from one another (thus showing that in their case the

soul of each individual plant before division was actually one, potentially

many), so we notice a similar result in other varieties of soul, i.e. in insects

which have been cut in two; each of the segments possesses both sensation

and  local  movement;  and  if  sensation,  necessarily  also  imagination  and

appetition; for, where there is sensation, there is also pleasure and pain, and,

where these, necessarily also desire.

We have no evidence as yet about mind or the power to think; it seems to

be a widely different kind of soul, differing as what is eternal from what is

perishable; it alone is capable of existence in isolation from all other psychic

powers. All the other parts of soul, it is evident from what we have said, are,

in spite of certain statements to the contrary, incapable of separate existence

though, of course, distinguishable by definition. If opining is distinct fromperceiving, to be capable of opining and to be capable of perceiving must be

distinct, and so with all the other forms of living above enumerated. Further,

some  animals  possess  all  these  parts  of  soul,  some  certain  of  them  only,

others one only (this is what enables us to classify animals); the cause must

be considered later.’ A similar arrangement is found also within the field of

the senses; some classes of animals have all the senses, some only certain of

them, others only one, the most indispensable, touch.

  Since  the  expression  ‘that  whereby  we  live  and  perceive’  has  two

meanings, just like the expression ‘that whereby we know’-that may mean

either (a) knowledge or (b) the soul, for we can speak of knowing by or with

either, and similarly that whereby we are in health may be either (a) health or

(b)  the  body  or  some  part  of  the  body;  and  since  of  the  two  terms  thus

contrasted knowledge or health is the name of a form, essence, or ratio, or if

we  so  express  it  an  actuality  of  a  recipient  matter-knowledge  of  what  is

capable of knowing, health of what is capable of being made healthy (for the

operation of that which is capable of originating change terminates and has

its seat in what is changed or altered); further, since it is the soul by or with

which primarily we live, perceive, and think:-it follows that the soul must be

a ratio or formulable essence, not a matter or subject. For, as we said, word

substance has three meanings form, matter, and the complex of both and of

these three what is called matter is potentiality, what is called form actuality.

Since  then  the  complex  here  is  the  living  thing,  the  body  cannot  be  the

actuality of the soul; it is the soul which is the actuality of a certain kind of

body. Hence the rightness of the view that the soul cannot be without a body,

while it csnnot he a body; it is not a body but something relative to a body.

That is why it is in a body, and a body of a definite kind. It was a mistake,

therefore, to do as former thinkers did, merely to fit it into a body without

adding  a  definite  specification  of  the  kind  or  character  of  that  body.

Reflection confirms the observed fact; the actuality of any given thing can

only be realized in what is already potentially that thing, i.e. in a matter of its

own appropriate to it. From all this it follows that soul is an actuality or

formulable  essence  of  something  that  possesses  a  potentiality  of  being

besouled.


3


Of the psychic powers above enumerated some kinds of living things, aswe have said, possess all, some less than all, others one only. Those we have

mentioned are the nutritive, the appetitive, the sensory, the locomotive, and

the power of thinking. Plants have none but the first, the nutritive, while

another order of living things has this plus the sensory. If any order of living

things has the sensory, it must also have the appetitive; for appetite is the

genus of which desire, passion, and wish are the species; now all animals

have one sense at least, viz. touch, and whatever has a sense has the capacity

for pleasure and pain and therefore has pleasant and painful objects present to

it, and wherever these are present, there is desire, for desire is just appetition

of what is pleasant. Further, all animals have the sense for food (for touch is

the sense for food); the food of all living things consists of what is dry, moist,

hot, cold, and these are the qualities apprehended by touch; all other sensible

qualities  are  apprehended  by  touch  only  indirectly.  Sounds,  colours,  and

odours  contribute  nothing  to  nutriment;  flavours  fall  within  the  field  of

tangible qualities. Hunger and thirst are forms of desire, hunger a desire for

what is dry and hot, thirst a desire for what is cold and moist; flavour is a sort

of seasoning added to both. We must later clear up these points, but at present

it may be enough to say that all animals that possess the sense of touch have

also appetition. The case of imagination is obscure; we must examine it later.

Certain kinds of animals possess in addition the power of locomotion, and

still another order of animate beings, i.e. man and possibly another order like

man or superior to him, the power of thinking, i.e. mind. It is now evident

that a single definition can be given of soul only in the same sense as one can

be given of figure. For, as in that case there is no figure distinguishable and

apart from triangle, &c., so here there is no soul apart from the forms of soul

just enumerated. It is true that a highly general definition can be given for

figure which will fit all figures without expressing the peculiar nature of any

figure. So here in the case of soul and its specific forms. Hence it is absurd in

this and similar cases to demand an absolutely general definition which will

fail to express the peculiar nature of anything that is, or again, omitting this,

to look for separate definitions corresponding to each infima species. The

cases of figure and soul are exactly parallel; for the particulars subsumed

under the common name in both cases-figures and living beings-constitute a

series, each successive term of which potentially contains its predecessor, e.g.

the square the triangle, the sensory power the self-nutritive. Hence we must

ask in the case of each order of living things, What is its soul, i.e. What is the

soul of plant, animal, man? Why the terms are related in this serial way mustform the subject of later examination. But the facts are that the power of

perception is never found apart from the power of self-nutrition, while-in

plants-the latter is found isolated from the former. Again, no sense is found

apart from that of touch, while touch is found by itself; many animals have

neither sight, hearing, nor smell. Again, among living things that possess

sense some have the power of locomotion, some not. Lastly, certain living

beings-a small minority-possess calculation and thought, for (among mortal

beings)  those  which  possess  calculation  have  all  the  other  powers  above

mentioned,  while  the  converse  does  not  hold-indeed  some  live  by

imagination alone, while others have not even imagination. The mind that

knows with immediate intuition presents a different problem.

It is evident that the way to give the most adequate definition of soul is to

seek in the case of each of its forms for the most appropriate definition.


4


It  is  necessary  for  the  student  of  these  forms  of  soul  first  to  find  a

definition  of  each,  expressive  of  what  it  is,  and  then  to  investigate  its

derivative properties, &c. But if we are to express what each is, viz. what the

thinking power is, or the perceptive, or the nutritive, we must go farther back

and  first  give  an  account  of  thinking  or  perceiving,  for  in  the  order  of

investigation the question of what an agent does precedes the question, what

enables it to do what it does. If this is correct, we must on the same ground go

yet another step farther back and have some clear view of the objects of each;

thus we must start with these objects, e.g. with food, with what is perceptible,

or with what is intelligible.

It follows that first of all we must treat of nutrition and reproduction, for

the nutritive soul is found along with all the others and is the most primitive

and widely distributed power of soul, being indeed that one in virtue of which

all are said to have life. The acts in which it manifests itself are reproduction

and the use of food-reproduction, I say, because for any living thing that has

reached its normal development and which is unmutilated, and whose mode

of generation is not spontaneous, the most natural act is the production of

another like itself, an animal producing an animal, a plant a plant, in order

that, as far as its nature allows, it may partake in the eternal and divine. That

is the goal towards which all things strive, that for the sake of which they do

whatsoever their nature renders possible. The phrase ‘for the sake of which’is ambiguous; it may mean either (a) the end to achieve which, or (b) the

being in whose interest, the act is done. Since then no living thing is able to

partake  in  what  is  eternal  and  divine  by  uninterrupted  continuance  (for

nothing perishable can for ever remain one and the same), it tries to achieve

that end in the only way possible to it, and success is possible in varying

degrees; so it remains not indeed as the self-same individual but continues its

existence in something like itself-not numerically but specifically one.

The soul is the cause or source of the living body. The terms cause and

source have many senses. But the soul is the cause of its body alike in all

three senses which we explicitly recognize. It is (a) the source or origin of

movement, it is (b) the end, it is (c) the essence of the whole living body.

That it is the last, is clear; for in everything the essence is identical with the

ground of its being, and here, in the case of living things, their being is to

live, and of their being and their living the soul in them is the cause or source.

Further, the actuality of whatever is potential is identical with its formulable

essence.

It is manifest that the soul is also the final cause of its body. For Nature,

like mind, always does whatever it does for the sake of something, which

something is its end. To that something corresponds in the case of animals

the soul and in this it follows the order of nature; all natural bodies are organs

of the soul. This is true of those that enter into the constitution of plants as

well as of those which enter into that of animals. This shows that that the

sake of which they are is soul. We must here recall the two senses of ‘that for

the sake of which’, viz. (a) the end to achieve which, and (b) the being in

whose interest, anything is or is done.

We must maintain, further, that the soul is also the cause of the living body

as the original source of local movement. The power of locomotion is not

found, however, in all living things. But change of quality and change of

quantity  are  also  due  to  the  soul.  Sensation  is  held  to  be  a  qualitative

alteration, and nothing except what has soul in it is capable of sensation. The

same holds of the quantitative changes which constitute growth and decay;

nothing grows or decays naturally except what feeds itself, and nothing feeds

itself except what has a share of soul in it.

  Empedocles is wrong in adding that growth in plants is to be explained, the

downward rooting by the natural tendency of earth to travel downwards, and

the  upward  branching  by  the  similar  natural  tendency  of  fire  to  travel

upwards. For he misinterprets up and down; up and down are not for all