annoyance or disturbance, then even though she had made up her mind to lay

she can keep the egg back in abeyance. A singular phenomenon is observed

in pigeons with regard to pairing: that is, they kiss one another just when the

male is on the point of mounting the female, and without this preliminary the

male  would  decline  to  perform  his  function.  With  the  older  males  the

preliminary kiss is only given to begin with, and subsequently sequently he

mounts without previously kissing; with younger males the preliminary is

never omitted. Another singularity in these birds is that the hens tread one

another when a cock is not forthcoming, after kissing one another just as

takes place in the normal pairing. Though they do not impregnate one another

they lay more eggs under these than under ordinary circumstances; no chicks,

however, result therefrom, but all such eggs are wind-eggs.

<

div id="section104" class="section" title="3">


3


  Generation from the egg proceeds in an identical manner with all birds, but

the full periods from conception to birth differ, as has been said. With the

common hen after three days and three nights there is the first indication of

the embryo; with larger birds the interval being longer, with smaller birds

shorter. Meanwhile the yolk comes into being, rising towards the sharp end,

where  the  primal  element  of  the  egg  is  situated,  and  where  the  egg  gets

hatched; and the heart appears, like a speck of blood, in the white of the egg.

This point beats and moves as though endowed with life, and from it two

vein-ducts  with  blood  in  them  trend  in  a  convoluted  course  (as  the  egg

substance  goes  on  growing,  towards  each  of  the  two  circumjacent

integuments); and a membrane carrying bloody fibres now envelops the yolk,

leading off from the vein-ducts. A little afterwards the body is differentiated,

at first very small and white. The head is clearly distinguished, and in it the

eyes, swollen out to a great extent. This condition of the eyes lat on for a

good while, as it is only by degrees that they diminish in size and collapse. At

the outset the under portion of the body appears insignificant in comparison

with the upper portion. Of the two ducts that lead from the heart, the one

proceeds towards the circumjacent integument, and the other, like a navel-

string, towards the yolk. The life-element of the chick is in the white of the

egg, and the nutriment comes through the navel-string out of the yolk.  When the egg is now ten days old the chick and all its parts are distinctly

visible. The head is still larger than the rest of its body, and the eyes larger

than the head, but still devoid of vision. The eyes, if removed about this time,

are found to be larger than beans, and black; if the cuticle be peeled off them

there is a white and cold liquid inside, quite glittering in the sunlight, but

there is no hard substance whatsoever. Such is the condition of the head and

eyes.  At  this  time  also  the  larger  internal  organs  are  visible,  as  also  the

stomach and the arrangement of the viscera; and veins that seem to proceed

from the heart are now close to the navel. From the navel there stretch a pair

of veins; one towards the membrane that envelops the yolk (and, by the way,

the yolk is now liquid, or more so than is normal), and the other towards that

membrane which envelops collectively the membrane wherein the chick lies,

the  membrane  of  the  yolk,  and  the  intervening  liquid.  (For,  as  the  chick

grows,  little  by  little  one  part  of  the  yolk  goes  upward,  and  another  part

downward, and the white liquid is between them; and the white of the egg is

underneath the lower part of the yolk, as it was at the outset.) On the tenth

day the white is at the extreme outer surface, reduced in amount, glutinous,

firm in substance, and sallow in colour.

The  disposition  of  the  several  constituent  parts  is  as  follows.  First  and

outermost  comes  the  membrane  of  the  egg,  not  that  of  the  shell,  but

underneath it. Inside this membrane is a white liquid; then comes the chick,

and a membrane round about it, separating it off so as to keep the chick free

from the liquid; next after the chick comes the yolk, into which one of the

two veins was described as leading, the other one leading into the enveloping

white substance. (A membrane with a liquid resembling serum envelops the

entire structure. Then comes another membrane right round the embryo, as

has been described, separating it off against the liquid. Underneath this comes

the  yolk,  enveloped  in  another  membrane  (into  which  yolk  proceeds  the

navel-string that leads from the heart and the big vein), so as to keep the

embryo free of both liquids.)

  About the twentieth day, if you open the egg and touch the chick, it moves

inside and chirps; and it is already coming to be covered with down, when,

after the twentieth day is ast, the chick begins to break the shell. The head is

situated over the right leg close to the flank, and the wing is placed over the

head; and about this time is plain to be seen the membrane resembling an

after-birth that comes next after the outermost membrane of the shell, into

which membrane the one of the navel-strings was described as leading (and,by the way, the chick in its entirety is now within it), and so also is the other

membrane resembling an after-birth, namely that surrounding the yolk, into

which the second navel-string was described as leading; and both of them

were described as being connected with the heart and the big vein. At this

conjuncture the navel-string that leads to the outer afterbirth collapses and

becomes detached from the chick, and the membrane that leads into the yolk

is fastened on to the thin gut of the creature, and by this time a considerable

amount  of  the  yolk  is  inside  the  chick  and  a  yellow  sediment  is  in  its

stomach. About this time it discharges residuum in the direction of the outer

after-birth, and has residuum inside its stomach; and the outer residuum is

white  (and  there  comes  a  white  substance  inside).  By  and  by  the  yolk,

diminishing  gradually  in  size,  at  length  becomes  entirely  used  up  and

comprehended within the chick (so that, ten days after hatching, if you cut

open the chick, a small remnant of the yolk is still left in connexion with the

gut), but it is detached from the navel, and there is nothing in the interval

between, but it has been used up entirely. During the period above referred to

the chick sleeps, wakes up, makes a move and looks up and Chirps; and the

heart and the navel together palpitate as though the creature were respiring.

So much as to generation from the egg in the case of birds.

  Birds lay some eggs that are unfruitful, even eggs that are the result of

copulation,  and  no  life  comes  from  such  eggs  by  incubation;  and  this

phenomenon is observed especially with pigeons.

  Twin eggs have two yolks. In some twin eggs a thin partition of white

intervenes to prevent the yolks mixing with each other, but some twin eggs

are unprovided with such partition, and the yokes run into one another. There

are  some  hens  that  lay  nothing  but  twin  eggs,  and  in  their  case  the

phenomenon regarding the yolks has been observed. For instance, a hen has

been known to lay eighteen eggs, and to hatch twins out of them all, except

those that were wind-eggs; the rest were fertile (though, by the way, one of

the twins is always bigger than the other), but the eighteenth was abnormal or

monstrous.

<

div id="section105" class="section" title="4">


4


  Birds of the pigeon kind, such as the ringdove and the turtle-dove, lay twoeggs at a time; that is to say, they do so as a general rule, and they never lay

more than three. The pigeon, as has been said, lays at all seasons; the ring-

dove and the turtle-dove lay in the springtime, and they never lay more than

twice in the same season. The hen-bird lays the second pair of eggs when the

first  pair  happens  to  have  been  destroyed,  for  many  of  the  hen-pigeons

destroy the first brood. The hen-pigeon, as has been said, occasionally lays

three eggs, but it never rears more than two chicks, and sometimes rears only

one; and the odd one is always a wind-egg.

Very few birds propagate within their first year. All birds, after once they

have begun laying, keep on having eggs, though in the case of some birds it is

difficult to detect the fact from the minute size of the creature.

The pigeon, as a rule, lays a male and a female egg, and generally lays the

male egg first; after laying it allows a day’s interval to ensue and then lays

the second egg. The male takes its turn of sitting during the daytime; the

female sits during the night. The first-laid egg is hatched and brought to birth

within twenty days; and the mother bird pecks a hole in the egg the day

before she hatches it out. The two parent birds brood for some time over the

chicks in the way in which they brooded previously over the eggs. In all

connected with the rearing of the young the female parent is more cross-

tempered than the male, as is the case with most animals after parturition.

The hens lay as many as ten times in the year; occasional instances have been

known of their laying eleven times, and in Egypt they actually lay twelve

times.  The  pigeon,  male  and  female,  couples  within  the  year;  in  fact,  it

couples when only six months old. Some assert that ringdoves and turtle-

doves  pair  and  procreate  when  only  three  months  old,  and  instance  their

superabundant numbers by way of proof of the assertion. The hen-pigeon

carries her eggs fourteen days; for as many more days the parent birds hatch

the eggs; by the end of another fourteen days the chicks are so far capable of

flight  as  to  be  overtaken  with  difficulty.  (The  ring-dove,  according  to  all

accounts, lives up to forty years. The partridge lives over sixteen.) (After one

brood the pigeon is ready for another within thirty days.)

<

div id="section106" class="section" title="5">


5


The vulture builds its nest on inaccessible cliffs; for which reason its nestand young are rarely seen. And therefore Herodorus, father of Bryson the

Sophist, declares that vultures belong to some foreign country unknown to us,

stating as a proof of the assertion that no one has ever seen a vulture’s nest,

and also that vultures in great numbers make a sudden appearance in the rear

of armies. However, difficult as it is to get a sight of it, a vulture’s nest has

been seen. The vulture lays two eggs.

  (Carnivorous birds in general are observed to lay but once a year. The

swallow is the only carnivorous bird that builds a nest twice. If you prick out

the eyes of swallow chicks while they are yet young, the birds will get well

again and will see by and by.)

<

div id="section107" class="section" title="6">


6


The eagle lays three eggs and hatches two of them, as it is said in the

verses ascribed to Musaeus:

<

div class="quote">

That lays three, hatches two, and cares for one.

This is the case in most instances, though occasionally a brood of three has

been observed. As the young ones grow, the mother becomes wearied with

feeding them and extrudes one of the pair from the nest. At the same time the

bird is said to abstain from food, to avoid harrying the young of wild animals.

That is to say, its wings blanch, and for some days its talons get turned awry.

It is in consequence about this time cross-tempered to its own young. The

phene is said to rear the young one that has been expelled the nest. The eagle

broods for about thirty days.

The hatching period is about the same for the larger birds, such as the

goose and the great bustard; for the middle-sized birds it extends over about

twenty days, as in the case of the kite and the hawk. The kite in general lays

two eggs, but occasionally rears three young ones. The so-called aegolius at

times rears four. It is not true that, as some aver, the raven lays only two

eggs;  it  lays  a  larger  number.  It  broods  for  about  twenty  days  and  then

extrudes  its  young.  Other  birds  perform  the  same  operation;  at  all  events

mother birds that lay several eggs often extrude one of their young.

  Birds of the eagle species are not alike in the treatment of their young. Thewhite-tailed eagle is cross, the black eagle is affectionate in the feeding of the

young;  though,  by  the  way,  all  birds  of  prey,  when  their  brood  is  rather

forward  in  being  able  to  fly,  beat  and  extrude  them  from  the  nest.  The

majority of birds other than birds of prey, as has been said, also act in this

manner, and after feeding their young take no further care of them; but the

crow is an exception. This bird for a considerable time takes charge of her

young; for, even when her young can fly, she flies alongside of them and

supplies them with food.

<

div id="section108" class="section" title="7">


7


The cuckoo is said by some to be a hawk transformed, because at the time

of the cuckoo’s coming, the hawk, which it resembles, is never seen; and

indeed it is only for a few days that you will see hawks about when the

cuckoo’s note sounds early in the season. The cuckoo appears only for a short

time  in  summer,  and  in  winter  disappears.  The  hawk  has  crooked  talons,

which the cuckoo has not; neither with regard to the head does the cuckoo

resemble the hawk. In point of fact, both as regards the head and the claws it

more resembles the pigeon. However, in colour and in colour alone it does

resemble the hawk, only that the markings of the hawk are striped, and of the

cuckoo mottled. And, by the way, in size and flight it resembles the smallest

of  the  hawk  tribe,  which  bird  disappears  as  a  rule  about  the  time  of  the

appearance of the cuckoo, though the two have been seen simultaneously.

The  cuckoo  has  been  seen  to  be  preyed  on  by  the  hawk;  and  this  never

happens between birds of the same species. They say no one has ever seen

the young of the cuckoo. The bird eggs, but does not build a nest. Sometimes

it lays its eggs in the nest of a smaller bird after first devouring the eggs of

this bird; it lays by preference in the nest of the ringdove, after first devouring

the eggs of the pigeon. (It occasionally lays two, but usually one.) It lays also

in the nest of the hypolais, and the hypolais hatches and rears the brood. It is

about this time that the bird becomes fat and palatable. (The young of hawks

also get palatable and fat. One species builds a nest in the wilderness and on

sheer and inaccessible cliffs.)

<

div id="section109" class="section" title="8">8


  With most birds, as has been said of the pigeon, the hatching is carried on

by the male and the female in turns: with some birds, however, the male only

sits long enough to allow the female to provide herself with food. In the

goose tribe the female alone incubates, and after once sitting on the eggs she

continues brooding until they are hatched.

The nests of all marsh-birds are built in districts fenny and well supplied

with grass; consequently, the mother-bird while sitting quiet on her eggs can

provide herself with food without having to submit to absolute fasting.

  With the crow also the female alone broods, and broods throughout the

whole  period;  the  male  bird  supports  the  female,  bringing  her  food  and

feeding her. The female of the ring-dove begins to brood in the afternoon and

broods through the entire night until breakfast-time of the following day; the

male  broods  during  the  rest  of  the  time.  Partridges  build  a  nest  in  two

compartments; the male broods on the one and the female on the other. After

hatching, each of the parent birds rears its brood. But the male, when he first

takes his young out of the nest, treads them.

<

div id="section110" class="section" title="9">


9


  Peafowl live for about twenty-five years, breed about the third year, and at

the same time take on their spangled plumage. They hatch their eggs within

thirty days or rather more. The peahen lays but once a year, and lays twelve

eggs, or may be a slightly lesser number: she does not lay all the eggs there

and then one after the other, but at intervals of two or three days. Such as lay

for the first time lay about eight eggs. The peahen lays wind-eggs. They pair

in the spring; and laying begins immediately after pairing. The bird moults

when the earliest trees are shedding their leaves, and recovers its plumage

when the same trees are recovering their foliage. People that rear peafowl put

the eggs under the barn-door hen, owing to the fact that when the peahen is

brooding over them the peacock attacks her and tries to trample on them;

owing to this circumstance some birds of wild varieties run away from the

males and lay their eggs and brood in solitude. Only two eggs are put under a

barn-door hen, for she could not brood over and hatch a large number. Theytake every precaution, by supplying her with food, to prevent her going off

the eggs and discontinuing the brooding.

  With male birds about pairing time the testicles are obviously larger than at

other times, and this is conspicuously the case with the more salacious birds,

such as the barn-door cock and the cock partridge; the peculiarity is less

conspicuous in such birds as are intermittent in regard to pairing.

<

div id="section111" class="section" title="10">


10


So much for the conception and generation of birds.

It has been previously stated that fishes are not all oviparous. Fishes of the

cartilaginous genus are viviparous; the rest are oviparous. And cartilaginous

fishes are first oviparous internally and subsequently viviparous; they rear the

embryos internally, the batrachus or fishing-frog being an exception.

  Fishes also, as was above stated, are provided with wombs, and wombs of

diverse kinds. The oviparous genera have wombs bifurcate in shape and low

down in position; the cartilaginous genus have wombs shaped like those of O

birds. The womb, however, in the cartilaginous fishes differs in this respect

from the womb of birds, that with some cartilaginous fishes the eggs do not

settle close to the diaphragm but middle-ways along the backbone, and as

they grow they shift their position.

The egg with all fishes is not of two colours within but is of even hue; and

the colour is nearer to white than to yellow, and that both when the young is

inside it and previously as well.

  Development  from  the  egg  in  fishes  differs  from  that  in  birds  in  this

respect, that it does not exhibit that one of the two navel-strings that leads off

to the membrane that lies close under the shell, while it does exhibit that one

of the two that in the case of birds leads off to the yolk. In a general way the

rest of the development from the egg onwards is identical in birds and fishes.

That is to say, development takes place at the upper part of the egg, and the

veins extend in like manner, at first from the heart; and at first the head, the

eyes,  and  the  upper  parts  are  largest;  and  as  the  creature  grows  the  egg-

substance decreases and eventually disappears, and becomes absorbed within

the embryo, just as takes place with the yolk in birds.

The navel-string is attached a little way below the aperture of the belly.When the creatures are young the navel-string is long, but as they grow it

diminishes in size; at length it gets small and becomes incorporated, as was

described in the case of birds. The embryo and the egg are enveloped by a

common membrane, and just under this is another membrane that envelops

the embryo by itself; and in between the two membranes is a liquid. The food

inside the stomach of the little fishes resembles that inside the stomach of

young chicks, and is partly white and partly yellow.

As regards the shape of the womb, the reader is referred to my treatise on

Anatomy. The womb, however, is diverse in diverse fishes, as for instance in

the sharks as compared one with another or as compared with the skate. That

is to say, in some sharks the eggs adhere in the middle of the womb round

about the backbone, as has been stated, and this is the case with the dog-fish;

as the eggs grow they shift their place; and since the womb is bifurcate and

adheres to the midriff, as in the rest of similar creatures, the eggs pass into

one or other of the two compartments. This womb and the womb of the other

sharks  exhibit,  as  you  go  a  little  way  off  from  the  midriff,  something

resembling white breasts, which never make their appearance unless there be

conception.

  Dog-fish and skate have a kind of egg-shell, in the which is found an egg-

like liquid. The shape of the egg-shell resembles the tongue of a bagpipe, and

hair-like ducts are attached to the shell. With the dog-fish which is called by

some  the  ‘dappled  shark’,  the  young  are  born  when  the  shell-formation

breaks in pieces and falls out; with the ray, after it has laid the egg the shell-

formation breaks up and the young move out. The spiny dog-fish has its close

to the midriff above the breast like formations; when the egg descends, as

soon as it gets detached the young is born. The mode of generation is the

same in the case of the fox-shark.

The so-called smooth shark has its eggs in betwixt the wombs like the dog-

fish; these eggs shift into each of the two horns of the womb and descend,

and the young develop with the navel-string attached to the womb, so that, as

the egg-substance gets used up, the embryo is sustained to all appearance just

as in the case of quadrupeds. The navel-string is long and adheres to the

under part of the womb (each navel-string being attached as it were by a

sucker), and also to the centre of the embryo in the place where the liver is

situated. If the embryo be cut open, even though it has the egg-substance no

longer, the food inside is egg-like in appearance. Each embryo, as in the case

of quadrupeds, is provided with a chorion and separate membranes. Whenyoung the embryo has its head upwards, but downwards when it gets strong

and is completed in form. Males are generated on the left-hand side of the

womb, and females on the right-hand side, and males and females on the

same side together. If the embryo be cut open, then, as with quadrupeds, such

internal organs as it is furnished with, as for instance the liver, are found to be

large and supplied with blood.

All cartilaginous fishes have at one and the same time eggs above close to

the midriff (some larger, some smaller), in considerable numbers, and also

embryos  lower  down.  And  this  circumstance  leads  many  to  suppose  that

fishes of this species pair and bear young every month, inasmuch as they do

not produce all their young at once, but now and again and over a lengthened

period.  But  such  eggs  as  have  come  down  below  within  the  womb  are

simultaneously ripened and completed in growth.

  Dog-fish in general can extrude and take in again their young, as can also

the angel-fish and the electric ray-and, by the way, a large electric ray has

been seen with about eighty embryos inside it-but the spiny dogfish is an

exception to the rule, being prevented by the spine of the young fish from so

doing. Of the flat cartilaginous fish, the trygon and the ray cannot extrude and

take in again in consequence of the roughness of the tails of the young. The

batrachus or fishing-frog also is unable to take in its young owing to the size

of the head and the prickles; and, by the way, as was previously remarked, it

is the only one of these fishes that is not viviparous.

So much for the varieties of the cartilaginous species and for their modes

of generation from the egg.

<

div id="section112" class="section" title="11">


11


At the breeding season the sperm-ducts of the male are filled with sperm,

so much so that if they be squeezed the sperm flows out spontaneously as a

white fluid; the ducts are bifurcate, and start from the midriff and the great

vein. About this period the sperm-ducts of the male are quite distinct (from

the womb of the female) but at any other than the actual breeding time their

distinctness is not obvious to a non-expert. The fact is that in certain fishes at

certain  times  these  organs  are  imperceptible,  as  was  stated  regarding  the

testicles of birds.  Among  other  distinctions  observed  between  the  thoric  ducts  and  the

womb-ducts is the circumstance that the thoric ducts are attached to the loins,

while  the  womb-ducts  move  about  freely  and  are  attached  by  a  thin

membrane. The particulars regarding the thoric ducts may be studied by a

reference to the diagrams in my treatise on Anatomy.

  Cartilaginous  fishes  are  capable  of  superfoetation,  and  their  period  of

gestation  is  six  months  at  the  longest.  The  so-called  starry  dogfish  bears

young  the  most  frequently;  in  other  words  it  bears  twice  a  month.  The

breeding season is in the month of Maemacterion. The dog-fish as a general

rule bear twice in the year, with the exception of the little dog-fish, which

bears only once a year. Some of them bring forth in the springtime. The

rhine, or angel-fish, bears its first brood in the springtime, and its second in

the autumn, about the winter setting of the Pleiads; the second brood is the

stronger of the two. The electric ray brings forth in the late autumn.

  Cartilaginous fishes come out from the main seas and deep waters towards

the shore and there bring forth their young, and they do so for the sake of

warmth and by way of protection for their young.

  Observations would lead to the general rule that no one variety of fish pairs

with another variety. The angel-fish, however, and the batus or skate appear

to pair with one another; for there is a fish called the rhinobatus, with the

head and front parts of the skate and the after parts of the rhine or angel-fish,

just as though it were made up of both fishes together.

Sharks then and their congeners, as the fox-shark and the dog-fish, and the

flat fishes, such as the electric ray, the ray, the smooth skate, and the trygon,

are first oviparous and then viviparous in the way above mentioned, (as are

also the saw-fish and the ox-ray.)

<

div id="section113" class="section" title="12">


12


The dolphin, the whale, and all the rest of the Cetacea, all, that is to say,

that are provided with a blow-hole instead of gills, are viviparous. That is to

say, no one of all these fishes is ever seen to be supplied with eggs, but

directly with an embryo from whose differentiation comes the fish, just as in

the case of mankind and the viviparous quadrupeds.

The dolphin bears one at a time generally, but occasionally two. The whalebears one or at the most two, generally two. The porpoise in this respect

resembles the dolphin, and, by the way, it is in form like a little dolphin, and

is found in the Euxine; it differs, however, from the dolphin as being less in

size and broader in the back; its colour is leaden-black. Many people are of

opinion that the porpoise is a variety of the dolphin.

All  creatures  that  have  a  blow-hole  respire  and  inspire,  for  they  are

provided with lungs. The dolphin has been seen asleep with his nose above

water, and when asleep he snores.

The  dolphin  and  the  porpoise  are  provided  with  milk,  and  suckle  their

young. They also take their young, when small, inside them. The young of

the dolphin grow rapidly, being full grown at ten years of age. Its period of

gestation is ten months. It brings forth its young summer, and never at any

other season; (and, singularly enough, under the Dogstar it disappears for

about thirty days). Its young accompany it for a considerable period; and, in

fact, the creature is remarkable for the strength of its parental affection. It

lives for many years; some are known to have lived for more than twenty-

five, and some for thirty years; the fact is fishermen nick their tails sometimes

and set them adrift again, and by this expedient their ages are ascertained.

The seal is an amphibious animal: that is to say, it cannot take in water, but

breathes and sleeps and brings forth on dry land-only close to the shore-as

being an animal furnished with feet; it spends, however, the greater part of its

time in the sea and derives its food from it, so that it must be classed in the

category of marine animals. It is viviparous by immediate conception and

brings forth its young alive, and exhibits an after-birth and all else just like a

ewe. It bears one or two at a time, and three at the most. It has two teats, and

suckles its young like a quadruped. Like the human species it brings forth at

all seasons of the year, but especially at the time when the earliest kids are

forthcoming. It conducts its young ones, when they are about twelve days

old, over and over again during the day down to the sea, accustoming them

by slow degrees to the water. It slips down steep places instead of walking,

from the fact that it cannot steady itself by its feet. It can contract and draw

itself  in,  for  it  is  fleshy  and  soft  and  its  bones  are  gristly.  Owing  to  the

flabbiness of its body it is difficult to kill a seal by a blow, unless you strike it

on the temple. It looks like a cow. The female in regard to its genital organs

resembles the female of the ray; in all other respects it resembles the female

of the human species.

So much for the phenomena of generation and of parturition in animalsthat live in water and are viviparous either internally or externally.

<

div id="section114" class="section" title="13">


13


  Oviparous fishes have their womb bifurcate and placed low down, as was

said previously-and, by the way, all scaly fish are oviparous, as the basse, the

mullet, the grey mullet, and the etelis, and all the so-called white-fish, and all

the smooth or slippery fish except the eel-and their roe is of a crumbling or

granular substance. This appearance is due to the fact that the whole womb of

such fishes is full of eggs, so that in little fishes there seem to be only a

couple of eggs there; for in small fishes the womb is indistinguishable, from

its  diminutive  size  and  thin  contexture.  The  pairing  of  fishes  has  been

discussed previously.

  Fishes for the most part are divided into males and females, but one is

puzzled to account for the erythrinus and the channa, for specimens of these

species are never caught except in a condition of pregnancy.

  With such fish as pair, eggs are the result of copulation, but such fish have

them also without copulation; and this is shown in the case of some river-

fish, for the minnow has eggs when quite small,-almost, one may say, as soon

as it is born. These fishes shed their eggs little by little, and, as is stated, the

males swallow the greater part of them, and some portion of them goes to

waste  in  the  water;  but  such  of  the  eggs  as  the  female  deposits  on  the

spawning beds are saved. If all the eggs were preserved, each species would

be infinite in number. The greater number of these eggs so deposited are not

productive, but only those over which the male sheds the milt or sperm; for

when the female has laid her eggs, the male follows and sheds its sperm over

them, and from all the eggs so besprinkled young fishes proceed, while the

rest are left to their fate.

The same phenomenon is observed in the case of molluscs also; for in the

case of the cuttlefish or sepia, after the female has deposited her eggs, the

male besprinkles them. It is highly probable that a similar phenomenon takes

place in regard to molluscs in general, though up to the present time the

phenomenon has been observed only in the case of the cuttlefish.

  Fishes deposit their eggs close in to shore, the goby close to stones; and, by

the way, the spawn of the goby is flat and crumbly. Fish in general so deposittheir eggs; for the water close in to shore is warm and is better supplied with

food than the outer sea, and serves as a protection to the spawn against the

voracity of the larger fish. And it is for this reason that in the Euxine most

fishes spawn near the mouth of the river Thermodon, because the locality is

sheltered, genial, and supplied with fresh water.

  Oviparous fish as a rule spawn only once a year. The little phycis or black

goby is an exception, as it spawns twice; the male of the black goby differs

from the female as being blacker and having larger scales.

  Fishes then in general produce their young by copulation, and lay their

eggs; but the pipefish, as some call it, when the time of parturition arrives,

bursts in two, and the eggs escape out. For the fish has a diaphysis or cloven

growth under the belly and abdomen (like the blind snakes), and, after it has

spawned by the splitting of this diaphysis, the sides of the split grow together

again.

  Development  from  the  egg  takes  place  similarly  with  fishes  that  are

oviparous internally and with fishes that are oviparous externally; that is to

say, the embryo comes at the upper end of the egg and is enveloped in a

membrane,  and  the  eyes,  large  and  spherical,  are  the  first  organs  visible.

From this circumstance it is plain that the assertion is untenable which is

made  by  some  writers,  to  wit,  that  the  young  of  oviparous  fishes  are

generated like the grubs of worms; for the opposite phenomena are observed

in the case of these grubs, in that their lower extremities are the larger at the

outset, and that the eyes and the head appear later on. After the egg has been

used up, the young fishes are like tadpoles in shape, and at first, without

taking any nutriment, they grow by sustenance derived from the juice oozing

from the egg; by and by, they are nourished up to full growth by the river-

waters.

  When the Euxine is ‘purged’ a substance called phycus is carried into the

Hellespont, and this substance is of a pale yellow colour. Some writers aver

that it is the flower of the phycus, from which rouge is made; it comes at the

beginning of summer. Oysters and the small fish of these localities feed on

this substance, and some of the inhabitants of these maritime districts say that

the purple murex derives its peculiar colour from it.

<

div id="section115" class="section" title="14">


14  Marsh-fishes  and  river-fishes  conceive  at  the  age  of  five  months  as  a

general rule, and deposit their spawn towards the close of the year without

exception. And with these fishes, like as with the marine fishes, the female

does not void all her eggs at one time, nor the male his sperm; but they are at

all times more or less provided, the female with eggs, and the male with

sperm. The-carp spawns as the seasons come round, five or six times, and

follows  in  spawning  the  rising  of  the  greater  constellations.  The  chalcis

spawns three times, and the other fishes once only in the year. They all spawn

in  pools  left  by  the  overflowing  of  rivers,  and  near  to  reedy  places  in

marshes; as for instance the phoxinus or minnow and the perch.

The  glanis  or  sheat-fish  and  the  perch  deposit  their  spawn  in  one

continuous  string,  like  the  frog;  so  continuous,  in  fact,  is  the  convoluted

spawn of the perch that, by reason of its smoothness, the fishermen in the

marshes  can  unwind  it  off  the  reeds  like  threads  off  a  reel.  The  larger

individuals  of  the  sheat-fish  spawn  in  deep  waters,  some  in  water  of  a

fathom’s depth, the smaller in shallower water, generally close to the roots of

the willow or of some other tree, or close to reeds or to moss. At times these

fishes intertwine with one another, a big with a little one, and bring into

juxtaposition the ducts-which some writers designate as navels-at the point

where they emit the generative products and discharge the egg in the case of

the female and the milt in the case of the male. Such eggs as are besprinkled

with the milt grow, in a day or thereabouts, whiter and larger, and in a little

while afterwards the fish’s eyes become visible for these organs in all fishes,

as  for  that  matter  in  all  other  animals,  are  early  conspicuous  and  seem

disproportionately big. But such eggs as the milt fails to touch remain, as

with marine fishes, useless and infertile. From the fertile eggs, as the little

fish grow, a kind of sheath detaches itself; this is a membrane that envelops

the egg and the young fish. When the milt has mingled with the eggs, the

resulting product becomes very sticky or viscous, and adheres to the roots of

trees or wherever it may have been laid. The male keeps on guard at the

principal spawning-place, and the female after spawning goes away.

In the case of the sheat-fish the growth from the egg is exceptionally slow,

and, in consequence, the male has to keep watch for forty or fifty days to

prevent the-spawn being devoured by such little fishes as chance to come by.

Next in point of slowness is the generation of the carp. As with fishes in

general, so even with these, the spawn thus protected disappears and gets lost

rapidly.In the case of some of the smaller fishes when they are only three days old

young fishes are generated. Eggs touched by the male sperm take on increase

both the same day and also later. The egg of the sheat-fish is as big as a

vetch-seed; the egg of the carp and of the carp-species as big as a millet-seed.

  These  fishes  then  spawn  and  generate  in  the  way  here  described.  The

chalcis, however, spawns in deep water in dense shoals of fish; and the so-

called tilon spawns near to beaches in sheltered spots in shoals likewise. The

carp, the baleros, and fishes in general push eagerly into the shallows for the

purpose  of  spawning,  and  very  often  thirteen  or  fourteen  males  are  seen

following a single female. When the female deposits her spawn and departs,

the males follow on and shed the milt. The greater portion of the spawn gets

wasted;  because,  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  female  moves  about  while

spawning, the spawn scatters, or so much of it as is caught in the stream and

does not get entangled with some rubbish. For, with the exception of the

sheatfish, no fish keeps on guard; unless, by the way, it be the carp, which is

said to remain on guard, if it so happen that its spawn lies in a solid mass.

All male fishes are supplied with milt, excepting the eel: with the eel, the

male is devoid of milt, and the female of spawn. The mullet goes up from the

sea to marshes and rivers; the eels, on the contrary, make their way down

from the marshes and rivers to the sea.

<

div id="section116" class="section" title="15">


15


The great majority of fish, then, as has been stated, proceed from eggs.

However, there are some fish that proceed from mud and sand, even of those

kinds that proceed also from pairing and the egg. This occurs in ponds here

and there, and especially in a pond in the neighbourhood of Cnidos. This

pond, it is said, at one time ran dry about the rising of the Dogstar, and the

mud had all dried up; at the first fall of the rains there was a show of water in

the pond, and on the first appearance of the water shoals of tiny fish were

found in the pond. The fish in question was a kind of mullet, one which does

not proceed from normal pairing, about the size of a small sprat, and not one

of these fishes was provided with either spawn or milt. There are found also

in Asia Minor, in rivers not communicating with the sea, little fishes like

whitebait, differing from the small fry found near Cnidos but found undersimilar  circumstances.  Some  writers  actually  aver  that  mullet  all  grow

spontaneously. In this assertion they are mistaken, for the female of the fish is

found  provided  with  spawn,  and  the  male  with  milt.  However,  there  is  a

species of mullet that grows spontaneously out of mud and sand.

  From the facts above enumerated it is quite proved that certain fishes come

spontaneously  into  existence,  not  being  derived  from  eggs  or  from

copulation. Such fish as are neither oviparous nor viviparous arise all from

one of two sources, from mud, or from sand and from decayed matter that

rises thence as a scum; for instance, the so-called froth of the small fry comes

out of sandy ground. This fry is incapable of growth and of propagating its

kind; after living for a while it dies away and another creature takes its place,

and so, with short intervals excepted, it may be said to last the whole year

through. At all events, it lasts from the autumn rising of Arcturus up to the

spring-time. As a proof that these fish occasionally come out of the ground

we have the fact that in cold weather they are not caught, and that they are

caught in warm weather, obviously coming up out of the ground to catch the

heat; also, when the fishermen use dredges and the ground is scraped up

fairly often, the fishes appear in larger numbers and of superior quality. All

other small fry are inferior in quality owing to rapidity of growth. The fry are

found in sheltered and marshy districts, when after a spell of fine weather the

ground is getting warmer, as, for instance, in the neighbourhood of Athens, at

Salamis and near the tomb of Themistocles and at Marathon; for in these

districts the froth is found. It appears, then, in such districts and during such

weather, and occasionally appears after a heavy fall of rain in the froth that is

thrown up by the falling rain, from which circumstance the substance derives

its specific name. Foam is occasionally brought in on the surface of the sea in

fair weather. (And in this, where it has formed on the surface, the so-called

froth collects, as grubs swarm in manure; for which-reason this fry is often

brought in from the open sea. The fish is at its best in quality and quantity in

moist warm weather.)

The  ordinary  fry  is  the  normal  issue  of  parent  fishes:  the  so-called

gudgeon-fry of small insignificant gudgeon-like fish that burrow under the

ground. From the Phaleric fry comes the membras, from the membras the

trichis, from the trichis the trichias, and from one particular sort of fry, to wit

from  that  found  in  the  harbour  of  Athens,  comes  what  is  called  the

encrasicholus, or anchovy. There is another fry, derived from the maenis and

the mullet.The unfertile fry is watery and keeps only a short time, as has been stated,

for at last only head and eyes are left. However, the fishermen of late have hit

upon a method of transporting it to a distance, as when salted it keeps for a

considerable time.

<

div id="section117" class="section" title="16">


16


Eels are not the issue of pairing, neither are they oviparous; nor was an eel

ever found supplied with either milt or spawn, nor are they when cut open

found to have within them passages for spawn or for eggs. In point of fact,

this entire species of blooded animals proceeds neither from pair nor from the

egg.

  There can be no doubt that the case is so. For in some standing pools, after

the water has been drained off and the mud has been dredged away, the eels

appear again after a fall of rain. In time of drought they do not appear even in

stagnant ponds, for the simple reason that their existence and sustenance is

derived from rain-water.

  There is no doubt, then, that they proceed neither from pairing nor from an

egg. Some writers, however, are of opinion that they generate their kind,

because in some eels little worms are found, from which they suppose that

eels are derived. But this opinion is not founded on fact. Eels are derived

from  the  so-called  ‘earth’s  guts’  that  grow  spontaneously  in  mud  and  in

humid ground; in fact, eels have at times been seen to emerge out of such

earthworms, and on other occasions have been rendered visible when the

earthworms were laid open by either scraping or cutting. Such earthworms

are found both in the sea and in rivers, especially where there is decayed

matter:  in  the  sea  in  places  where  sea-weed  abounds,  and  in  rivers  and

marshes near to the edge; for it is near to the water’s edge that sun-heat has

its chief power and produces putrefaction. So much for the generation of the

eel.

<

div id="section118" class="section" title="17">


17Fish do not all bring forth their young at the same season nor all in like

manner, neither is the period of gestation for all of the same duration.

Before pairing the males and females gather together in shoals; at the time

for copulation and parturition they pair off. With some fishes the time of

gestation is not longer than thirty days, with others it is a lesser period; but

with all it extends over a number of days divisible by seven. The longest

period of gestation is that of the species which some call a marinus.

The sargue conceives during the month of Poseideon (or December), and

carries its spawn for thirty days; and the species of mullet named by some the

chelon, and the myxon, go with spawn at the same period and over the same

length of time.

All  fish  suffer  greatly  during  the  period  of  gestation,  and  are  in

consequence very apt to be thrown up on shore at this time. In some cases

they are driven frantic with pain and throw themselves on land. At all events

they are throughout this time continually in motion until parturition is over

(this being especially true of the mullet), and after parturition they are in

repose. With many fish the time for parturition terminates on the appearance

of grubs within the belly; for small living grubs get generated there and eat

up the spawn.

  With shoal fishes parturition takes place in the spring, and indeed, with

most fishes, about the time of the spring equinox; with others it is at different

times, in summer with some, and with others about the autumn equinox.

The first of shoal fishes to spawn is the atherine, and it spawns close to

land; the last is the cephalus: and this is inferred from the fact that the brood

of the atherine appears first of all and the brood of the cephalus last. The

mullet  also  spawns  early.  The  saupe  spawns  usually  at  the  beginning  of

summer, but occasionally in the autumn. The aulopias, which some call the

anthias,  spawns  in  the  summer.  Next  in  order  of  spawning  comes  the

chrysophrys or gilthead, the basse, the mormyrus, and in general such fish as

are nicknamed ‘runners’. Latest in order of the shoal fish come the red mullet

and the coracine; these spawn in autumn. The red mullet spawns on mud, and

consequently, as the mud continues cold for a long while, spawns late in the

year. The coracine carries its spawn for a long time; but, as it lives usually on

rocky  ground,  it  goes  to  a  distance  and  spawns  in  places  abounding  in

seaweed, at a period later than the red mullet. The maenis spawns about the

winter solstice. Of the others, such as are pelagic spawn for the most part in

summer; which fact is proved by their not being caught by fishermen duringthis period.

Of ordinary fishes the most prolific is the sprat; of cartilaginous fishes, the

fishing-frog.  Specimens,  however,  of  the  fishing-frog  are  rare  from  the

facility with which the young are destroyed, as the female lays her spawn all

in a lump close in to shore. As a rule, cartilaginous fish are less prolific than

other fish owing to their being viviparous; and their young by reason of their

size have a better chance of escaping destruction.

The so-called needle-fish (or pipe-fish) is late in spawning, and the greater

portion of them are burst asunder by the eggs before spawning; and the eggs

are not so many in number as large in size. The young fish cluster round the

parent like so many young spiders, for the fish spawns on to herself; and, if

any one touch the young, they swim away. The atherine spawns by rubbing

its belly against the sand.

  Tunny fish also burst asunder by reason of their fat. They live for two

years; and the fishermen infer this age from the circumstance that once when

there was a failure of the young tunny fish for a year there was a failure of the

full-grown tunny the next summer. They are of opinion that the tunny is a

fish a year older than the pelamyd. The tunny and the mackerel pair about the

close of the month of Elaphebolion, and spawn about the commencement of

the month of Hecatombaeon; they deposit their spawn in a sort of bag. The

growth of the young tunny is rapid. After the females have spawned in the

Euxine, there comes from the egg what some call scordylae, but what the

Byzantines  nickname  the  ‘auxids’  or  ‘growers’,  from  their  growing  to  a

considerable size in a few days; these fish go out of the Pontus in autumn

along with the young tunnies, and enter Pontus in the spring as pelamyds.

Fishes as a rule take on growth with rapidity, but this is peculiarly the case

with all species of fish found in the Pontus; the growth, for instance, of the

amia-tunny is quite visible from day to day.

To resume, we must bear in mind that the same fish in the same localities

have not the same season for pairing, for conception, for parturition, or for

favouring weather. The coracine, for instance, in some places spawns about

wheat-harvest. The statements here given pretend only to give the results of

general observation.

The conger also spawns, but the fact is not equally obvious in all localities,

nor is the spawn plainly visible owing to the fat of the fish; for the spawn is

lanky in shape as it is with serpents. However, if it be put on the fire it shows

its nature; for the fat evaporates and melts, while the eggs dance about andexplode with a crack. Further, if you touch the substances and rub them with

your  fingers,  the  fat  feels  smooth  and  the  egg  rough.  Some  congers  are

provided with fat but not with any spawn, others are unprovided with fat but

have egg-spawn as here described.

<

div id="section119" class="section" title="18">


18


We have, then, treated pretty fully of the animals that fly in the air or swim

in the water, and of such of those that walk on dry land as are oviparous, to

wit of their pairing, conception, and the like phenomena; it now remains to

treat of the same phenomena in connexion with viviparous land animals and

with man.

The statements made in regard to the pairing of the sexes apply partly to

the particular kinds of animal and partly to all in general. It is common to all

animals to be most excited by the desire of one sex for the other and by the

pleasure derived from copulation. The female is most cross-tempered just

after parturition, the male during the time of pairing; for instance, stallions at

this period bite one another, throw their riders, and chase them. Wild boars,

though usually enfeebled at this time as the result of copulation, are now

unusually fierce, and fight with one another in an extraordinary way, clothing

themselves with defensive armour, or in other words deliberately thickening

their hide by rubbing against trees or by coating themselves repeatedly all

over with mud and then drying themselves in the sun. They drive one another

away from the swine pastures, and fight with such fury that very often both

combatants succumb. The case is similar with bulls, rams, and he-goats; for,

though at ordinary times they herd together, at breeding time they hold aloof

from and quarrel with one another. The male camel also is cross-tempered at

pairing time if either a man or a camel comes near him; as for a horse, a

camel is ready to fight him at any time. It is the same with wild animals. The

bear, the wolf, and the lion are all at this time ferocious towards such as come

in their way, but the males of these animals are less given to fight with one

another from the fact that they are at no time gregarious. The she-bear is

fierce after cubbing, and the bitch after pupping.

  Male  elephants  get  savage  about  pairing  time,  and  for  this  reason  it  is

stated that men who have charge of elephants in India never allow the malesto have intercourse with the females; on the ground that the males go wild at

this  time  and  turn  topsy-turvy  the  dwellings  of  their  keepers,  lightly

constructed as they are, and commit all kinds of havoc. They also state that

abundancy of food has a tendency to tame the males. They further introduce

other elephants amongst the wild ones, and punish and break them in by

setting on the new-comers to chastise the others.

  Animals that pair frequently and not at a single specific season, as for

instance animals domesticated by man, such as swine and dogs, are found to

indulge in such freaks to a lesser degree owing to the frequency of their

sexual intercourse.

Of female animals the mare is the most sexually wanton, and next in order

comes the cow. In fact, the mare is said to go a-horsing; and the term derived

from the habits of this one animal serves as a term of abuse applicable to such

females of the human species as are unbridled in the way of sexual appetite.

This is the common phenomenon as observed in the sow when she is said to

go a-boaring. The mare is said also about this time to get wind-impregnated if

not  impregnated  by  the  stallion,  and  for  this  reason  in  Crete  they  never

remove the stallion from the mares; for when the mare gets into this condition

she runs away from all other horses. The mares under these circumstances fly

invariably either northwards or southwards, and never towards either east or

west. When this complaint is on them they allow no one to approach, until

either they are exhausted with fatigue or have reached the sea. Under either of

these circumstances they discharge a certain substance ‘hippomanes’, the title

given to a growth on a new-born foal; this resembles the sow-virus, and is in

great request amongst women who deal in drugs and potions. About horsing

time the mares huddle closer together, are continually switching their tails,

their neigh is abnormal in sound, and from the sexual organ there flows a

liquid resembling genital sperm, but much thinner than the sperm of the male.

It is this substance that some call hippomanes, instead of the growth found on

the foal; they say it is extremely difficult to get as it oozes out only in small

drops at a time. Mares also, when in heat, discharge urine frequently, and

frisk with one another. Such are the phenomena connected with the horse.

  Cows go a-bulling; and so completely are they under the influence of the

sexual excitement that the herdsmen have no control over them and cannot

catch hold of them in the fields. Mares and kine alike, when in heat, indicate

the fact by the upraising of their genital organs, and by continually voiding

urine. Further, kine mount the bulls, follow them about; and keep standingbeside them. The younger females both with horses and oxen are the first to

get in heat; and their sexual appetites are all the keener if the weather warm

and their bodily condition be healthy. Mares, when clipt of their coat, have

the sexual feeling checked, and assume a downcast drooping appearance. The

stallion  recognizes  by  the  scent  the  mares  that  form  his  company,  even

though they have been together only a few days before breeding time: if they

get  mixed  up  with  other  mares,  the  stallion  bites  and  drives  away  the

interlopers. He feeds apart, accompanied by his own troop of mares. Each

stallion has assigned to him about thirty mares or even somewhat more; when

a strange stallion approaches, he huddles his mares into a close ring, runs

round them, then advances to the encounter of the newcomer; if one of the

mares  make  a  movement,  he  bites  her  and  drives  her  back.  The  bull  in

breeding  time  begins  to  graze  with  the  cows,  and  fights  with  other  bulls

(having  hitherto  grazed  with  them),  which  is  termed  by  graziers  ‘herd-

spurning’. Often in Epirus a bull disappears for three months together. In a

general way one may state that of male animals either none or few herd with

their respective females before breeding time; but they keep separate after

reaching maturity, and the two sexes feed apart. Sows, when they are moved

by sexual desire, or are, as it is called, a-boaring, will attack even human

beings.

  With bitches the same sexual condition is termed ‘getting into heat’. The

sexual organ rises at this time, and there is a moisture about the parts. Mares

drip with a white liquid at this season.

  Female animals are subject to menstrual discharges, but never in such-

abundance as is the female of the human species. With ewes and she-goats

there  are  signs  of  menstruation  in  breeding  time,  just  before  the  for

submitting to the male; after copulation also the signs are manifest, and then

cease for an interval until the period of parturition arrives; the process then

supervenes, and it is by this supervention that the shepherd knows that such

and such an ewe is about to bring forth. After parturition comes copious

menstruation, not at first much tinged with blood, but deeply dyed with it by

and  by.  With  the  cow,  the  she  ass,  and  the  mare,  the  discharge  is  more

copious actually, owing to their greater bulk, but proportionally to the greater

bulk it is far less copious. The cow, for instance, when in heat, exhibits a

small discharge to the extent of a quarter of a pint of liquid or a little less; and

the time when this discharge takes place is the best time for her to be covered

by the bull. Of all quadrupeds the mare is the most easily delivered of itsyoung, exhibits the least amount of discharge after parturition, and emits the

least amount of blood; that is to say, of all animals in proportion to size. With

kine and mares menstruation usually manifests itself at intervals of two, four,

and six months; but, unless one be constantly attending to and thoroughly

acquainted with such animals, it is difficult to verify the circumstance, and

the result is that many people are under the belief that the process never takes

place with these animals at all.

  With mules menstruation never takes place, but the urine of the female is

thicker than the urine of the male. As a general rule the discharge from the

bladder in the case of quadrupeds is thicker than it is in the human species,

and this discharge with ewes and she-goats is thicker than with rams and he-

goats; but the urine of the jackass is thicker than the urine of the she-ass, and

the  urine  of  the  bull  is  more  pungent  than  the  urine  of  the  cow.  After

parturition the urine of all quadrupeds becomes thicker, especially with such

animals as exhibit comparatively slight discharges. At breeding time the milk

become  purulent,  but  after  parturition  it  becomes  wholesome.  During

pregnancy ewes and she-goats get fatter and eat more; as is also the case with

cows, and, indeed, with the females of all quadrupeds.

In general the sexual appetites of animals are keenest in spring-time; the

time of pairing, however, is not the same for all, but is adapted so as to ensure

the rearing of the young at a convenient season.

  Domesticated swine carry their young for four months, and bring forth a

litter of twenty at the utmost; and, by the way, if the litter be exceedingly

numerous they cannot rear all the young. As the sow grows old she continues

to  bear,  but  grows  indifferent  to  the  boar;  she  conceives  after  a  single

copulation,  but  they  have  to  put  the  boar  to  her  repeatedly  owing  to  her

dropping after intercourse what is called the sow-virus. This incident befalls

all  sows,  but  some  of  them  discharge  the  genital  sperm  as  well.  During

conception  any  one  of  the  litter  that  gets  injured  or  dwarfed  is  called  an

afterpig  or  scut:  such  injury  may  occur  at  any  part  of  the  womb.  After

littering the mother offers the foremost teat to the first-born. When the sow is

in heat, she must not at once be put to the boar, but only after she lets her lugs

drop, for otherwise she is apt to get into heat again; if she be put to the boar

when in full condition of heat, one copulation, as has been said, is sufficient.

It is as well to supply the boar at the period of copulation with barley, and the

sow at the time of parturition with boiled barley. Some swine give fine litters

only at the beginning, with others the litters improve as the mothers grow inage and size. It is said that a sow, if she have one of her eyes knocked out, is

almost sure to die soon afterwards. Swine for the most part live for fifteen

years, but some fall little short of the twenty.

<

div id="section120" class="section" title="19">


19


  Ewes conceive after three or four copulations with the ram. If rain falls

after intercourse, the ram impregnates the ewe again; and it is the same with

the she-goat. The ewe bears usually two lambs, sometimes three or four. Both

ewe and she-goat carry their young for five months; consequently wherever a

district is sunny and the animals are used to comfort and well fed, they bear

twice in the year. The goat lives for eight years and the sheep for ten, but in

most cases not so long; the bell-wether, however, lives to fifteen years. In

every flock they train one of the rams for bell-wether. When he is called on

by name by the shepherd, he takes the lead of the flock: and to this duty the

creature is trained from its earliest years. Sheep in Ethiopia live for twelve or

thirteen years, goats for ten or eleven. In the case of the sheep and the goat

the two sexes have intercourse all their lives long.

  Twins with sheep and goats may be due to richness of pasturage, or to the

fact that either the ram or the he-goat is a twin-begetter or that the ewe or the

she-goat is a twin-bearer. Of these animals some give birth to males and

others to females; and the difference in this respect depends on the waters

they drink and also on the sires. And if they submit to the male when north

winds  are  blowing,  they  are  apt  to  bear  males;  if  when  south  winds  are

blowing, females. Such as bear females may get to bear males, due regard

being  paid  to  their  looking  northwards  when  put  to  the  male.  Ewes

accustomed to be put to the ram early will refuse him if he attempt to mount

them late. Lambs are born white and black according as white or black veins

are under the ram’s tongue; the lambs are white if the veins are white, and

black if the veins are black, and white and black if the veins are white and

black; and red if the veins are red. The females that drink salted waters are

the  first  to  take  the  male;  the  water  should  be  salted  before  and  after

parturition, and again in the springtime. With goats the shepherds appoint no

bell-wether,  as  the  animal  is  not  capable  of  repose  but  frisky  and  apt  to

ramble.  If  at  the  appointed  season  the  elders  of  the  flock  are  eager  forintercourse, the shepherds say that it bodes well for the flock; if the younger

ones, that the flock is going to be bad.

<

div id="section121" class="section" title="20">


20


Of dogs there are several breeds. Of these the Laconian hound of either sex

is fit for breeding purposes when eight months old: at about the same age

some dogs lift the leg when voiding urine. The bitch conceives with one

lining; this is clearly seen in the case where a dog contrives to line a bitch by

stealth, as they impregnate after mounting only once. The Laconian bitch

carries her young the sixth part of a year or sixty days: or more by one, two,

or three, or less by one; the pups are blind for twelve days after birth. After

pupping, the bitch gets in heat again in six months, but not before. Some

bitches carry their young for the fifth part of the year or for seventy-two days;

and their pups are blind for fourteen days. Other bitches carry their young for

a quarter of a year or for three whole months; and the whelps of these are

blind for seventeen days. The bitch appears go in heat for the same length of

time. Menstruation continues for seven days, and a swelling of the genital

organ  occurs  simultaneously;  it  is  not  during  this  period  that  the  bitch  is

disposed to submit to the dog, but in the seven days that follow. The bitch as

a rule goes in heat for fourteen days, but occasionally for sixteen. The birth-

discharge  occurs  simultaneously  with  the  delivery  of  the  whelps,  and  the

substance of it is thick and mucous. (The falling-off in bulk on the part of the

mother  is  not  so  great  as  might  have  been  inferred  from  the  size  of  her

frame.) The bitch is usually supplied with milk five days before parturition;

some  seven  days  previously,  some  four;  and  the  milk  is  serviceable

immediately after birth. The Laconian bitch is supplied with milk thirty days

after lining. The milk at first is thickish, but gets thinner by degrees; with the

bitch the milk is thicker than with the female of any other animal excepting

the sow and the hare. When the bitch arrives at full growth an indication is

given of her capacity for the male; that is to say, just as occurs in the female

of the human species, a swelling takes place in the teats of the breasts, and

the breasts take on gristle. This incident, however, it is difficult for any but an

expert to detect, as the part that gives the indication is inconsiderable. The

preceding statements relate to the female, and not one of them to the male.The male as a rule lifts his leg to void urine when six months old; some at a

later period, when eight months old, some before they reach six months. In a

general way one may put it that they do so when they are out of puppyhood.

The bitch squats down when she voids urine; it is a rare exception that she

lifts the leg to do so. The bitch bears twelve pups at the most, but usually five

or six; occasionally a bitch will bear one only. The bitch of the Laconian

breed generally bears eight. The two sexes have intercourse with each other

at all periods of life. A very remarkable phenomenon is observed in the case

of the Laconian hound: in other words, he is found to be more vigorous in

commerce with the female after being hard-worked than when allowed to live

idle.

The dog of the Laconian breed lives ten years, and the bitch twelve. The

bitch of other breeds usually lives for fourteen or fifteen years, but some live

to twenty; and for this reason certain critics consider that Homer did well in

representing the dog of Ulysses as having died in his twentieth year. With the

Laconian hound, owing to the hardships to which the male is put, he is less

long-lived than the female; with other breeds the distinction as to longevity is

not very apparent, though as a general rule the male is the longer-lived.

The dog sheds no teeth except the so-called ‘canines’; these a dog of either

sex sheds when four months old. As they shed these only, many people are in

doubt as to the fact, and some people, owing to their shedding but two and its

being hard to hit upon the time when they do so, fancy that the animal sheds

no  teeth  at  all;  others,  after  observing  the  shedding  of  two,  come  to  the

conclusion that the creature sheds the rest in due turn. Men discern the age of

a dog by inspection of its teeth; with young dogs the teeth are white and sharp

pointed, with old dogs black and blunted.

<

div id="section122" class="section" title="21">


21


The bull impregnates the cow at a single mount, and mounts with such

vigour as to weigh down the cow; if his effort be unsuccessful, the cow must

be allowed an interval of twenty days before being again submitted. Bulls of

mature age decline to mount the same cow several times on one day, except,

by the way, at considerable intervals. Young bulls by reason of their vigour

are enabled to mount the same cow several times in one day, and a goodmany cows besides. The bull is the least salacious of male animals… . The

victor among the bulls is the one that mounts the females; when he gets

exhausted by his amorous efforts, his beaten antagonist sets on him and very

often gets the better of the conflict. The bull and the cow are about a year old

when it is possible for them to have commerce with chance of offspring: as a

rule, however, they are about twenty months old, but it is universally allowed

that they are capable in this respect at the age of two years. The cow goes

with calf for nine months, and she calves in the tenth month; some maintain

that they go in calf for ten months, to the very day. A calf delivered before

the  times  here  specified  is  an  abortion  and  never  lives,  however  little

premature its birth may have been, as its hooves are weak and imperfect. The

cow as a rule bears but one calf, very seldom two; she submits to the bull and

bears as long as she lives.

  Cows live for about fifteen years, and the bulls too, if they have been

castrated;  but  some  live  for  twenty  years  or  even  more,  if  their  bodily

constitutions be sound. The herdsmen tame the castrated bulls, and give them

an office in the herd analogous to the office of the bell-wether in a flock; and

these bulls live to an exceptionally advanced age, owing to their exemption

from hardship and to their browsing on pasture of good quality. The bull is in

fullest vigour when five years old, which leads the critics to commend Homer

for applying to the bull the epithets of ‘five-year-old’, or ‘of nine seasons’,

which epithets are alike in meaning. The ox sheds his teeth at the age of two

years, not all together but just as the horse sheds his. When the animal suffers

from podagra it does not shed the hoof, but is subject to a painful swelling in

the  feet.  The  milk  of  the  cow  is  serviceable  after  parturition,  and  before

parturition there is no milk at all. The milk that first presents itself becomes

as  hard  as  stone  when  it  clots;  this  result  ensues  unless  it  be  previously

diluted with water. Oxen younger than a year old do not copulate unless

under circumstances of an unnatural and portentous kind: instances have been

recorded  of  copulation  in  both  sexes  at  the  age  of  four  months.  Kine  in

general begin to submit to the male about the month of Thargelion or of

Scirophorion;  some,  however,  are  capable  of  conception  right  on  to  the

autumn.  When  kine  in  large  numbers  receive  the  bull  and  conceive,  it  is

looked upon as prognostic of rain and stormy weather. Kine herd together

like mares, but in lesser degree.

<

div id="section123" class="section" title="22">22


In the case of horses, the stallion and the mare are first fitted for breeding

purposes when two years old. Instances, however, of such early maturity are

rare, and their young are exceptionally small and weak; the ordinary age for

sexual maturity is three years, and from that age to twenty the two sexes go

on improving in the quality of their offspring. The mare carries her foal for

eleven months, and casts it in the twelfth. It is not a fixed number of days that

the stallion takes to impregnate the mare; it may be one, two, three, or more.

An ass in covering will impregnate more expeditiously than a stallion. The

act of intercourse with horses is not laborious as it is with oxen. In both sexes

the horse is the most salacious of animals next after the human species. The

breeding  faculties  of  the  younger  horses  may  be  stimulated  beyond  their

years if they be supplied with good feeding in abundance. The mare as a rule

bears only one foal; occasionally she has two, but never more. A mare has

been known to cast two mules; but such a circumstance was regarded as

unnatural and portentous.

The horse then is first fitted for breeding purposes at the age of two and a

half years, but achieves full sexual maturity when it has ceased to shed teeth,

except it be naturally infertile; it must be added, however, that some horses

have been known to impregnate the mare while the teeth were in process of

shedding.

The horse has forty teeth. It sheds its first set of four, two from the upper

jaw and two from the lower, when two and a half years old. After a year’s

interval, it sheds another set of four in like manner, and another set of four

after yet another year’s interval; after arriving at the age of four years and six

months it sheds no more. An instance has occurred where a horse shed all his

teeth at once, and another instance of a horse shedding all his teeth with his

last set of four; but such instances are very rare. It consequently happens that

a horse when four and a half years old is in excellent condition for breeding

purposes.

The older horses, whether of the male or female, are the more generatively

productive. Horses will cover mares from which they have been foaled and

mares  which  they  have  begotten;  and,  indeed,  a  troop  of  horses  is  only

considered perfect when such promiscuity of intercourse occurs. Scythians

use pregnant mares for riding when the embryo has turned rather soon in the

womb, and they assert that thereby the mothers have all the easier delivery.Quadrupeds as a rule lie down for parturition, and in consequence the young

of them all come out of the womb sideways. The mare, however, when the

time for parturition arrives, stands erect and in that posture casts its foal.

The horse in general lives for eighteen or twenty years; some horses live

for twenty-five or even thirty, and if a horse be treated with extreme care, it

may last on to the age of fifty years; a horse, however, when it reaches thirty

years is regarded as exceptionally old. The mare lives usually for twenty-five

years, though instances have occurred of their attaining the age of forty. The

male is less long-lived than the female by reason of the sexual service he is

called on to render; and horses that are reared in a private stable live longer

than such as are reared in troops. The mare attains her full length and height

at five years old, the stallion at six; in another six years the animal reaches its

full bulk, and goes on improving until it is twenty years old. The female,

then, reaches maturity more rapidly than the male, but in the womb the case

is reversed, just as is observed in regard to the sexes of the human species;

and the same phenomenon is observed in the case of all animals that bear

several young.

The mare is said to suckle a mule-foal for six months, but not to allow its

approach for any longer on account of the pain it is put to by the hard tugging

of the young; an ordinary foal it allows to suck for a longer period.

  Horse and mule are at their best after the shedding of the teeth. After they

have shed them all, it is not easy to distinguish their age; hence they are said

to carry their mark before the shedding, but not after. However, even after the

shedding their age is pretty well recognized by the aid of the canines; for in

the case of horses much ridden these teeth are worn away by attrition caused

by the insertion of the bit; in the case of horses not ridden the teeth are large

and detached, and in young horses they are sharp and small.

The male of the horse will breed at all seasons and during its whole life;

the mare can take the horse all its life long, but is not thus ready to pair at all

seasons unless it be held in check by a halter or some other compulsion be

brought to bear. There is no fixed time at which intercourse of the two sexes

cannot take place; and accordingly intercourse may chance to take place at a

time that may render difficult the rearing of the future progeny. In a stable in

Opus there was a stallion that used to serve mares when forty years old: his

fore legs had to be lifted up for the operation.

Mares first take the horse in the spring-time. After a mare has foaled she

does not get impregnated at once again, but only after a considerable interval;in fact, the foals will be all the better if the interval extend over four or five

years. It is, at all events, absolutely necessary to allow an interval of one year,

and for that period to let her lie fallow. A mare, then, breeds at intervals; a

she-ass breeds on and on without intermission. Of mares some are absolutely

sterile, others are capable of conception but incapable of bringing the foal to

full term; it is said to be an indication of this condition in a mare, that her foal

if dissected is found to have other kidney-shaped substances round about its

kidneys, presenting the appearance of having four kidneys.

  After parturition the mare at once swallows the after-birth, and bites off the

growth, called the ‘hippomanes’, that is found on the forehead of the foal.

This growth is somewhat smaller than a dried fig; and in shape is broad and

round, and in colour black. If any bystander gets possession of it before the

mare, and the mare gets a smell of it, she goes wild and frantic at the smell.

And it is for this reason that venders of drugs and simples hold the substance

in high request and include it among their stores.

If an ass cover a mare after the mare has been covered by a horse, the ass

will destroy the previously formed embryo.

  (Horse-trainers do not appoint a horse as leader to a troop, as herdsmen

appoint a bull as leader to a herd, and for this reason that the horse is not

steady but quick-tempered and skittish.)

<

div id="section124" class="section" title="23">


23


The ass of both sexes is capable of breeding, and sheds its first teeth at the

age of two and a half years; it sheds its second teeth within six months, its

third within another six months, and the fourth after the like interval. These

fourth teeth are termed the gnomons or age-indicators.

A she-ass has been known to conceive when a year old, and the foal to be

reared. After intercourse with the male it will discharge the genital sperm

unless  it  be  hindered,  and  for  this  reason  it  is  usually  beaten  after  such

intercourse  and  chased  about.  It  casts  its  young  in  the  twelfth  month.  It

usually  bears  but  one  foal,  and  that  is  its  natural  number,  occasionally

however it bears twins. The ass if it cover a mare destroys, as has been said,

the embryo previously begotten by the horse; but, after the mare has been

covered by the ass, the horse supervening will not spoil the embryo. The she-ass has milk in the tenth month of pregnancy. Seven days after casting a foal

the she-ass submits to the male, and is almost sure to conceive if put to the

male on this particular day; the same result, however, is quite possible later

on. The she-ass will refuse to cast her foal with any one looking on or in the

daylight and just before foaling she has to be led away into a dark place. If

the she-ass has had young before the shedding of the index-teeth, she will

bear all her life through; but if not, then she will neither conceive nor bear for

the rest of her days. The ass lives for more than thirty years, and the she-ass

lives longer than the male.

  When there is a cross between a horse and a she-ass or a jackass and a

mare, there is much greater chance of a miscarriage than where the commerce

is normal. The period for gestation in the case of a cross depends on the male,

and is just what it would have been if the male had had commerce with a

female of his own kind. In regard to size, looks, and vigour, the foal is more

apt  to  resemble  the  mother  than  the  sire.  If  such  hybrid  connexions  be

continued without intermittence, the female will soon go sterile; and for this

reason trainers always allow of intervals between breeding times. A mare will

not take the ass, nor a she ass the horse, unless the ass or she-ass shall have

been suckled by a mare; and for this reason trainers put foals of the she-ass

under mares, which foals are technically spoken of as ‘mare-suckled’. These

asses, thus reared, mount the mares in the open pastures, mastering them by

force as the stallions do.

<

div id="section125" class="section" title="24">


24


A mule is fitted for commerce with the female after the first shedding of its

teeth,  and  at  the  age  of  seven  will  impregnate  effectually;  and  where

connexion  has  taken  place  with  a  mare,  a  ‘hinny’  has  been  known  to  be

produced. After the seventh year it has no further intercourse with the female.

A  female  mule  has  been  known  to  be  impregnated,  but  without  the

impregnation being followed up by parturition. In Syrophoenicia she-mules

submit to the mule and bear young; but the breed, though it resembles the

ordinary one, is different and specific. The hinny or stunted mule is foaled by

a mare when she has gone sick during gestation, and corresponds to the dwarf

in the human species and to the after-pig or scut in swine; and as is the casewith dwarfs, the sexual organ of the hinny is abnormally large.

The mule lives for a number of years. There are on record cases of mules

living to the age of eighty, as did one in Athens at the time of the building of

the temple; this mule on account of its age was let go free, but continued to

assist in dragging burdens, and would go side by side with the other draught-

beasts and stimulate them to their work; and in consequence a public decree

was passed forbidding any baker driving the creature away from his bread-

tray. The she-mule grows old more slowly than the mule. Some assert that the

she-mule menstruates by the act of voiding her urine, and that the mule owes

the prematurity of his decay to his habit of smelling at the urine. So much for

the modes of generation in connexion with these animals.

<

div id="section126" class="section" title="25">


25


  Breeders and trainers can distinguish between young and old quadrupeds.

If, when drawn back from the jaw, the skin at once goes back to its place, the

animal is young; if it remains long wrinkled up, the animal is old.

<

div id="section127" class="section" title="26">


26


The camel carries its young for ten months, and bears but one at a time and

never more; the young camel is removed from the mother when a year old.

The animal lives for a long period, more than fifty years. It bears in spring-

time, and gives milk until the time of the next conception. Its flesh and milk

are  exceptionally  palatable.  The  milk  is  drunk  mixed  with  water  in  the

proportion of either two to one or three to one.

<

div id="section128" class="section" title="27">


27


The elephant of either sex is fitted for breeding before reaching the age oftwenty. The female carries her young, according to some accounts, for two

and a half years; according to others, for three years; and the discrepancy in

the  assigned  periods  is  due  to  the  fact  that  there  are  never  human

eyewitnesses to the commerce between the sexes. The female settles down on

its rear to cast its young, and obviously suffers greatly during the process.

The young one, immediately after birth, sucks the mother, not with its trunk

but with the mouth; and can walk about and see distinctly the moment it is

born.

<

div id="section129" class="section" title="28">


28


The wild sow submits to the boar at the beginning of winter, and in the

spring-time retreats for parturition to a lair in some district inaccessible to

intrusion,  hemmed  in  with  sheer  cliffs  and  chasms  and  overshadowed  by

trees. The boar usually remains by the sow for thirty days. The number of the

litter and the period gestation is the same as in the case of the domesticated

congener. The sound of the grunt also is similar; only that the sow grunts

continually, and the boar but seldom. Of the wild boars such as are castrated

grow to the largest size and become fiercest: to which circumstance Homer

alludes when he says:—

‘He  reared  against  him  a  wild  castrated  boar:  it  was  not  like  a  food-

devouring brute, but like a forest-clad promontory.’

  Wild boars become castrated owing to an itch befalling them in early life

in  the  region  of  the  testicles,  and  the  castration  is  superinduced  by  their

rubbing themselves against the trunks of trees.

<

div id="section130" class="section" title="29">


29


The  hind,  as  has  been  stated,  submits  to  the  stag  as  a  rule  only  under

compulsion, as she is unable to endure the male often owing to the rigidity of

the  penis.  However,  they  do  occasionally  submit  to  the  stag  as  the  ewe

submits ram; and when they are in heat the hinds avoid one another. The stagis not constant to one particular hind, but after a while quits one and mates

with  others.  The  breeding  time  is  after  the  rising  of  Arcturus,  during  the

months of Boedromion and Maimacterion. The period of gestation lasts for

eight  months.  Conception  comes  on  a  few  days  after  intercourse;  and  a

number of hinds can be impregnated by a single male. The hind, as a rule,

bears but one fawn, although instances have been known of her casting two.

Out of dread of wild beasts she casts her young by the side of the high-road.

The young fawn grows with rapidity. Menstruation occurs at no other time

with  the  hind;  it  takes  place  only  after  parturition,  and  the  substance  is

phlegm-like.

The hind leads the fawn to her lair; this is her place of refuge, a cave with a

single inlet, inside which she shelters herself against attack.

  Fabulous stories are told concerning the longevity of the animal, but the

stories have never been verified, and the brevity of the period of gestation

and the rapidity of growth in the fawn would not lead one to attribute extreme

longevity to this creature.

In the mountain called Elaphoeis or Deer Mountain, which is in Arginussa

in Asia Minor-the place, by the way, where Alcibiades was assassinated-all

the hinds have the ear split, so that, if they stray to a distance, they can be

recognized by this mark; and the embryo actually has the mark while yet in

the womb of the mother.

The  hind  has  four  teats  like  the  cow.  After  the  hinds  have  become

pregnant,  the  males  all  segregate  one  by  one,  and  in  consequence  of  the

violence of their sexual passions they keep each one to himself, dig a hole in

the  ground,  and  bellow  from  time  to  time;  in  all  these  particulars  they

resemble the goat, and their foreheads from getting wetted become black, as

is also the case with the goat. In this way they pass the time until the rain

falls, after which time they turn to pasture. The animal acts in this way owing

to  its  sexual  wantonness  and  also  to  its  obesity;  for  in  summer-time  it

becomes so exceptionally fat as to be unable to run: in fact at this period they

can be overtaken by the hunters that pursue them on foot in the second or

third run; and, by the way, in consequence of the heat of the weather and their

getting out of breath they always make for water in their runs. In the rutting

season, the flesh of the deer is unsavoury and rank, like the flesh of the he-

goat.  In  winter-time  the  deer  becomes  thin  and  weak,  but  towards  the

approach of the spring he is at his best for running. When on the run the deer

keeps pausing from time to time, and waits until his pursuer draws upon him,whereupon he starts off again. This habit appears due to some internal pain:

at all events, the gut is so slender and weak that, if you strike the animal ever

so softly, it is apt to break asunder, though the hide of the animal remains

sound and uninjured.

<

div id="section131" class="section" title="30">


30


  Bears,  as  has  been  previously  stated,  do  not  copulate  with  the  male

mounting the back of the female, but with the female lying down under the

male.  The  she-bear  goes  with  young  for  thirty  days.  She  brings  forth

sometimes one cub, sometimes two cubs, and at most five. Of all animals the

newly born cub of the she bear is the smallest in proportion to the size of the

mother; that is to say, it is larger than a mouse but smaller than a weasel. It is

also  smooth  and  blind,  and  its  legs  and  most  of  its  organs  are  as  yet

inarticulate. Pairing takes Place in the month of Elaphebolion, and parturition

about the time for retiring into winter quarters; about this time the bear and

the she-bear are at the fattest. After the she-bear has reared her young, she

comes out of her winter lair in the third month, when it is already spring. The

female  porcupine,  by  the  way,  hibernates  and  goes  with  young  the  same

number of days as the she-bear, and in all respects as to parturition resembles

this animal. When a she-bear is with young, it is a very hard task to catch her.

<

div id="section132" class="section" title="31">


31


It has already been stated that the lion and lioness copulate rearwards, and

that these animals are opisthuretic. They do not copulate nor bring forth at all

seasons indiscriminately, but once in the year only. The lioness brings forth

in the spring, generally two cubs at a time, and six at the very most; but

sometimes only one. The story about the lioness discharging her womb in the

act of parturition is a pure fable, and was merely invented to account for the

scarcity of the animal; for the animal is, as is well known, a rare animal, and

is not found in many countries. In fact, in the whole of Europe it is onlyfound in the strip between the rivers Achelous and Nessus. The cubs of the

lioness when newly born are exceedingly small, and can scarcely walk when

two months old. The Syrian lion bears cubs five times: five cubs at the first

litter, then four, then three, then two, and lastly one; after this the lioness

ceases to bear for the rest of her days. The lioness has no mane, but this

appendage  is  peculiar  to  the  lion.  The  lion  sheds  only  the  four  so-called

canines, two in the upper jaw and two in the lower; and it sheds them when it

is six months old.

<

div id="section133" class="section" title="32">


32


The  hyena  in  colour  resembles  the  wolf,  but  is  more  shaggy,  and  is

furnished  with  a  mane  running  all  along  the  spine.  What  is  recounted

concerning its genital organs, to the effect that every hyena is furnished with

the organ both of the male and the female, is untrue. The fact is that the

sexual organ of the male hyena resembles the same organ in the wolf and in

the dog; the part resembling the female genital organ lies underneath the tail,

and does to some extent resemble the female organ, but it is unprovided with

duct or passage, and the passage for the residuum comes underneath it. The

female hyena has the part that resembles the organ of the male, and, as in the

case of the male, has it underneath her tail, unprovided with duct or passage;

and after it the passage for the residuum, and underneath this the true female

genital organ. The female hyena has a womb, like all other female animals of

the same kind. It is an exceedingly rare circumstance to meet with a female

hyena. At least a hunter said that out of eleven hyenas he had caught, only

one was a female.

<

div id="section134" class="section" title="33">


33


  Hares copulate in a rearward posture, as has been stated, for the animal is

opisthuretic.  They  breed  and  bear  at  all  seasons,  superfoetate  during

pregnancy,  and  bear  young  every  month.  They  do  not  give  birth  to  theiryoung ones all together at one time, but bring them forth at intervals over as

many days as the circumstances of each case may require. The female is

supplied with milk before parturition; and after bearing submits immediately

to the male, and is capable of conception while suckling her young. The milk

in consistency resembles sow’s milk. The young are born blind, as is the case

with the greater part Of the fissipeds or toed animals.

<

div id="section135" class="section" title="34">


34


The fox mounts the vixen in copulation, and the vixen bears young like the

she-bear; in fact, her young ones are even more inarticulately formed. Before

parturition she retires to sequestered places, so that it is a great rarity for a

vixen to be caught while pregnant. After parturition she warms her young and

gets them into shape by licking them. She bears four at most at a birth.

<

div id="section136" class="section" title="35">


35


The  wolf  resembles  the  dog  in  regard  to  the  time  of  conception  and

parturition, the number of the litter, and the blindness of the newborn young.

The sexes couple at one special period, and the female brings forth at the

beginning of the summer. There is an account given of the parturition of the

she-wolf  that  borders  on  the  fabulous,  to  the  effect  that  she  confines  her

lying-in to within twelve particular days of the year. And they give the reason

for this in the form of a myth, viz. that when they transported Leto in so

many days from the land of the Hyperboreans to the island of Delos, she

assumed the form of a she-wolf to escape the anger of Here. Whether the

account be correct or not has not yet been verified; I give it merely as it is

currently told. There is no more of truth in the current statement that the she-

wolf bears once and only once in her lifetime.

The cat and the ichneumon bear as many young as the dog, and live on the

same food; they live about six years. The cubs of the panther are born blind

like those of the wolf, and the female bears four at the most at one birth. Theparticulars of conception are the same for the thos, or civet, as for the dog;

the cubs of the animal are born blind, and the female bears two, or three, or

four at a birth. It is long in the body and low in stature; but not withstanding

the  shortness  of  its  legs  it  is  exceptionally  fleet  of  foot,  owing  to  the

suppleness of its frame and its capacity for leaping.

<

div id="section137" class="section" title="36">


36


  There is found in Syria a so-called mule. It is not the same as the cross

between the horse and ass, but resembles it just as a wild ass resembles the

domesticated congener, and derives its name from the resemblance. Like the

wild  ass,  this  wild  mule  is  remarkable  for  its  speed.  The  animals  of  this

species interbreed with one another; and a proof of this statement may be

gathered  from  the  fact  that  a  certain  number  of  them  were  brought  into

Phrygia in the time of Pharnaces, the father of Pharnabazus, and the animal is

there still. The number originally introduced was nine, and there are three

there at the present day.

<

div id="section138" class="section" title="37">


37


The  phenomena  of  generation  in  regard  to  the  mouse  are  the  most

astonishing  both  for  the  number  of  the  young  and  for  the  rapidity  of

recurrence in the births. On one occasion a she-mouse in a state of pregnancy

was shut up by accident in a jar containing millet-seed, and after a little while

the lid of the jar was removed and upwards of one hundred and twenty mice

were found inside it.

The rate of propagation of field mice in country places, and the destruction

that they cause, are beyond all telling. In many places their number is so

incalculable that but very little of the corn-crop is left to the farmer; and so

rapid is their mode of proceeding that sometimes a small farmer will one day

observe that it is time for reaping, and on the following morning, when he

takes  his  reapers  afield,  he  finds  his  entire  crop  devoured.  Theirdisappearance is unaccountable: in a few days not a mouse will there be to be

seen. And yet in the time before these few days men fail to keep down their

numbers by fumigating and unearthing them, or by regularly hunting them

and turning in swine upon them; for pigs, by the way, turn up the mouse-

holes by rooting with their snouts. Foxes also hunt them, and the wild ferrets

in particular destroy them, but they make no way against the prolific qualities

of the animal and the rapidity of its breeding. When they are super-abundant,

nothing succeeds in thinning them down except the rain; but after heavy rains

they disappear rapidly.

In a certain district of Persia when a female mouse is dissected the female

embryos appear to be pregnant. Some people assert, and positively assert,

that  a  female  mouse  by  licking  salt  can  become  pregnant  without  the

intervention of the male.

  Mice in Egypt are covered with bristles like the hedgehog. There is also a

different breed of mice that walk on their two hind-legs; their front legs are

small and their hind-legs long; the breed is exceedingly numerous. There are

many other breeds of mice than are here referred to.                    The History of Animals, Book VII


translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson


<

div id="book7" class="chapter" title="Book VII">


1


As to Man’s growth, first within his mother’s womb and afterward to old

age, the course of nature, in so far as man is specially concerned, is after the

following manner. And, by the way, the difference of male and female and of

their respective organs has been dealt with heretofore. When twice seven

years old, in the most of cases, the male begins to engender seed; and at the

same  time  hair  appears  upon  the  pubes,  in  like  manner,  so  Alcmaeon  of

Croton remarks, as plants first blossom and then seed. About the same time,

the voice begins to alter, getting harsher and more uneven, neither shrill as

formerly  nor  deep  as  afterward,  nor  yet  of  any  even  tone,  but  like  an

instrument whose strings are frayed and out of tune; and it is called, by way

of by-word, the bleat of the billy-goat. Now this breaking of the voice is the

more apparent in those who are making trial of their sexual powers; for in

those who are prone to lustfulness the voice turns into the voice of a man, but

not so in the continent. For if a lad strive diligently to hinder his voice from

breaking, as some do of those who devote themselves to music, the voice

lasts a long while unbroken and may even persist with little change. And the

breasts swell and likewise the private parts, altering in size and shape. (And

by the way, at this time of life those who try by friction to provoke emission

of seed are apt to experience pain as well as voluptuous sensations.) At the

same  age  in  the  female,  the  breasts  swell  and  the  so-called  catamenia

commence to flow; and this fluid resembles fresh blood. There is another

discharge, a white one, by the way, which occurs in girls even at a very early

age, more especially if their diet be largely of a fluid nature; and this malady

causes  arrest  of  growth  and  loss  of  flesh.  In  the  majority  of  cases  the

catamenia are noticed by the time the breasts have grown to the height of two

fingers’ breadth. In girls, too, about this time the voice changes to a deepernote; for while in general the woman’s voice is higher than the man’s, so also

the voices of girls are pitched in a higher key than the elder women’s, just as

the boy’s are higher than the men’s; and the girls’ voices are shriller than the

boys’, and a maid’s flute is tuned sharper than a lad’s.

  Girls of this age have much need of surveillance. For then in particular

they feel a natural impulse to make usage of the sexual faculties that are

developing in them; so that unless they guard against any further impulse

beyond that inevitable one which their bodily development of itself supplies,

even in the case of those who abstain altogether from passionate indulgence,

they contract habits which are apt to continue into later life. For girls who

give way to wantonness grow more and more wanton; and the same is true of

boys, unless they be safeguarded from one temptation and another; for the

passages become dilated and set up a local flux or running, and besides this

the  recollection  of  pleasure  associated  with  former  indulgence  creates  a

longing for its repetition.

  Some men are congenitally impotent owing to structural defect; and in like

manner women also may suffer from congenital incapacity. Both men and

women are liable to constitutional change, growing healthier or more sickly,

or altering in the way of leanness, stoutness, and vigour; thus, after puberty

some lads who were thin before grow stout and healthy, and the converse

also happens; and the same is equally true of girls. For when in boy or girl the

body is loaded with superfluous matter, then, when such superfluities are got

rid of in the spermatic or catamenial discharge, their bodies improve in health

and condition owing to the removal of what had acted as an impediment to

health and proper nutrition; but in such as are of opposite habit their bodies

become emaciated and out of health, for then the spermatic discharge in the

one case and the catamenial flow in the other take place at the cost of natural

healthy conditions.

  Furthermore, in the case of maidens the condition of the breasts is diverse

in different individuals, for they are sometimes quite big and sometimes little;

and as a general rule their size depends on whether or not the body was

burthened  in  childhood  with  superfluous  material.  For  when  the  signs  of

womanhood are nigh but not come, the more there be of moisture the more

will it cause the breasts to swell, even to the bursting point; and the result is

that the breasts remain during after-life of the bulk that they then acquired.

And among men, the breasts grow more conspicuous and more like to those

of women, both in young men and old, when the individual temperament ismoist and sleek and the reverse of sinewy, and all the more among the dark-

complexioned than the fair.

At the outset and till the age of one and twenty the spermatic discharge is

devoid of fecundity; afterwards it becomes fertile, but young men and women

produce  undersized  and  imperfect  progeny,  as  is  the  case  also  with  the

common  run  of  animals.  Young  women  conceive  readily,  but,  having

conceived, their labour in childbed is apt to be difficult.

The frame fails of reaching its full development and ages quickly in men of

intemperate lusts and in women who become mothers of many children; for it

appears to be the case that growth ceases when the woman has given birth to

three  children.  Women  of  a  lascivious  disposition  grow  more  sedate  and

virtuous after they have borne several children.

  After the age of twenty-one women are fully ripe for child-bearing, but

men  go  on  increasing  in  vigour.  When  the  spermatic  fluid  is  of  a  thin

consistency it is infertile; when granular it is fertile and likely to produce

male  children,  but  when  thin  and  unclotted  it  is  apt  to  produce  female

offspring. And it is about this time of life that in men the beard makes its

appearance.

<

div id="section140" class="section" title="2">


2


The onset of the catamenia in women takes place towards the end of the

month; and on this account the wiseacres assert that the moon is feminine,

because the discharge in women and the waning of the moon happen at one

and the same time, and after the wane and the discharge both one and the

other grow whole again. (In some women the catamenia occur regularly but

sparsely every month, and more abundantly every third month.) With those in

whom the ailment lasts but a little while, two days or three, recovery is easy;

but  where  the  duration  is  longer,  the  ailment  is  more  troublesome.  For

women are ailing during these days; and sometimes the discharge is sudden

and sometimes gradual, but in all cases alike there is bodily distress until the

attack be over. In many cases at the commencement of the attack, when the

discharge is about to appear, there occur spasms and rumbling noises within

the womb until such time as the discharge manifests itself.

Under  natural  conditions  it  is  after  recovery  from  these  symptoms  thatconception  takes  place  in  women,  and  women  in  whom  the  signs  do  not

manifest themselves for the most part remain childless. But the rule is not

without  exception,  for  some  conceive  in  spite  of  the  absence  of  these

symptoms; and these are cases in which a secretion accumulates, not in such

a way as actually to issue forth, but in amount equal to the residuum left in

the case of child-bearing women after the normal discharge has taken place.

And some conceive while the signs are on but not afterwards, those namely

in whom the womb closes up immediately after the discharge. In some cases

the menses persist during pregnancy up to the very last; but the result in these

cases is that the offspring are poor, and either fail to survive or grow up

weakly.

In  many  cases,  owing  to  excessive  desire,  arising  either  from  youthful

impetuosity or from lengthened abstinence, prolapsion of the womb takes

place  and  the  catamenia  appear  repeatedly,  thrice  in  the  month,  until

conception occurs; and then the womb withdraws upwards again to its proper

place…

As we have remarked above, the discharge is wont to be more abundant in

women than in the females of any other animals. In creatures that do not

bring  forth  their  young  alive  nothing  of  the  sort  manifests  itself,  this

particular superfluity being converted into bodily substance; and by the way,

in  such  animals  the  females  are  sometimes  larger  than  the  males;  and

moreover, the material is used up sometimes for scutes and sometimes for

scales, and sometimes for the abundant covering of feathers, whereas in the

vivipara possessed of limbs it is turned into hair and into bodily substance

(for  man  alone  among  them  is  smooth-skinned),  and  into  urine,  for  this

excretion is in the majority of such animals thick and copious. Only in the

case of women is the superfluity turned into a discharge instead of being

utilized in these other ways.

  There is something similar to be remarked of men: for in proportion to his

size man emits more seminal fluid than any other animal (for which reason

man is the smoothest of animals), especially such men as are of a moist habit

and not over corpulent, and fair men in greater degree than dark. It is likewise

with women; for in the stout, great part of the excretion goes to nourish the

body. In the act of intercourse, women of a fair complexion discharge a more

plentiful secretion than the dark; and furthermore, a watery and pungent diet

conduces to this phenomenon.

<div id="section141" class="section" title="3">


3


It is a sign of conception in women when the place is dry immediately after

intercourse. If the lips of the orifice be smooth conception is difficult, for the

matter slips off; and if they be thick it is also difficult. But if on digital

examination  the  lips  feel  somewhat  rough  and  adherent,  and  if  they  be

likewise thin, then the chances are in favour of conception. Accordingly, if

conception be desired, we must bring the parts into such a condition as we

have just described; but if on the contrary we want to avoid conception then

we must bring about a contrary disposition. Wherefore, since if the parts be

smooth conception is prevented, some anoint that part of the womb on which

the seed falls with oil of cedar, or with ointment of lead or with frankincense,

commingled with olive oil. If the seed remain within for seven days then it is

certain that conception has taken place; for it is during that period that what is

known as effluxion takes place.

In  most  cases  the  menstrual  discharge  recurs  for  some  time  after

conception has taken place, its duration being mostly thirty days in the case

of a female and about forty days in the case of a male child. After parturition

also it is common for the discharge to be withheld for an equal number of

days, but not in all cases with equal exactitude. After conception, and when

the above-mentioned days are past, the discharge no longer takes its natural

course but finds its way to the breasts and turns to milk. The first appearance

of  milk  in  the  breasts  is  scant  in  quantity  and  so  to  speak  cobwebby  or

interspersed with little threads. And when conception has taken place, there is

apt to be a sort of feeling in the region of the flanks, which in some cases

quickly swell up a little, especially in thin persons, and also in the groin.

In the case of male children the first movement usually occurs on the right-

hand side of the womb and about the fortieth day, but if the child be a female

then on the left-hand side and about the ninetieth day. However, we must by

no means assume this to be an accurate statement of fact, for there are many

exceptions,  in  which  the  movement  is  manifested  on  the  right-hand  side

though a female child be coming, and on the left-hand side though the infant

be a male. And in short, these and all suchlike phenomena are usually subject

to differences that may be summed up as differences of degree.

  About this period the embryo begins to resolve into distinct parts, it havinghitherto consisted of a fleshlike substance without distinction of parts.

  What is called effluxion is a destruction of the embryo within the first

week, while abortion occurs up to the fortieth day; and the greater number of

such embryos as perish do so within the space of these forty days.

In the case of a male embryo aborted at the fortieth day, if it be placed in

cold water it holds together in a sort of membrane, but if it be placed in any

other fluid it dissolves and disappears. If the membrane be pulled to bits the

embryo is revealed, as big as one of the large kind of ants; and all the limbs

are plain to see, including the penis, and the eyes also, which as in other

animals are of great size. But the female embryo, if it suffer abortion during

the first three months, is as a rule found to be undifferentiated; if however it

reach the fourth month it comes to be subdivided and quickly attains further

differentiation.  In  short,  while  within  the  womb,  the  female  infant

accomplishes the whole development of its parts more slowly than the male,

and  more  frequently  than  the  man-child  takes  ten  months  to  come  to

perfection.  But  after  birth,  the  females  pass  more  quickly  than  the  males

through youth and maturity and age; and this is especially true of those that

bear many children, as indeed I have already said.

<

div id="section142" class="section" title="4">


4


  When the womb has conceived the seed, straightway in the majority of

cases it closes up until seven months are fulfilled; but in the eighth month it

opens, and the embryo, if it be fertile, descends in the eighth month. But such

embryos as are not fertile but are devoid of breath at eight months old, their

mothers do not bring into the world by parturition at eight months, neither

does the embryo descend within the womb at that period nor does the womb

open. And it is a sign that the embryo is not capable of life if it be formed

without the above-named circumstances taking place.

  After conception women are prone to a feeling of heaviness in all parts of

their bodies, and for instance they experience a sensation of darkness in front

of the eyes and suffer also from headache. These symptoms appear sooner or

later, sometimes as early as the tenth day, according as the patient be more or

less burthened with superfluous humours. Nausea also and sickness affect the

most  of  women,  and  especially  such  as  those  that  we  have  just  nowmentioned,  after  the  menstrual  discharge  has  ceased  and  before  it  is  yet

turned in the direction of the breasts.

  Moreover, some women suffer most at the beginning of their pregnancy

and some at a later period when the embryo has had time to grow; and in

some women it is a common occurrence to suffer from strangury towards the

end of their time. As a general rule women who are pregnant of a male child

escape comparatively easily and retain a comparatively healthy look, but it is

otherwise with those whose infant is a female; for these latter look as a rule

paler and suffer more pain, and in many cases they are subject to swellings of

the  legs  and  eruptions  on  the  body.  Nevertheless  the  rule  is  subject  to

exceptions.

  Women  in  pregnancy  are  a  prey  to  all  sorts  of  longings  and  to  rapid

changes of mood, and some folks call this the ‘ivy-sickness’; and with the

mothers  of  female  infants  the  longings  are  more  acute,  and  they  are  less

contented when they have got what they desired.

In a certain few cases the patient feels unusually well during pregnancy.

The worst time of all is just when the child’s hair is beginning to grow.

In pregnant women their own natural hair is inclined to grow thin and fall

out, but on the other hand hair tends to grow on parts of the body where it

was  not  wont  to  be.  As  a  general  rule,  a  man-child  is  more  prone  to

movement within its mother’s womb than a female child, and it is usually

born sooner. And labour in the case of female children is apt to be protracted

and sluggish, while in the case of male children it is acute and by a long way

more  difficult.  Women  who  have  connexion  with  their  husbands  shortly

before  childbirth  are  delivered  all  the  more  quickly.  Occasionally  women

seem to be in the pains of labour though labour has not in fact commenced,

what seemed like the commencement of labour being really the result of the

foetus turning its head.

Now all other animals bring the time of pregnancy to an end in a uniform

way; in other words, one single term of pregnancy is defined for each of

them. But in the case of mankind alone of all animals the times are diverse;

for pregnancy may be of seven months’ duration, or of eight months or of

nine, and still more commonly of ten months, while some few women go

even into the eleventh month.

  Children  that  come  into  the  world  before  seven  months  can  under  no

circumstances survive. The seven-months’ children are the earliest that are

capable of life, and most of them are weakly-for which reason, by the way, itis customary to swaddle them in wool,-and many of them are born with some

of the orifices of the body imperforate, for instance the ears or the nostrils.

But as they get bigger they become more perfectly developed, and many of

them grow up.

In Egypt, and in some other places where the women are fruitful and are

wont to bear and bring forth many children without difficulty, and where the

children when born are capable of living even if they be born subject to

deformity, in these places the eight-months’ children live and are brought up,

but in Greece it is only a few of them that survive while most perish. And this

being the general experience, when such a child does happen to survive the

mother is apt to think that it was not an eight months’ child after all, but that

she had conceived at an earlier period without being aware of it.

  Women suffer most pain about the fourth and the eighth months, and if the

foetus perishes in the fourth or in the eighth month the mother also succumbs

as a general rule; so that not only do the eight-months’ children not live, but

when they die their mothers are in great danger of their own lives. In like

manner children that are apparently born at a later term than eleven months

are held to be in doubtful case; inasmuch as with them also the beginning of

conception may have escaped the notice of the mother. What I mean to say is

that often the womb gets filled with wind, and then when at a later period

connexion and conception take place, they think that the former circumstance

was the beginning of conception from the similarity of the symptoms that

they experienced.

  Such then are the differences between mankind and other animals in regard

to  the  many  various  modes  of  completion  of  the  term  of  pregnancy.

Furthermore, some animals produce one and some produce many at a birth,

but the human species does sometimes the one and sometimes the other. As a

general rule and among most nations the women bear one child a birth; but

frequently  and  in  many  lands  they  bear  twins,  as  for  instance  in  Egypt

especially. Sometimes women bring forth three and even four children, and

especially in certain parts of the world, as has already been stated. The largest

number ever brought forth is five, and such an occurrence has been witnessed

on several occasions. There was once upon a time a certain women who had

twenty children at four births; each time she had five, and most of them grew

up.

Now among other animals, if a pair of twins happen to be male and female

they have as good a chance of surviving as though both had been males orboth females; but among mankind very few twins survive if one happen to be

a boy and the other a girl.

Of all animals the woman and the mare are most inclined to receive the

commerce of the male during pregnancy; while all other animals when they

are  pregnant  avoid  the  male,  save  those  in  which  the  phenomenon  of

superfoetation occurs, such as the hare. Unlike that animal, the mare after

once conceiving cannot be rendered pregnant again, but brings forth one foal

only, at least as a general rule; in the human species cases of superfoetation

are rare, but they do happen now and then.

An embryo conceived some considerable time after a previous conception

does not come to perfection, but gives rise to pain and causes the destruction

of the earlier embryo; and, by the way, a case has been known to occur where

owing to this destructive influence no less than twelve embryos conceived by

superfoetation have been discharged. But if the second conception take place

at a short interval, then the mother bears that which was later conceived, and

brings forth the two children like actual twins, as happened, according to the

legend, in the case of Iphicles and Hercules. The following also is a striking

example: a certain woman, having committed adultery, brought forth the one

child resembling her husband and the other resembling the adulterous lover.

The case has also occurred where a woman, being pregnant of twins, has

subsequently conceived a third child; and in course of time she brought forth

the twins perfect and at full term, but the third a five-months’ child; and this

last died there and then. And in another case it happened that the woman was

first delivered of a seven-months’ child, and then of two which were of full

term; and of these the first died and the other two survived.

  Some also have been known to conceive while about to miscarry, and they

have lost the one child and been delivered of the other.

If women while going with child cohabit after the eighth month the child is

in most cases born covered over with a slimy fluid. Often also the child is

found to be replete with food of which the mother had partaken.

<

div id="section143" class="section" title="5">


5


  When women have partaken of salt in overabundance their children are apt

to be born destitute of nails.Milk that is produced earlier than the seventh month is unfit for use; but as

soon as the child is fit to live the milk is fit to use. The first of the milk is

saltish, as it is likewise with sheep. Most women are sensibly affected by

wine  during  pregnancy,  for  if  they  partake  of  it  they  grow  relaxed  and

debilitated.

The beginning of child-bearing in women and of the capacity to procreate

in men, and the cessation of these functions in both cases, coincide in the one

case with the emission of seed and in the other with the discharge of the

catamenia:  with  this  qualification  that  there  is  a  lack  of  fertility  at  the

commencement of these symptoms, and again towards their close when the

emissions  become  scanty  and  weak.  The  age  at  which  the  sexual  powers

begin has been related already. As for their end, the menstrual discharges

ceases in most women about their fortieth year; but with those in whom it

goes on longer it lasts even to the fiftieth year, and women of that age have

been known to bear children. But beyond that age there is no case on record.

<

div id="section144" class="section" title="6">


6


Men in most cases continue to be sexually competent until they are sixty

years old, and if that limit be overpassed then until seventy years; and men

have been actually known to procreate children at seventy years of age. With

many men and many women it so happens that they are unable to produce

children to one another, while they are able to do so in union with other

individuals. The same thing happens with regard to the production of male

and  female  offspring;  for  sometimes  men  and  women  in  union  with  one

another produce male children or female, as the case may be, but children of

the opposite sex when otherwise mated. And they are apt to change in this

respect with advancing age: for sometimes a husband and wife while they are

young produce female children and in later life male children; and in other

cases the very contrary occurs. And just the same thing is true in regard to the

generative  faculty:  for  some  while  young  are  childless,  but  have  children

when they grow older; and some have children to begin with, and later on no

more.

  There  are  certain  women  who  conceive  with  difficulty,  but  if  they  do

conceive, bring the child to maturity; while others again conceive readily, butare  unable  to  bring  the  child  to  birth.  Furthermore,  some  men  and  some

women produce female offspring and some male, as for instance in the story

of Hercules, who among all his two and seventy children is said to have

begotten but one girl. Those women who are unable to conceive, save with

the help of medical treatment or some other adventitious circumstance, are as

a general rule apt to bear female children rather than male.

It  is  a  common  thing  with  men  to  be  at  first  sexually  competent  and

afterwards impotent, and then again to revert to their former powers.

  From  deformed  parents  come  deformed  children,  lame  from  lame  and

blind from blind, and, speaking generally, children often inherit anything that

is peculiar in their parents and are born with similar marks, such as pimples

or scars. Such things have been known to be handed down through three

generations; for instance, a certain man had a mark on his arm which his son

did not possess, but his grandson had it in the same spot though not very

distinct.

  Such  cases,  however,  are  few;  for  the  children  of  cripples  are  mostly

sound, and there is no hard and fast rule regarding them. While children

mostly resemble their parents or their ancestors, it sometimes happens that no

such resemblance is to be traced. But parents may pass on resemblance after

several generations, as in the case of the woman in Elis, who committed

adultery with a negro; in this case it was not the woman’s own daughter but

the daughter’s child that was a blackamoor.

As a rule the daughters have a tendency to take after the mother, and the

boys after the father; but sometimes it is the other way, the boys taking after

the mother and the girls after the father. And they may resemble both parents

in particular features.

  There have been known cases of twins that had no resemblance to one

another, but they are alike as a general rule. There was once upon a time a

woman who had intercourse with her husband a week after giving birth to a

child and she conceived and bore a second child as like the first as any twin.

Some women have a tendency to produce children that take after themselves,

and others children that take after the husband; and this latter case is like that

of the celebrated mare in Pharsalus, that got the name of the Honest Wife.

<

div id="section145" class="section" title="7">


7In the emission of sperm there is a preliminary discharge of air, and the

outflow is manifestly caused by a blast of air; for nothing is cast to a distance

save by pneumatic pressure. After the seed reaches the womb and remains

there for a while, a membrane forms around it; for when it happens to escape

before it is distinctly formed, it looks like an egg enveloped in its membrane

after removal of the eggshell; and the membrane is full of veins.

All animals whatsoever, whether they fly or swim or walk upon dry land,

whether they bring forth their young alive or in the egg, develop in the same

way: save only that some have the navel attached to the womb, namely the

viviparous animals, and some have it attached to the egg, and some to both

parts alike, as in a certain sort of fishes. And in some cases membranous

envelopes surround the egg, and in other cases the chorion surrounds it. And

first  of  all  the  animal  develops  within  the  innermost  envelope,  and  then

another membrane appears around the former one, which latter is for the most

part attached to the womb, but is in part separated from it and contains fluid.

In between is a watery or sanguineous fluid, which the women folk call the

forewaters.

<

div id="section146" class="section" title="8">


8


All animals, or all such as have a navel, grow by the navel. And the navel

is attached to the cotyledon in all such as possess cotyledons, and to the

womb itself by a vein in all such as have the womb smooth. And as regards

their shape within the womb, the four-footed animals all lie stretched out, and

the footless animals lie on their sides, as for instance fishes; but two-legged

animals lie in a bent position, as for instance birds; and human embryos lie

bent, with nose between the knees and eyes upon the knees, and the ears free

at the sides.

All animals alike have the head upwards to begin with; but as they grow

and approach the term of egress from the womb they turn downwards, and

birth in the natural course of things takes place in all animals head foremost;

but in abnormal cases it may take place in a bent position, or feet foremost.

The  young  of  quadrupeds  when  they  are  near  their  full  time  contain

excrements, both liquid and in the form of solid lumps, the latter in the lower

part of the bowel and the urine in the bladder.In those animals that have cotyledons in the womb the cotyledons grow

less as the embryo grows bigger, and at length they disappear altogether. The

navel-string is a sheath wrapped about blood-vessels which have their origin

in the womb, from the cotyledons in those animals which possess them and

from a blood-vessel in those which do not. In the larger animals, such as the

embryos of oxen, the vessels are four in number, and in smaller animals two;

in the very little ones, such as fowls, one vessel only.

Of the four vessels that run into the embryo, two pass through the liver

where the so-called gates or ‘portae’ are, running in the direction of the great

vein, and the other two run in the direction of the aorta towards the point

where it divides and becomes two vessels instead of one. Around each pair of

blood-vessels are membranes, and surrounding these membranes is the navel-

string itself, after the manner of a sheath. And as the embryo grows, the veins

themselves tend more and more to dwindle in size. And also as the embryo

matures it comes down into the hollow of the womb and is observed to move

here, and sometimes rolls over in the vicinity of the groin.

<

div id="section147" class="section" title="9">


9


  When women are in labour, their pains determine towards many divers

parts of the body, and in most cases to one or other of the thighs. Those are

the quickest to be delivered who experience severe pains in the region of the

belly; and parturition is difficult in those who begin by suffering pain in the

loins, and speedy when the pain is abdominal. If the child about to be born be

a male, the preliminary flood is watery and pale in colour, but if a girl it is

tinged with blood, though still watery. In some cases of labour these latter

phenomena do not occur, either one way or the other.

In  other  animals  parturition  is  unaccompanied  by  pain,  and  the  dam  is

plainly seen to suffer but moderate inconvenience. In women, however, the

pains are more severe, and this is especially the case in persons of sedentary

habits, and in those who are weak-chested and short of breath. Labour is apt

to be especially difficult if during the process the woman while exerting force

with her breath fails to hold it in.

First of all, when the embryo starts to move and the membranes burst,

there issues forth the watery flood; then afterwards comes the embryo, whilethe womb everts and the afterbirth comes out from within.

<

div id="section148" class="section" title="10">


10


The  cutting  of  the  navel-string,  which  is  the  nurse’s  duty,  is  a  matter

calling for no little care and skill. For not only in cases of difficult labour

must she be able to render assistance with skilful hand, but she must also

have her wits about her in all contingencies, and especially in the operation of

tying the cord. For if the afterbirth have come away, the navel is ligatured off

from the afterbirth with a woollen thread and is then cut above the ligature;

and at the place where it has been tied it heals up, and the remaining portion

drops off. (If the ligature come loose the child dies from loss of blood.) But if

the afterbirth has not yet come away, but remains after the child itself is

extruded, it is cut away within after the ligaturing of the cord.

It often happens that the child appears to have been born dead when it is

merely weak, and when before the umbilical cord has been ligatured, the

blood  has  run  out  into  the  cord  and  its  surroundings.  But  experienced

midwives have been known to squeeze back the blood into the child’s body

from the cord, and immediately the child that a moment before was bloodless

came back to life again.

It is the natural rule, as we have mentioned above, for all animals to come

into  the  world  head  foremost,  and  children,  moreover,  have  their  hands

stretched out by their sides. And the child gives a cry and puts its hands up to

its mouth as soon as it issues forth.

  Moreover the child voids excrement sometimes at once, sometimes a little

later,  but  in  all  cases  during  the  first  day;  and  this  excrement  is  unduly

copious in comparison with the size of the child; it is what the midwives call

the meconium or ‘poppy-juice’. In colour it resembles blood, extremely dark

and pitch-like, but later on it becomes milky, for the child takes at once to the

breast. Before birth the child makes no sound, even though in difficult labour

it put forth its head while the rest of the body remains within.

In cases where flooding takes place rather before its time, it is apt to be

followed by difficult parturition. But if discharge take place after birth in

small quantity, and in cases where it only takes place at the beginning and

does not continue till the fortieth day, then in such cases women make abetter recovery and are the sooner ready to conceive again.

  Until the child is forty days old it neither laughs nor weeps during waking

hours, but of nights it sometimes does both; and for the most part it does not

even notice being tickled, but passes most of its time in sleep. As it keeps on

growing, it gets more and more wakeful; and moreover it shows signs of

dreaming, though it is long afterwards before it remembers what it dreams.

In other animals there is no contrasting difference between one bone and

another, but all are properly formed; but in children the front part of the head

is soft and late of ossifying. And by the way, some animals are born with

teeth, but children begin to cut their teeth in the seventh month; and the front

teeth are the first to come through, sometimes the upper and sometimes the

lower ones. And the warmer the nurses’ milk so much the quicker are the

children’s teeth to come.

<

div id="section149" class="section" title="11">


11


  After parturition and the cleasing flood the milk comes in plenty, and in

some women it flows not only from the nipples but at divers parts of the

breasts,  and  in  some  cases  even  from  the  armpits.  And  for  some  time

afterwards there continue to be certain indurated parts of the breast called

strangalides, or ‘knots’, which occur when it so happens that the moisture is

not concocted, or when it finds no outlet but accumulates within. For the

whole breast is so spongy that if a woman in drinking happen to swallow a

hair, she gets a pain in her breast, which ailment is called ‘trichia’; and the

pain lasts till the hair either find its own way out or be sucked out with the

milk. Women continue to have milk until their next conception; and then the

milk  stops  coming  and  goes  dry,  alike  in  the  human  species  and  in  the

quadrupedal  vivipara.  So  long  as  there  is  a  flow  of  milk  the  menstrual

purgations do not take place, at least as a general rule, though the discharge

has  been  known  to  occur  during  the  period  of  suckling.  For,  speaking

generally, a determination of moisture does not take place at one and the

same time in several directions; as for instance the menstrual purgations tend

to be scanty in persons suffering from haemorrhoids. And in some women the

like happens owing to their suffering from varices, when the fluids issue from

the pelvic region before entering into the womb. And patients who duringsuppression of the menses happen to vomit blood are no whit the worse.

<

div id="section150" class="section" title="12">


12


  Children are very commonly subject to convulsions, more especially such

of  them  as  are  more  than  ordinarily  well-nourished  on  rich  or  unusually

plentiful milk from a stout nurse. Wine is bad for infants, in that it tends to

excite this malady, and red wine is worse than white, especially when taken

undiluted; and most things that tend to induce flatulency are also bad, and

constipation too is prejudicial. The majority of deaths in infancy occur before

the child is a week old, hence it is customary to name the child at that age,

from a belief that it has now a better chance of survival. This malady is worst

at the full of the moon; and by the way, it is a dangerous symptom when the

spasms begin in the child’s back.                    The History of Animals, Book VIII


translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson


<

div id="book8" class="chapter" title="Book VIII">


1


We have now discussed the physical characteristics of animals and their

methods of generation. Their habits and their modes of living vary according

to their character and their food.

In the great majority of animals there are traces of psychical qualities or

attitudes,  which  qualities  are  more  markedly  differentiated  in  the  case  of

human  beings.  For  just  as  we  pointed  out  resemblances  in  the  physical

organs,  so  in  a  number  of  animals  we  observe  gentleness  or  fierceness,

mildness or cross temper, courage, or timidity, fear or confidence, high spirit

or  low  cunning,  and,  with  regard  to  intelligence,  something  equivalent  to

sagacity. Some of these qualities in man, as compared with the corresponding

qualities in animals, differ only quantitatively: that is to say, a man has more

or less of this quality, and an animal has more or less of some other; other

qualities in man are represented by analogous and not identical qualities: for

instance, just as in man we find knowledge, wisdom, and sagacity, so in

certain animals there exists some other natural potentiality akin to these. The

truth of this statement will be the more clearly apprehended if we have regard

to the phenomena of childhood: for in children may be observed the traces

and  seeds  of  what  will  one  day  be  settled  psychological  habits,  though

psychologically a child hardly differs for the time being from an animal; so

that one is quite justified in saying that, as regards man and animals, certain

psychical qualities are identical with one another, whilst others resemble, and

others are analogous to, each other.

Nature proceeds little by little from things lifeless to animal life in such a

way that it is impossible to determine the exact line of demarcation, nor on

which side thereof an intermediate form should lie. Thus, next after lifeless

things in the upward scale comes the plant, and of plants one will differ fromanother as to its amount of apparent vitality; and, in a word, the whole genus

of plants, whilst it is devoid of life as compared with an animal, is endowed

with  life  as  compared  with  other  corporeal  entities.  Indeed,  as  we  just

remarked, there is observed in plants a continuous scale of ascent towards the

animal. So, in the sea, there are certain objects concerning which one would

be at a loss to determine whether they be animal or vegetable. For instance,

certain  of  these  objects  are  fairly  rooted,  and  in  several  cases  perish  if

detached; thus the pinna is rooted to a particular spot, and the solen (or razor-

shell) cannot survive withdrawal from its burrow. Indeed, broadly speaking,

the entire genus of testaceans have a resemblance to vegetables, if they be

contrasted with such animals as are capable of progression.

In regard to sensibility, some animals give no indication whatsoever of it,

whilst others indicate it but indistinctly. Further, the substance of some of

these  intermediate  creatures  is  fleshlike,  as  is  the  case  with  the  so-called

tethya (or ascidians) and the acalephae (or sea-anemones); but the sponge is

in every respect like a vegetable. And so throughout the entire animal scale

there is a graduated differentiation in amount of vitality and in capacity for

motion.

A similar statement holds good with regard to habits of life. Thus of plants

that spring from seed the one function seems to be the reproduction of their

own  particular  species,  and  the  sphere  of  action  with  certain  animals  is

similarly limited. The faculty of reproduction, then, is common to all alike. If

sensibility be superadded, then their lives will differ from one another in

respect to sexual intercourse through the varying amount of pleasure derived

therefrom, and also in regard to modes of parturition and ways of rearing

their young. Some animals, like plants, simply procreate their own species at

definite seasons; other animals busy themselves also in procuring food for

their young, and after they are reared quit them and have no further dealings

with them; other animals are more intelligent and endowed with memory, and

they live with their offspring for a longer period and on a more social footing.

The life of animals, then, may be divided into two acts-procreation and

feeding; for on these two acts all their interests and life concentrate. Their

food  depends  chiefly  on  the  substance  of  which  they  are  severally

constituted; for the source of their growth in all cases will be this substance.

And  whatsoever  is  in  conformity  with  nature  is  pleasant,  and  all  animals

pursue pleasure in keeping with their nature.

<div id="section152" class="section" title="2">


2


  Animals are also differentiated locally: that is to say, some live upon dry

land,  while  others  live  in  the  water.  And  this  differentiation  may  be

interpreted in two different ways. Thus, some animals are termed terrestrial

as inhaling air, and others aquatic as taking in water; and there are others

which  do  not  actually  take  in  these  elements,  but  nevertheless  are

constitutionally adapted to the cooling influence, so far as is needful to them,

of one element or the other, and hence are called terrestrial or aquatic though

they neither breathe air nor take in water. Again, other animals are so called

from their finding their food and fixing their habitat on land or in water: for

many animals, although they inhale air and breed on land, yet derive their

food from the water, and live in water for the greater part of their lives; and

these are the only animals to which as living in and on two elements the term

‘amphibious’  is  applicable.  There  is  no  animal  taking  in  water  that  is

terrestrial or aerial or that derives its food from the land, whereas of the great

number of land animals inhaling air many get their food from the water;

moreover some are so peculiarly organized that if they be shut off altogether

from the water they cannot possibly live, as for instance, the so-called sea-

turtle, the crocodile, the hippopotamus, the seal, and some of the smaller

creatures, such as the fresh-water tortoise and the frog: now all these animals

choke or drown if they do not from time to time breathe atmospheric air: they

breed and rear their young on dry land, or near the land, but they pass their

lives in water.

But the dolphin is equipped in the most remarkable way of all animals: the

dolphin  and  other  similar  aquatic  animals,  including  the  other  cetaceans

which resemble it; that is to say, the whale, and all the other creatures that are

furnished with a blow-hole. One can hardly allow that such an animal is

terrestrial and terrestrial only, or aquatic and aquatic only, if by terrestrial we

mean an animal that inhales air, and if by aquatic we mean an animal that

takes in water. For the fact is the dolphin performs both these processes: he

takes in water and discharges it by his blow-hole, and he also inhales air into

his  lungs;  for,  by  the  way,  the  creature  is  furnished  with  this  organ  and

respires  thereby,  and  accordingly,  when  caught  in  the  nets,  he  is  quickly

suffocated for lack of air. He can also live for a considerable while out of thewater, but all this while he keeps up a dull moaning sound corresponding to

the  noise  made  by  air-breathing  animals  in  general;  furthermore,  when

sleeping, the animal keeps his nose above water, and he does so that he may

breathe the air. Now it would be unreasonable to assign one and the same

class of animals to both categories, terrestrial and aquatic, seeing that these

categories are more or less exclusive of one another; we must accordingly

supplement our definition of the term ‘aquatic’ or ‘marine’. For the fact is,

some  aquatic  animals  take  in  water  and  discharge  it  again,  for  the  same

reason that leads air-breathing animals to inhale air: in other words, with the

object of cooling the blood. Others take in water as incidental to their mode

of feeding; for as they get their food in the water they cannot but take in

water along with their food, and if they take in water they must be provided

with some organ for discharging it. Those blooded animals, then, that use

water for a purpose analogous to respiration are provided with gills; and such

as  take  in  water  when  catching  their  prey,  with  the  blow-hole.  Similar

remarks are applicable to molluscs and crustaceans; for again it is by way of

procuring food that these creatures take in water.

  Aquatic in different ways, the differences depending on bodily relation to

external temperature and on habit of life, are such animals on the one hand as

take in air but live in water, and such on the other hand as take in water and

are furnished with gills but go upon dry land and get their living there. At

present only one animal of the latter kind is known, the so-called cordylus or

water-newt; this creature is furnished not with lungs but with gills, but for all

that it is a quadruped and fitted for walking on dry land.

In the case of all these animals their nature appears in some kind of a way

to have got warped, just as some male animals get to resemble the female,

and  some  female  animals  the  male.  The  fact  is  that  animals,  if  they  be

subjected  to  a  modification  in  minute  organs,  are  liable  to  immense

modifications  in  their  general  configuration.  This  phenomenon  may  be

observed in the case of gelded animals: only a minute organ of the animal is

mutilated, and the creature passes from the male to the female form. We may

infer,  then,  that  if  in  the  primary  conformation  of  the  embryo  an

infinitesimally  minute  but  absolutely  essential  organ  sustain  a  change  of

magnitude one way or the other, the animal will in one case turn to male and

in  the  other  to  female;  and  also  that,  if  the  said  organ  be  obliterated

altogether, the animal will be of neither one sex nor the other. And so by the

occurrence of modification in minute organs it comes to pass that one animalis terrestrial and another aquatic, in both senses of these terms. And, again,

some animals are amphibious whilst other animals are not amphibious, owing

to  the  circumstance  that  in  their  conformation  while  in  the  embryonic

condition there got intermixed into them some portion of the matter of which

their  subsequent  food  is  constituted;  for,  as  was  said  above,  what  is  in

conformity with nature is to every single animal pleasant and agreeable.

  Animals then have been categorized into terrestrial and aquatic in three

ways, according to their assumption of air or of water, the temperament of

their bodies, or the character of their food; and the mode of life of an animal

corresponds to the category in which it is found. That is to say, in some cases

the animal depends for its terrestrial or aquatic nature on temperament and

diet combined, as well as upon its method of respiration; and sometimes on

temperament and habits alone.

Of testaceans, some, that are incapable of motion, subsist on fresh water,

for, as the sea water dissolves into its constituents, the fresh water from its

greater thinness percolates through the grosser parts; in fact, they live on

fresh water just as they were originally engendered from the same. Now that

fresh water is contained in the sea and can be strained off from it can be

proved in a thoroughly practical way. Take a thin vessel of moulded wax,

attach a cord to it, and let it down quite empty into the sea: in twenty-four

hours it will be found to contain a quantity of water, and the water will be

fresh and drinkable.

  Sea-anemones feed on such small fishes as come in their way. The mouth

of this creature is in the middle of its body; and this fact may be clearly

observed in the case of the larger varieties. Like the oyster it has a duct for

the outlet of the residuum; and this duct is at the top of the animal. In other

words, the sea-anemone corresponds to the inner fleshy part of the oyster,

and the stone to which the one creature clings corresponds to the shell which

encases the other.

The limpet detaches itself from the rock and goes about in quest of food.

Of shell-fish that are mobile, some are carnivorous and live on little fishes, as

for  instance,  the  purple  murex-and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  purple

murex is carnivorous, as it is caught by a bait of fish; others are carnivorous,

but feed also on marine vegetation.

The  sea-turtles  feed  on  shell-fish-for,  by  the  way,  their  mouths  are

extraordinarily hard; whatever object it seizes, stone or other, it crunches into

bits, but when it leaves the water for dry land it browses on grass). Thesecreatures suffer greatly, and oftentimes die when they lie on the surface of the

water  exposed  to  a  scorching  sun;  for,  when  once  they  have  risen  to  the

surface, they find a difficulty in sinking again.

  Crustaceans feed in like manner. They are omnivorous; that is to say, they

live on stones, slime, sea-weed, and excrement-as for instance the rock-crab-

and are also carnivorous. The crawfish or spiny-lobster can get the better of

fishes even of the larger species, though in some of them it occasionally finds

more than its match. Thus, this animal is so overmastered and cowed by the

octopus that it dies of terror if it become aware of an octopus in the same net

with itself. The crawfish can master the conger-eel, for owing to the rough

spines  of  the  crawfish  the  eel  cannot  slip  away  and  elude  its  hold.  The

conger-eel, however, devours the octopus, for owing to the slipperiness of its

antagonist the octopus can make nothing of it. The crawfish feeds on little

fish, capturing them beside its hole or dwelling place; for, by the way, it is

found out at sea on rough and stony bottoms, and in such places it makes its

den. Whatever it catches, it puts into its mouth with its pincer-like claws, like

the common crab. Its nature is to walk straight forward when it has nothing to

fear, with its feelers hanging sideways; if it be frightened, it makes its escape

backwards, darting off to a great distance. These animals fight one another

with their claws, just as rams fight with their horns, raising them and striking

their opponents; they are often also seen crowded together in herds. So much

for the mode of life of the crustacean.

  Molluscs are all carnivorous; and of molluscs the calamary and the sepia

are more than a match for fishes even of the large species. The octopus for

the most part gathers shellfish, extracts the flesh, and feeds on that; in fact,

fishermen recognize their holes by the number of shells lying about. Some

say that the octopus devours its own species, but this statement is incorrect; it

is  doubtless  founded  on  the  fact  that  the  creature  is  often  found  with  its

tentacles removed, which tentacles have really been eaten off by the conger.

  Fishes, all without exception, feed on spawn in the spawning season; but in

other  respects  the  food  varies  with  the  varying  species.  Some  fishes  are

exclusively carnivorous, as the cartilaginous genus, the conger, the channa or

Serranus, the tunny, the bass, the synodon or Dentex, the amia, the sea-perch,

and the muraena. The red mullet is carnivorous, but feeds also on sea-weed,

on shell-fish, and on mud. The grey mullet feeds on mud, the dascyllus on

mud and offal, the scarus or parrot-fish and the melanurus on sea-weed, the

saupe on offal and sea-weed; the saupe feeds also on zostera, and is the onlyfish that is captured with a gourd. All fishes devour their own species, with

the single exception of the cestreus or mullet; and the conger is especially

ravenous in this respect. The cephalus and the mullet in general are the only

fish that eat no flesh; this may be inferred from the facts that when caught

they are never found with flesh in their intestines, and that the bait used to

catch them is not flesh but barley-cake. Every fish of the mullet-kind lives on

sea-weed and sand. The cephalus, called by some the ‘chelon’, keeps near in

to  the  shore,  the  peraeas  keeps  out  at  a  distance  from  it,  and  feeds  on  a

mucous  substance  exuding  from  itself,  and  consequently  is  always  in  a

starved condition. The cephalus lives in mud, and is in consequence heavy

and slimy; it never feeds on any other fish. As it lives in mud, it has every

now and then to make a leap upwards out of the mud so as to wash the slime

from off its body. There is no creature known to prey upon the spawn of the

cephalus, so that the species is exceedingly numerous; when, however, the is

full-grown it is preyed upon by a number of fishes, and especially by the

acharnas or bass. Of all fishes the mullet is the most voracious and insatiable,

and in consequence its belly is kept at full stretch; whenever it is not starving,

it may be considered as out of condition. When it is frightened, it hides its

head in mud, under the notion that it is hiding its whole body. The synodon is

carnivorous and feeds on molluscs. Very often the synodon and the channa

cast up their stomachs while chasing smaller fishes; for, be it remembered,

fishes have their stomachs close to the mouth, and are not furnished with a

gullet.

  Some  fishes  then,  as  has  been  stated,  are  carnivorous,  and  carnivorous

only,  as  the  dolphin,  the  synodon,  the  gilt-head,  the  selachians,  and  the

molluscs. Other fishes feed habitually on mud or sea-weed or sea-moss or the

so-called stalk-weed or growing plants; as for instance, the phycis, the goby,

and the rock-fish; and, by the way, the only meat that the phycis will touch is

that of prawns. Very often, however, as has been stated, they devour one

another, and especially do the larger ones devour the smaller. The proof of

their being carnivorous is the fact that they can be caught with flesh for a bait.

The mackerel, the tunny, and the bass are for the most part carnivorous, but

they do occasionally feed on sea-weed. The sargue feeds on the leavings of

the trigle or red mullet. The red mullet burrows in the mud, when it sets the

mud in motion and quits its haunt, the sargue settles down into the place and

feeds on what is left behind, and prevents any smaller fish from settling in the

immediate vicinity.Of all fishes the so-called scarus, or parrot, wrasse, is the only one known

to chew the cud like a quadruped.

As a general rule the larger fishes catch the smaller ones in their mouths

whilst  swimming  straight  after  them  in  the  ordinary  position;  but  the

selachians, the dolphin, and all the cetacea must first turn over on their backs,

as their mouths are placed down below; this allows a fair chance of escape to

the smaller fishes, and, indeed, if it were not so, there would be very few of

the little fishes left, for the speed and voracity of the dolphin is something

marvellous.

Of eels a few here and there feed on mud and on chance morsels of food

thrown to them; the greater part of them subsist on fresh water. Eel-breeders

are  particularly  careful  to  have  the  water  kept  perfectly  clear,  by  its

perpetually  flowing  on  to  flat  slabs  of  stone  and  then  flowing  off  again;

sometimes they coat the eel-tanks with plaster. The fact is that the eel will

soon choke if the water is not clear as his gills are peculiarly small. On this

account, when fishing for eels, they disturb the water. In the river Strymon

eel-fishing takes place at the rising of the Pleiads, because at this period the

water is troubled and the mud raised up by contrary winds; unless the water

be in this condition, it is as well to leave the eels alone. When dead the eel,

unlike the majority of fishes, neither floats on nor rises to the surface; and

this is owing to the smallness of the stomach. A few eels are supplied with

fat, but the greater part have no fat whatsoever. When removed from the

water they can live for five or six days; for a longer period if north winds

prevail, for a shorter if south winds. If they are removed in summer from the

pools to the tanks they will die; but not so if removed in the winter. They are

not  capable  of  holding  out  against  any  abrupt  change;  consequently  they

often die in large numbers when men engaged in transporting them from one

place to another dip them into water particularly cold. They will also die of

suffocation if they be kept in a scanty supply of water. This same remark will

hold  good  for  fishes  in  general;  for  they  are  suffocated  if  they  be  long

confined in a short supply of water, with the water kept unchanged-just as

animals that respire are suffocated if they be shut up with a scanty supply of

air. The eel in some cases lives for seven or eight years. The river-eel feeds

on his own species, on grass, or on roots, or on any chance food found in the

mud. Their usual feeding-time is at night, and during the day-time they retreat

into deep water. And so much for the food of fishes.

<div id="section153" class="section" title="3">


3


Of birds, such as have crooked talons are carnivorous without exception,

and cannot swallow corn or bread-food even if it be put into their bills in tit-

bits; as for instance, the eagle of every variety, the kite, the two species of

hawks, to wit, the dove-hawk and the sparrow-hawk-and, by the way, these

two  hawks  differ  greatly  in  size  from  one  another-and  the  buzzard.  The

buzzard is of the same size as the kite, and is visible at all seasons of the year.

There is also the phene (or lammergeier) and the vulture. The phene is larger

than the common eagle and is ashen in colour. Of the vulture there are two

varieties: one small and whitish, the other comparatively large and rather

more ashen-coloured than white. Further, of birds that fly by night, some

have crooked talons, such as the night-raven, the owl, and the eagle-owl. The

eagle-owl resembles the common owl in shape, but it is quite as large as the

eagle. Again, there is the eleus, the Aegolian owl, and the little horned owl.

Of these birds, the eleus is somewhat larger than the barn-door cock, and the

Aegolian owl is of about the same size as the eleus, and both these birds hunt

the jay; the little horned owl is smaller than the common owl. All these three

birds are alike in appearance, and all three are carnivorous.

  Again, of birds that have not crooked talons some are carnivorous, such as

the swallow. Others feed on grubs, such as the chaffinch, the sparrow, the

‘batis’, the green linnet, and the titmouse. Of the titmouse there are three

varieties. The largest is the finch-titmouse—for it is about the size of a finch;

the second has a long tail, and from its habitat is called the hill-titmouse; the

third resembles the other two in appearance, but is less in size than either of

them. Then come the becca-fico, the black-cap, the bull-finch, the robin, the

epilais, the midget-bird, and the golden-crested wren. This wren is little larger

than a locust, has a crest of bright red gold, and is in every way a beautiful

and graceful little bird. Then the anthus, a bird about the size of a finch; and

the mountain-finch, which resembles a finch and is of much the same size,

but its neck is blue, and it is named from its habitat; and lastly the wren and

the rook. The above-enumerated birds and the like of them feed either wholly

or for the most part on grubs, but the following and the like feed on thistles;

to wit, the linnet, the thraupis, and the goldfinch. All these birds feed on

thistles, but never on grubs or any living thing whatever; they live and roostalso on the plants from which they derive their food.

  There  are  other  birds  whose  favourite  food  consists  of  insects  found

beneath the bark of trees; as for instance, the great and the small pie, which

are nicknamed the woodpeckers. These two birds resemble one another in

plumage and in note, only that the note of the larger bird is the louder of the

two; they both frequent the trunks of trees in quest of food. There is also the

greenpie, a bird about the size of a turtle-dove, green-coloured all over, that

pecks at the bark of trees with extraordinary vigour, lives generally on the

branch of a tree, has a loud note, and is mostly found in the Peloponnese.

There is another bird called the ‘grub-picker’ (or tree-creeper), about as small

as the penduline titmouse, with speckled plumage of an ashen colour, and

with a poor note; it is a variety of the woodpecker.

  There are other birds that live on fruit and herbage, such as the wild pigeon

or ringdove, the common pigeon, the rock-dove, and the turtle-dove. The

ring-dove and the common pigeon are visible at all seasons; the turtledove

only in the summer, for in winter it lurks in some hole or other and is never

seen. The rock-dove is chiefly visible in the autumn, and is caught at that

season; it is larger than the common pigeon but smaller than the wild one; it

is generally caught while drinking. These pigeons bring their young ones

with them when they visit this country. All our other birds come to us in the

early summer and build their nests here, and the greater part of them rear

their young on animal food, with the sole exception of the pigeon and its

varieties.

The whole genus of birds may be pretty well divided into such as procure

their food on dry land, such as frequent rivers and lakes, and such as live on

or by the sea.

Of water-birds such as are web-footed live actually on the water, while

such as are split-footed live by the edge of it-and, by the way, water-birds

that are not carnivorous live on water-plants, (but most of them live on fish),

like the heron and the spoonbill that frequent the banks of lakes and rivers;

and the spoonbill, by the way, is less than the common heron, and has a long

flat bill. There are furthermore the stork and the seamew; and the seamew, by

the way, is ashen-coloured. There is also the schoenilus, the cinclus, and the

white-rump. Of these smaller birds the last mentioned is the largest, being

about the size of the common thrush; all three may be described as ‘wag-

tails’.  Then  there  is  the  scalidris,  with  plumage  ashen-grey,  but  speckled.

Moreover, the family of the halcyons or kingfishers live by the waterside. Ofkingfishers there are two varieties; one that sits on reeds and sings; the other,

the larger of the two, is without a note. Both these varieties are blue on the

back. There is also the trochilus (or sandpiper). The halcyon also, including a

variety termed the cerylus, is found near the seaside. The crow also feeds on

such animal life as is cast up on the beach, for the bird is omnivorous. There

are also the white gull, the cepphus, the aethyia, and the charadrius.

Of web-footed birds, the larger species live on the banks of rivers and

lakes;  as  the  swan,  the  duck,  the  coot,  the  grebe,  and  the  teal-a  bird

resembling the duck but less in size-and the water-raven or cormorant. This

bird is the size of a stork, only that its legs are shorter; it is web-footed and is

a good swimmer; its plumage is black. It roosts on trees, and is the only one

of all such birds as these that is found to build its nest in a tree. Further there

is the large goose, the little gregarious goose, the vulpanser, the horned grebe,

and the penelops. The sea-eagle lives in the neighbourhood of the sea and

seeks its quarry in lagoons.

A great number of birds are omnivorous. Birds of prey feed on any animal

or bird, other than a bird of prey, that they may catch. These birds never

touch one of their own genus, whereas fishes often devour members actually

of their own species.

Birds, as a rule, are very spare drinkers. In fact birds of prey never drink at

all,  excepting  a  very  few,  and  these  drink  very  rarely;  and  this  last

observation is peculiarly applicable to the kestrel. The kite has been seen to

drink, but he certainly drinks very seldom.

<

div id="section154" class="section" title="4">


4


  Animals that are coated with tessellates-such as the lizard and the other

quadrupeds,  and  the  serpents-are  omnivorous:  at  all  events  they  are

carnivorous and graminivorous; and serpents, by the way, are of all animals

the greatest gluttons.

  Tessellated animals are spare drinkers, as are also all such animals as have

a spongy lung, and such a lung, scantily supplied with blood, is found in all

oviparous animals. Serpents, by the by, have an insatiate appetite for wine;

consequently, at times men hunt for snakes by pouring wine into saucers and

putting them into the interstices of walls, and the creatures are caught wheninebriated. Serpents are carnivorous, and whenever they catch an animal they

extract all its juices and eject the creature whole. And, by the way, this is

done by all other creatures of similar habits, as for instance the spider; only

that the spider sucks out the juices of its prey outside, and the serpent does so

in  its  belly.  The  serpent  takes  any  food  presented  to  him,  eats  birds  and

animals,  and  swallows  eggs  entire.  But  after  taking  his  prey  he  stretches

himself until he stands straight out to the very tip, and then he contracts and

squeezes himself into little compass, so that the swallowed mass may pass

down his outstretched body; and this action on his part is due to the tenuity

and length of his gullet. Spiders and snakes can both go without food for a

long time; and this remark may be verified by observation of specimens kept

alive in the shops of the apothecaries.

<

div id="section155" class="section" title="5">


5


Of viviparous quadrupeds such as are fierce and jag-toothed are without

exception carnivorous; though, by the way, it is stated of the wolf, but of no

other animal, that in extremity of hunger it will eat a certain kind of earth.

These carnivorous animals never eat grass except when they are sick, just as

dogs bring on a vomit by eating grass and thereby purge themselves.

The solitary wolf is more apt to attack man than the wolf that goes with a

pack.

The animal called ‘glanus’ by some and ‘hyaena’ by others is as large as a

wolf, with a mane like a horse, only that the hair is stiffer and longer and

extends over the entire length of the chine. It will lie in wait for a man and

chase him, and will inveigle a dog within its reach by making a noise that

resembles the retching noise of a man vomiting. It is exceedingly fond of

putrefied flesh, and will burrow in a graveyard to gratify this propensity.

The bear is omnivorous. It eats fruit, and is enabled by the suppleness of its

body to climb a tree; it also eats vegetables, and it will break up a hive to get

at the honey; it eats crabs and ants also, and is in a general way carnivorous.

It is so powerful that it will attack not only the deer but the wild boar, if it can

take it unawares, and also the bull. After coming to close quarters with the

bull it falls on its back in front of the animal, and, when the bull proceeds to

butt, the bear seizes hold of the bull’s horns with its front paws, fastens itsteeth into his shoulder, and drags him down to the ground. For a short time

together it can walk erect on its hind legs. All the flesh it eats it first allows to

become carrion.

The lion, like all other savage and jag-toothed animals, is carnivorous. It

devours  its  food  greedily  and  fiercely,  and  often  swallows  its  prey  entire

without rending it at all; it will then go fasting for two or three days together,

being rendered capable of this abstinence by its previous surfeit. It is a spare

drinker. It discharges the solid residuum in small quantities, about every other

day or at irregular intervals, and the substance of it is hard and dry like the

excrement of a dog. The wind discharged from off its stomach is pungent,

and its urine emits a strong odour, a phenomenon which, in the case of dogs,

accounts for their habit of sniffing at trees; for, by the way, the lion, like the

dog, lifts its leg to void its urine. It infects the food it eats with a strong smell

by breathing on it, and when the animal is cut open an overpowering vapour

exhales from its inside.

  Some wild quadrupeds feed in lakes and rivers; the seal is the only one that

gets its living on the sea. To the former class of animals belong the so-called

castor, the satyrium, the otter, and the so-called latax, or beaver. The beaver

is flatter than the otter and has strong teeth; it often at night-time emerges

from the water and goes nibbling at the bark of the aspens that fringe the

riversides. The otter will bite a man, and it is said that whenever it bites it will

never let go until it hears a bone crack. The hair of the beaver is rough,

intermediate in appearance between the hair of the seal and the hair of the

deer.

<

div id="section156" class="section" title="6">


6


  Jag-toothed animals drink by lapping, as do also some animals with teeth

differently formed, as the mouse. Animals whose upper and lower teeth meet

evenly drink by suction, as the horse and the ox; the bear neither laps nor

sucks, but gulps down his drink. Birds, a rule, drink by suction, but the long

necked birds stop and elevate their heads at intervals; the purple coot is the

only one (of the long-necked birds) that swallows water by gulps.

  Horned animals, domesticated or wild, and all such as are not jag-toothed,

are all frugivorous and graminivorous, save under great stress of hunger. Thepig is an exception, it cares little for grass or fruit, but of all animals it is the

fondest of roots, owing to the fact that its snout is peculiarly adapted for

digging  them  out  of  the  ground;  it  is  also  of  all  animals  the  most  easily

pleased in the matter of food. It takes on fat more rapidly in proportion to its

size than any other animal; in fact, a pig can be fattened for the market in

sixty days. Pig-dealers can tell the amount of flesh taken on, by having first

weighed the animal while it was being starved. Before the fattening process

begins, the creature must be starved for three days; and, by the way, animals

in general will take on fat if subjected previously to a course of starvation;

after  the  three  days  of  starvation,  pig-breeders  feed  the  animal  lavishly.

Breeders in Thrace, when fattening pigs, give them a drink on the first day;

then they miss one, and then two days, then three and four, until the interval

extends over seven days. The pigs’ meat used for fattening is composed of

barley, millet, figs, acorns, wild pears, and cucumbers. These animals-and

other animals that have warm bellies-are fattened by repose. (Pigs also fatten

the better by being allowed to wallow in mud. They like to feed in batches of

the same age. A pig will give battle even to a wolf.) If a pig be weighed when

living, you may calculate that after death its flesh will weigh five-sixths of

that weight, and the hair, the blood, and the rest will weigh the other sixth.

When suckling their young, swinelike all other animals-get attenuated. So

much for these animals.

<

div id="section157" class="section" title="7">


7


  Cattle feed on corn and grass, and fatten on vegetables that tend to cause

flatulency, such as bitter vetch or bruised beans or bean-stalks. The older

ones also will fatten if they be fed up after an incision has been made into

their hide, and air blown thereinto. Cattle will fatten also on barley in its

natural state or on barley finely winnowed, or on sweet food, such as figs, or

pulp from the wine-press, or on elm-leaves. But nothing is so fattening as the

heat of the sun and wallowing in warm waters. If the horns of young cattle be

smeared with hot wax, you may mold them to any shape you please, and

cattle are less subject to disease of the hoof if you smear the horny parts with

wax, pitch, or olive oil. Herded cattle suffer more when they are forced to

change their pasture ground by frost than when snow is the cause of change.Cattle grow all the more in size when they are kept from sexual commerce

over a number of years; and it is with a view to growth in size that in Epirus

the so-called Pyrrhic kine are not allowed intercourse with the bull until they

are  nine  years  old;  from  which  circumstance  they  are  nicknamed  the

‘unbulled’ kine. Of these Pyrrhic cattle, by the way, they say that there are

only about four hundred in the world, that they are the private property of the

Epirote royal family, that they cannot thrive out of Epirus, and that people

elsewhere have tried to rear them, but without success.

<

div id="section158" class="section" title="8">


8


  Horses, mules, and asses feed on corn and grass, but are fattened chiefly by

drink. Just in proportion as beasts of burden drink water, so will they more or

less enjoy their food, and a place will give good or bad feeding according as

the water is good or bad. Green corn, while ripening, will give a smooth coat;

but such corn is injurious if the spikes are too stiff and sharp. The first crop of

clover is unwholesome, and so is clover over which ill-scented water runs;

for the clover is sure to get the taint of the water. Cattle like clear water for

drinking; but the horse in this respect resembles the camel, for the camel likes

turbid  and  thick  water,  and  will  never  drink  from  a  stream  until  he  has

trampled it into a turbid condition. And, by the way, the camel can go without

water for as much as four days, but after that when he drinks, he drinks in

immense quantities.

<

div id="section159" class="section" title="9">


9


The elephant at the most can eat nine Macedonian medimni of fodder at

one meal; but so large an amount is unwholesome. As a general rule it can

take six or seven medimni of fodder, five medimni of wheat, and five mareis

of wine-six cotylae going to the maris. An elephant has been known to drink

right off fourteen Macedonian metretae of water, and another metretae later

in the day.  Camels live for about thirty years; in some exceptional cases they live

much longer, and instances have been known of their living to the age of a

hundred. The elephant is said by some to live for about two hundred years; by

others, for three hundred.

<

div id="section160" class="section" title="10">


10


  Sheep  and  goats  are  graminivorous,  but  sheep  browse  assiduously  and

steadily, whereas goats shift their ground rapidly, and browse only on the tips

of  the  herbage.  Sheep  are  much  improved  in  condition  by  drinking,  and

accordingly they give the flocks salt every five days in summer, to the extent

of one medimnus to the hundred sheep, and this is found to render a flock

healthier and fatter. In fact they mix salt with the greater part of their food; a

large amount of salt is mixed into their bran (for the reason that they drink

more when thirsty), and in autumn they get cucumbers with a sprinkling of

salt on them; this admixture of salt in their food tends also to increase the

quantity of milk in the ewes. If sheep be kept on the move at midday they

will drink more copiously towards evening; and if the ewes be fed with salted

food as the lambing season draws near they will get larger udders. Sheep are

fattened by twigs of the olive or of the oleaster, by vetch, and bran of every

kind; and these articles of food fatten all the more if they be first sprinkled

with brine. Sheep will take on flesh all the better if they be first put for three

days through a process of starving. In autumn, water from the north is more

wholesome for sheep than water from the south. Pasture grounds are all the

better if they have a westerly aspect.

  Sheep will lose flesh if they be kept overmuch on the move or be subjected

to any hardship. In winter time shepherds can easily distinguish the vigorous

sheep from the weakly, from the fact that the vigorous sheep are covered with

hoar-frost while the weakly ones are quite free of it; the fact being that the

weakly ones feeling oppressed with the burden shake themselves and so get

rid of it. The flesh of all quadrupeds deteriorates in marshy pastures, and is

the better on high grounds. Sheep that have flat tails can stand the winter

better  than  long-tailed  sheep,  and  short-fleeced  sheep  than  the  shaggy-

fleeced; and sheep with crisp wool stand the rigour of winter very poorly.

Sheep are healthier than goats, but goats are stronger than sheep. (The fleecesand the wool of sheep that have been killed by wolves, as also the clothes

made from them, are exceptionally infested with lice.)

<

div id="section161" class="section" title="11">


11


Of insects, such as have teeth are omnivorous; such as have a tongue feed

on liquids only, extracting with that organ juices from all quarters. And of

these latter some may be called omnivorous, inasmuch as they feed on every

kind of juice, as for instance, the common fly; others are blood-suckers, such

as the gadfly and the horse-fly, others again live on the juices of fruits and

plants. The bee is the only insect that invariably eschews whatever is rotten; it

will touch no article of food unless it have a sweet-tasting juice, and it is

particularly fond of drinking water if it be found bubbling up clear from a

spring underground.

So much for the food of animals of the leading genera.

<

div id="section162" class="section" title="12">


12


The habits of animals are all connected with either breeding and the rearing

of young, or with the procuring a due supply of food; and these habits are

modified so as to suit cold and heat and the variations of the seasons. For all

animals have an instinctive perception of the changes of temperature, and,

just as men seek shelter in houses in winter, or as men of great possessions

spend their summer in cool places and their winter in sunny ones, so also all

animals that can do so shift their habitat at various seasons.

  Some creatures can make provision against change without stirring from

their ordinary haunts; others migrate, quitting Pontus and the cold countries

after the autumnal equinox to avoid the approaching winter, and after the

spring equinox migrating from warm lands to cool lands to avoid the coming

heat. In some cases they migrate from places near at hand, in others they may

be said to come from the ends of the world, as in the case of the crane; for

these birds migrate from the steppes of Scythia to the marshlands south ofEgypt where the Nile has its source. And it is here, by the way, that they are

said to fight with the pygmies; and the story is not fabulous, but there is in

reality a race of dwarfish men, and the horses are little in proportion, and the

men  live  in  caves  underground.  Pelicans  also  migrate,  and  fly  from  the

Strymon to the Ister, and breed on the banks of this river. They depart in

flocks, and the birds in front wait for those in the rear, owing to the fact that

when the flock is passing over the intervening mountain range, the birds in

the rear lose sight of their companions in the van.

  Fishes also in a similar manner shift their habitat now out of the Euxine

and now into it. In winter they move from the outer sea in towards land in

quest of heat; in summer they shift from shallow waters to the deep sea to

escape the heat.

  Weakly birds in winter and in frosty weather come down to the plains for

warmth, and in summer migrate to the hills for coolness. The more weakly an

animal is the greater hurry will it be in to migrate on account of extremes of

temperature, either hot or cold; thus the mackerel migrates in advance of the

tunnies, and the quail in advance of the cranes. The former migrates in the

month  of  Boedromion,  and  the  latter  in  the  month  of  Maemacterion.  All

creatures are fatter in migrating from cold to heat than in migrating from heat

to cold; thus the quail is fatter when he emigrates in autumn than when he

arrives in spring. The migration from cold countries is contemporaneous with

the close of the hot season. Animals are in better trim for breeding purposes

in spring-time, when they change from hot to cool lands.

Of birds, the crane, as has been said, migrates from one end of the world to

the other; they fly against the wind. The story told about the stone is untrue:

to wit, that the bird, so the story goes, carries in its inside a stone by way of

ballast, and that the stone when vomited up is a touchstone for gold.

The cushat and the rock-dove migrate, and never winter in our country, as

is the case also with the turtle-dove; the common pigeon, however, stays

behind. The quail also migrates; only, by the way, a few quails and turtle-

doves may stay behind here and there in sunny districts. Cushats and turtle-

doves  flock  together,  both  when  they  arrive  and  when  the  season  for

migration comes round again. When quails come to land, if it be fair weather

or  if  a  north  wind  is  blowing,  they  will  pair  off  and  manage  pretty

comfortably; but if a southerly wind prevail they are greatly distressed owing

to the difficulties in the way of flight, for a southerly wind is wet and violent.

For this reason bird-catchers are never on the alert for these birds during fineweather, but only during the prevalence of southerly winds, when the bird

from the violence of the wind is unable to fly. And, by the way, it is owing to

the  distress  occasioned  by  the  bulkiness  of  its  body  that  the  bird  always

screams while flying: for the labour is severe. When the quails come from

abroad they have no leaders, but when they migrate hence, the glottis flits

along  with  them,  as  does  also  the  landrail,  and  the  eared  owl,  and  the

corncrake. The corncrake calls them in the night, and when the birdcatchers

hear the croak of the bird in the nighttime they know that the quails are on the

move. The landrail is like a marsh bird, and the glottis has a tongue that can

project far out of its beak. The eared owl is like an ordinary owl, only that it

has feathers about its ears; by some it is called the night-raven. It is a great

rogue of a bird, and is a capital mimic; a bird-catcher will dance before it and,

while the bird is mimicking his gestures, the accomplice comes behind and

catches it. The common owl is caught by a similar trick.

As  a  general  rule  all  birds  with  crooked  talons  are  short-necked,  flat-

tongued, and disposed to mimicry. The Indian bird, the parrot, which is said

to have a man’s tongue, answers to this description; and, by the way, after

drinking wine, the parrot becomes more saucy than ever.

Of birds, the following are migratory-the crane, the swan, the pelican, and

the lesser goose.

<

div id="section163" class="section" title="13">


13


Of  fishes,  some,  as  has  been  observed,  migrate  from  the  outer  seas  in

towards  shore,  and  from  the  shore  towards  the  outer  seas,  to  avoid  the

extremes of cold and heat.

Fish living near to the shore are better eating than deep-sea fish. The fact is

they have more abundant and better feeding, for wherever the sun’s heat can

reach vegetation is more abundant, better in quality, and more delicate, as is

seen in any ordinary garden. Further, the black shore-weed grows near to

shore; the other shore-weed is like wild weed. Besides, the parts of the sea

near to shore are subjected to a more equable temperature; and consequently

the flesh of shallow-water fishes is firm and consistent, whereas the flesh of

deep-water fishes is flaccid and watery.

The following fishes are found near into the shore-the synodon, the blackbream, the merou, the gilthead, the mullet, the red mullet, the wrasse, the

weaver,  the  callionymus,  the  goby,  and  rock-fishes  of  all  kinds.  The

following are deep-sea fishes—the trygon, the cartilaginous fishes, the white

conger, the serranus, the erythrinus, and the glaucus. The braize, the sea-

scorpion, the black conger, the muraena, and the piper or sea-cuckoo are

found  alike  in  shallow  and  deep  waters.  These  fishes,  however,  vary  for

various localities; for instance, the goby and all rock-fish are fat off the coast

of  Crete.  Again,  the  tunny  is  out  of  season  in  summer,  when  it  is  being

preyed on by its own peculiar louse-parasite, but after the rising of Arcturus,

when the parasite has left it, it comes into season again. A number of fish also

are found in sea-estuaries; such as the saupe, the gilthead, the red mullet, and,

in point of fact, the greater part of the gregarious fishes. The bonito also is

found in such waters, as, for instance, off the coast of Alopeconnesus; and

most species of fishes are found in Lake Bistonis. The coly-mackerel as a

rule does not enter the Euxine, but passes the summer in the Propontis, where

it spawns, and winters in the Aegean. The tunny proper, the pelamys, and the

bonito penetrate into the Euxine in summer and pass the summer there; as do

also the greater part of such fish as swim in shoals with the currents, or

congregate in shoals together. And most fish congregate in shoals, and shoal-

fishes in all cases have leaders.

Fish penetrate into the Euxine for two reasons, and firstly for food. For the

feeding is more abundant and better in quality owing to the amount of fresh

river-water that discharges into the sea, and moreover, the large fishes of this

inland sea are smaller than the large fishes of the outer sea. In point of fact,

there is no large fish in the Euxine excepting the dolphin and the porpoise,

and the dolphin is a small variety; but as soon as you get into the outer sea the

big fishes are on the big scale. Furthermore, fish penetrate into this sea for the

purpose of breeding; for there are recesses there favourable for spawning, and

the fresh and exceptionally sweet water has an invigorating effect upon the

spawn. After spawning, when the young fishes have attained some size, the

parent fish swim out of the Euxine immediately after the rising of the Pleiads.

If winter comes in with a southerly wind, they swim out with more or less of

deliberation; but, if a north wind be blowing, they swim out with greater

rapidity, from the fact that the breeze is favourable to their own course. And,

by the way, the young fish are caught about this time in the neighbourhood of

Byzantium  very  small  in  size,  as  might  have  been  expected  from  the

shortness of their sojourn in the Euxine. The shoals in general are visible bothas they quit and enter the Euxine. The trichiae, however, only can be caught

during their entry, but are never visible during their exit; in point of fact,

when  a  trichia  is  caught  running  outwards  in  the  neighbourhood  of

Byzantium, the fishermen are particularly careful to cleanse their nets, as the

circumstance is so singular and exceptional. The way of accounting for this

phenomenon is that this fish, and this one only, swims northwards into the

Danube, and then at the point of its bifurcation swims down southwards into

the Adriatic. And, as a proof that this theory is correct, the very opposite

phenomenon presents itself in the Adriatic; that is to say, they are not caught

in that sea during their entry, but are caught during their exit.

  Tunny-fish  swim  into  the  Euxine  keeping  the  shore  on  their  right,  and

swim out of it with the shore upon their left. It is stated that they do so as

being naturally weak-sighted, and seeing better with the right eye.

  During the daytime shoal-fish continue on their way, but during the night

they rest and feed. But if there be moonlight, they continue their journey

without resting at all. Some people accustomed to sea-life assert that shoal-

fish at the period of the winter solstice never move at all, but keep perfectly

still wherever they may happen to have been overtaken by the solstice, and

this lasts until the equinox.

The coly-mackerel is caught more frequently on entering than on quitting

the Euxine. And in the Propontis the fish is at its best before the spawning

season. Shoal-fish, as a rule, are caught in greater quantities as they leave the

Euxine, and at that season they are in the best condition. At the time of their

entrance they are caught in very plump condition close to shore, but those are

in comparatively poor condition that are caught farther out to sea. Very often,

when the coly-mackerel and the mackerel are met by a south wind in their

exit, there are better catches to the southward than in the neighbourhood of

Byzantium. So much then for the phenomenon of migration of fishes.

Now the same phenomenon is observed in fishes as in terrestrial animals in

regard to hibernation: in other words, during winter fishes take to concealing

themselves in out of the way places, and quit their places of concealment in

the warmer season. But, by the way, animals go into concealment by way of

refuge against extreme heat, as well as against extreme cold. Sometimes an

entire genus will thus seek concealment; in other cases some species will do

so and others will not. For instance, the shell-fish seek concealment without

exception, as is seen in the case of those dwelling in the sea, the purple

murex, the ceryx, and all such like; but though in the case of the detachedspecies the phenomenon is obvious-for they hide themselves, as is seen in the

scallop, or they are provided with an operculum on the free surface, as in the

case of land snails-in the case of the non-detached the concealment is not so

clearly observed. They do not go into hiding at one and the same season; but

the snails go in winter, the purple murex and the ceryx for about thirty days at

the rising of the Dog-star, and the scallop at about the same period. But for

the most part they go into concealment when the weather is either extremely

cold or extremely hot.

<

div id="section164" class="section" title="14">


14


  Insects almost all go into hiding, with the exception of such of them as live

in human habitations or perish before the completion of the year. They hide

in the winter; some of them for several days, others for only the coldest days,

as the bee. For the bee also goes into hiding: and the proof that it does so is

that during a certain period bees never touch the food set before them, and if

a bee creeps out of the hive, it is quite transparent, with nothing whatsoever

in its stomach; and the period of its rest and hiding lasts from the setting of

the Pleiads until springtime.

  Animals take their winter-sleep or summer-sleep by concealing themselves

in warm places, or in places where they have been used to lie concealed.

<

div id="section165" class="section" title="15">


15


  Several  blooded  animals  take  this  sleep,  such  as  the  pholidotes  or

tessellates, namely, the serpent, the lizard, the gecko, and the river. crocodile,

all of which go into hiding for four months in the depth of winter, and during

that  time  eat  nothing.  Serpents  in  general  burrow  under  ground  for  this

purpose; the viper conceals itself under a stone.

A great number of fishes also take this sleep, and notably, the hippurus and

coracinus in winter time; for, whereas fish in general may be caught at all

periods of the year more or less, there is this singularity observed in thesefishes, that they are caught within a certain fixed period of the year, and never

by any chance out of it. The muraena also hides, and the orphus or sea-perch,

and the conger. Rock-fish pair off, male and female, for hiding (just as for

breeding); as is observed in the case of the species of wrasse called the thrush

and the owzel, and in the perch.

The tunny also takes a sleep in winter in deep waters, and gets exceedingly

fat after the sleep. The fishing season for the tunny begins at the rising of the

Pleiads and lasts, at the longest, down to the setting of Arcturus; during the

rest  of  the  year  they  are  hid  and  enjoying  immunity.  About  the  time  of

hibernation  a  few  tunnies  or  other  hibernating  fishes  are  caught  while

swimming about, in particularly warm localities and in exceptionally fine

weather, or on nights of full moon; for the fishes are induced (by the warmth

or the light) to emerge for a while from their lair in quest of food.

  Most fishes are at their best for the table during the summer or winter

sleep.

The primas-tunny conceals itself in the mud; this may be inferred from the

fact that during a particular period the fish is never caught, and that, when it

is caught after that period, it is covered with mud and has its fins damaged. In

the  spring  these  tunnies  get  in  motion  and  proceed  towards  the  coast,

coupling and breeding, and the females are now caught full of spawn. At this

time they are considered as in season, but in autumn and in winter as of

inferior quality; at this time also the males are full of milt. When the spawn is

small, the fish is hard to catch, but it is easily caught when the spawn gets

large, as the fish is then infested by its parasite. Some fish burrow for sleep in

the sand and some in mud, just keeping their mouths outside.

  Most fishes hide, then, during the winter only, but crustaceans, the rock-

fish, the ray, and the cartilaginous species hide only during extremely severe

weather, and this may be inferred from the fact that these fishes are never by

any  chance  caught  when  the  weather  is  extremely  cold.  Some  fishes,

however, hide during the summer, as the glaucus or grey-back; this fish hides

in summer for about sixty days. The hake also and the gilthead hide; and we

infer that the hake hides over a lengthened period from the fact that it is only

caught at long intervals. We are led also to infer that fishes hide in summer

from the circumstance that the takes of certain fish are made between the rise

and setting of certain constellations: of the Dog-star in particular, the sea at

this period being upturned from the lower depths. This phenomenon may be

observed to best advantage in the Bosporus; for the mud is there brought upto the surface and the fish are brought up along with it. They say also that

very often, when the sea-bottom is dredged, more fish will be caught by the

second  haul  than  by  the  first  one.  Furthermore,  after  very  heavy  rains

numerous specimens become visible of creatures that at other times are never

seen at all or seen only at intervals.

<

div id="section166" class="section" title="16">


16


A great number of birds also go into hiding; they do not all migrate, as is

generally supposed, to warmer countries. Thus, certain birds (as the kite and

the swallow) when they are not far off from places of this kind, in which they

have their permanent abode, betake themselves thither; others, that are at a

distance from such places, decline the trouble of migration and simply hide

themselves where they are. Swallows, for instance, have been often found in

holes, quite denuded of their feathers, and the kite on its first emergence from

torpidity has been seen to fly from out some such hiding-place. And with

regard to this phenomenon of periodic torpor there is no distinction observed,

whether the talons of a bird be crooked or straight; for instance, the stork, the

owzel,  the  turtle-dove,  and  the  lark,  all  go  into  hiding.  The  case  of  the

turtledove is the most notorious of all, for we would defy any one to assert

that he had anywhere seen a turtle-dove in winter-time; at the beginning of

the hiding time it is exceedingly plump, and during this period it moults, but

retains its plumpness. Some cushats hide; others, instead of hiding, migrate at

the same time as the swallow. The thrush and the starling hide; and of birds

with crooked talons the kite and the owl hide for a few days.

<

div id="section167" class="section" title="17">


17


Of  viviparous  quadrupeds  the  porcupine  and  the  bear  retire  into

concealment. The fact that the bear hides is well established, but there are

doubts as to its motive for so doing, whether it be by reason of the cold or

from some other cause. About this period the male and the female become sofat as to be hardly capable of motion. The female brings forth her young at

this time, and remains in concealment until it is time to bring the cubs out;

and  she  brings  them  out  in  spring,  about  three  months  after  the  winter

solstice. The bear hides for at least forty days; during fourteen of these days it

is said not to move at all, but during most of the subsequent days it moves,

and from time to time wakes up. A she-bear in pregnancy has either never

been caught at all or has been caught very seldom. There can be no doubt but

that  during  this  period  they  eat  nothing;  for  in  the  first  place  they  never

emerge from their hiding-place, and further, when they are caught, their belly

and intestines are found to be quite empty. It is also said that from no food

being taken the gut almost closes up, and that in consequence the animal on

first  emerging  takes  to  eating  arum  with  the  view  of  opening  up  and

distending the gut.

The dormouse actually hides in a tree, and gets very fat at that period; as

does also the white mouse of Pontus.

(Of animals that hide or go torpid some slough off what is called their ‘old-

age’.  This  name  is  applied  to  the  outermost  skin,  and  to  the  casing  that

envelops the developing organism.)

In discussing the case of terrestrial vivipara we stated that the reason for

the bear’s seeking concealment is an open question. We now proceed to treat

of the tessellates. The tessellates for the most part go into hiding, and if their

skin is soft they slough off their ‘old-age’, but not if the skin is shell-like, as

is the shell of the tortoise-for, by the way, the tortoise and the fresh water

tortoise belong to the tessellates. Thus, the old-age is sloughed off by the

gecko, the lizard, and above all, by serpents; and they slough off the skin in

springtime when emerging from their torpor, and again in the autumn. Vipers

also slough off their skin both in spring and in autumn, and it is not the case,

as some aver, that this species of the serpent family is exceptional in not

sloughing. When the serpent begins to slough, the skin peels off at first from

the eyes, so that any one ignorant of the phenomenon would suppose the

animal were going blind; after that it peels off the head, and so on, until the

creature presents to view only a white surface all over. The sloughing goes on

for  a  day  and  a  night,  beginning  with  the  head  and  ending  with  the  tail.

During the sloughing of the skin an inner layer comes to the surface, for the

creature emerges just as the embryo from its afterbirth.

All insects that slough at all slough in the same way; as the silphe, and the

empis or midge, and all the coleoptera, as for instance the cantharus-beetle.They all slough after the period of development; for just as the afterbirth

breaks from off the young of the vivipara so the outer husk breaks off from

around the young of the vermipara, in the same way both with the bee and the

grasshopper. The cicada the moment after issuing from the husk goes and sits

upon an olive tree or a reed; after the breaking up of the husk the creature

issues out, leaving a little moisture behind, and after a short interval flies up

into the air and sets a. chirping.

Of marine animals the crawfish and the lobster slough sometimes in the

spring, and sometimes in autumn after parturition. Lobsters have been caught

occasionally with the parts about the thorax soft, from the shell having there

peeled off, and the lower parts hard, from the shell having not yet peeled off

there; for, by the way, they do not slough in the same manner as the serpent.

The crawfish hides for about five months. Crabs also slough off their old-age;

this is generally allowed with regard to the soft-shelled crabs, and it is said to

be the case with the testaceous kind, as for instance with the large ‘granny’

crab. When these animals slough their shell becomes soft all over, and as for

the crab, it can scarcely crawl. These animals also do not cast their skins once

and for all, but over and over again.

So much for the animals that go into hiding or torpidity, for the times at

which, and the ways in which, they go; and so much also for the animals that

slough off their old-age, and for the times at which they undergo the process.

<

div id="section168" class="section" title="18">


18


  Animals do not all thrive at the same seasons, nor do they thrive alike

during all extremes of weather. Further animals of diverse species are in a

diverse way healthy or sickly at certain seasons; and, in point of fact, some

animals have ailments that are unknown to others. Birds thrive in times of

drought, both in their general health and in regard to parturition, and this is

especially the case with the cushat; fishes, however, with a few exceptions,

thrive best in rainy weather; on the contrary rainy seasons are bad for birds-

and so by the way is much drinking-and drought is bad for fishes. Birds of

prey, as has been already stated, may in a general way be said never to drink

at all, though Hesiod appears to have been ignorant of the fact, for in his story

about  the  siege  of  Ninus  he  represents  the  eagle  that  presided  over  theauguries as in the act of drinking; all other birds drink, but drink sparingly, as

is the case also with all other spongy-lunged oviparous animals. Sickness in

birds may be diagnosed from their plumage, which is ruffled when they are

sickly instead of lying smooth as when they are well.

<

div id="section169" class="section" title="19">


19


The majority of fishes, as has been stated, thrive best in rainy seasons. Not

only have they food in greater abundance at this time, but in a general way

rain is wholesome for them just as it is for vegetation-for, by the way, kitchen

vegetables, though artificially watered, derive benefit from rain; and the same

remark applies even to reeds that grow in marshes, as they hardly grow at all

without a rainfall. That rain is good for fishes may be inferred from the fact

that  most  fishes  migrate  to  the  Euxine  for  the  summer;  for  owing  to  the

number of the rivers that discharge into this sea its water is exceptionally

fresh, and the rivers bring down a large supply of food. Besides, a great

number of fishes, such as the bonito and the mullet, swim up the rivers and

thrive in the rivers and marshes. The sea-gudgeon also fattens in the rivers,

and, as a rule, countries abounding in lagoons furnish unusually excellent

fish. While most fishes, then, are benefited by rain, they are chiefly benefited

by summer rain; or we may state the case thus, that rain is good for fishes in

spring, summer, and autumn, and fine dry weather in winter. As a general

rule what is good for men is good for fishes also.

  Fishes do not thrive in cold places, and those fishes suffer most in severe

winters that have a stone in their head, as the chromis, the basse, the sciaena,

and the braize; for owing to the stone they get frozen with the cold, and are

thrown up on shore.

  Whilst  rain  is  wholesome  for  most  fishes,  it  is,  on  the  contrary,

unwholesome for the mullet, the cephalus, and the so-called marinus, for rain

superinduces blindness in most of these fishes, and all the more rapidly if the

rainfall be superabundant. The cephalus is peculiarly subject to this malady in

severe  winters;  their  eyes  grow  white,  and  when  caught  they  are  in  poor

condition, and eventually the disease kills them. It would appear that this

disease is due to extreme cold even more than to an excessive rainfall; for

instance, in many places and more especially in shallows off the coast ofNauplia, in the Argolid, a number of fishes have been known to be caught out

at  sea  in  seasons  of  severe  cold.  The  gilthead  also  suffers  in  winter;  the

acharnas suffers in summer, and loses condition. The coracine is exceptional

among fishes in deriving benefit from drought, and this is due to the fact that

heat and drought are apt to come together.

  Particular  places  suit  particular  fishes;  some  are  naturally  fishes  of  the

shore, and some of the deep sea, and some are at home in one or the other of

these regions, and others are common to the two and are at home in both.

Some fishes will thrive in one particular spot, and in that spot only. As a

general rule it may be said that places abounding in weeds are wholesome; at

all events, fishes caught in such places are exceptionally fat: that is, such

fishes a a habit all sorts of localities as well. The fact is that weed-eating

fishes find abundance of their special food in such localities, and carnivorous

fish find an unusually large number of smaller fish. It matters also whether

the wind be from the north or south: the longer fish thrive better when a north

wind prevails, and in summer at one and the same spot more long fish will be

caught than flat fish with a north wind blowing.

The tunny and the sword-fish are infested with a parasite about the rising

of the Dog-star; that is to say, about this time both these fishes have a grub

beside their fins that is nicknamed the ‘gadfly’. It resembles the scorpion in

shape, and is about the size of the spider. So acute is the pain it inflicts that

the sword-fish will often leap as high out of the water as a dolphin; in fact, it

sometimes leaps over the bulwarks of a vessel and falls back on the deck. The

tunny delights more than any other fish in the heat of the sun. It will burrow

for warmth in the sand in shallow waters near to shore, or will, because it is

warm, disport itself on the surface of the sea.

The fry of little fishes escape by being overlooked, for it is only the larger

ones of the small species that fishes of the large species will pursue. The

greater part of the spawn and the fry of fishes is destroyed by the heat of the

sun, for whatever of them the sun reaches it spoils.

  Fishes are caught in greatest abundance before sunrise and after sunset, or,

speaking generally, just about sunset and sunrise. Fishermen haul up their

nets at these times, and speak of the hauls then made as the ‘nick-of-time’

hauls. The fact is, that at these times fishes are particularly weak-sighted; at

night they are at rest, and as the light grows stronger they see comparatively

well.

We know of no pestilential malady attacking fishes, such as those whichattack man, and horses and oxen among the quadrupedal vivipara, and certain

species of other genera, domesticated and wild; but fishes do seem to suffer

from sickness; and fishermen infer this from the fact that at times fishes in

poor condition, and looking as though they were sick, and of altered colour,

are caught in a large haul of well-conditioned fish of their own species. So

much for sea-fishes.

<

div id="section170" class="section" title="20">


20


  River-fish  and  lake-fish  also  are  exempt  from  diseases  of  a  pestilential

character, but certain species are subject to special and peculiar maladies. For

instance, the sheat-fish just before the rising of the Dog-star, owing to its

swimming  near  the  surface  of  the  water,  is  liable  to  sunstroke,  and  is

paralysed  by  a  loud  peal  of  thunder.  The  carp  is  subject  to  the  same

eventualities  but  in  a  lesser  degree.  The  sheatfish  is  destroyed  in  great

quantities in shallow waters by the serpent called the dragon. In the balerus

and tilon a worm is engendered about the rising of the Dog-star, that sickens

these fish and causes them to rise towards the surface, where they are killed

by the excessive heat. The chalcis is subject to a very violent malady; lice are

engendered underneath their gills in great numbers, and cause destruction

among them; but no other species of fish is subject to any such malady.

If mullein be introduced into water it will kill fish in its vicinity. It is used

extensively for catching fish in rivers and ponds; by the Phoenicians it is

made use of also in the sea.

  There are two other methods employed for catch-fish. It is a known fact

that in winter fishes emerge from the deep parts of rivers and, by the way, at

all seasons fresh water is tolerably cold. A trench accordingly is dug leading

into a river, and wattled at the river end with reeds and stones, an aperture

being left in the wattling through which the river water flows into the trench;

when the frost comes on the fish can be taken out of the trench in weels.

Another method is adopted in summer and winter alike. They run across a

stream a dam composed of brushwood and stones leaving a small open space,

and in this space they insert a weel; they then coop the fish in towards this

place, and draw them up in the weel as they swim through the open space.

  Shell-fish, as a rule, are benefited by rainy weather. The purple murex is anexception; if it be placed on a shore near to where a river discharges, it will

die within a day after tasting the fresh water. The murex lives for about fifty

days  after  capture;  during  this  period  they  feed  off  one  another,  as  there

grows on the shell a kind of sea-weed or sea-moss; if any food is thrown to

them during this period, it is said to be done not to keep them alive, but to

make them weigh more.

To shell-fish in general drought is unwholesome. During dry weather they

decrease in size and degenerate in quality; and it is during such weather that

the red scallop is found in more than usual abundance. In the Pyrrhaean Strait

the  clam  was  exterminated,  partly  by  the  dredging-machine  used  in  their

capture, and partly by long-continued droughts. Rainy weather is wholesome

to  the  generality  of  shellfish  owing  to  the  fact  that  the  sea-water  then

becomes exceptionally sweet. In the Euxine, owing to the coldness of the

climate, shellfish are not found: nor yet in rivers, excepting a few bivalves

here and there. Univalves, by the way, are very apt to freeze to death in

extremely cold weather. So much for animals that live in water.

<

div id="section171" class="section" title="21">


21


To turn to quadrupeds, the pig suffers from three diseases, one of which is

called branchos, a disease attended with swellings about the windpipe and the

jaws. It may break out in any part of the body; very often it attacks the foot,

and occasionally the ear; the neighbouring parts also soon rot, and the decay

goes on until it reaches the lungs, when the animal succumbs. The disease

develops with great rapidity, and the moment it sets in the animal gives up

eating. The swineherds know but one way to cure it, namely, by complete

excision, when they detect the first signs of the disease. There are two other

diseases, which are both alike termed craurus. The one is attended with pain

and heaviness in the head, and this is the commoner of the two, the other with

diarrhoea.  The  latter  is  incurable,  the  former  is  treated  by  applying  wine

fomentations to the snout and rinsing the nostrils with wine. Even this disease

is very hard to cure; it has been known to kill within three or four days. The

animal is chiefly subject to branchos when it gets extremely fat, and when the

heat has brought a good supply of figs. The treatment is to feed on mashed

mulberries, to give repeated warm baths, and to lance the under part of thetongue.

Pigs with flabby flesh are subject to measles about the legs, neck, and

shoulders, for the pimples develop chiefly in these parts. If the pimples are

few in number the flesh is comparatively sweet, but if they be numerous it

gets  watery  and  flaccid.  The  symptoms  of  measles  are  obvious,  for  the

pimples show chiefly on the under side of the tongue, and if you pluck the

bristles off the chine the skin will appear suffused with blood, and further the

animal will be unable to keep its hind-feet at rest. Pigs never take this disease

while they are mere sucklings. The pimples may be got rid of by feeding on

this kind of spelt called tiphe; and this spelt, by the way, is very good for

ordinary food. The best food for rearing and fattening pigs is chickpeas and

figs, but the one thing essential is to vary the food as much as possible, for

this animal, like animals in general lights in a change of diet; and it is said

that one kind of food blows the animal out, that another superinduces flesh,

and that another puts on fat, and that acorns, though liked by the animal,

render the flesh flaccid. Besides, if a sow eats acorns in great quantities, it

will miscarry, as is also the case with the ewe; and, indeed, the miscarriage is

more certain in the case of the ewe than in the case of the sow. The pig is the

only animal known to be subject to measles.

<

div id="section172" class="section" title="22">


22


  Dogs  suffer  from  three  diseases;  rabies,  quinsy,  and  sore  feet.  Rabies

drives the animal mad, and ary animal whatever, excepting man, will take the

disease if bitten by a dog so afflicted; the disease is fatal to the dog itself, and

to any animal it may bite, man excepted. Quinsy also is fatal to dogs; and

only  a  few  recover  from  disease  of  the  feet.  The  camel,  like  the  dog,  is

subject to rabies. The elephant, which is reputed to enjoy immunity from all

other illnesses, is occasionally subject to flatulency.

<

div id="section173" class="section" title="23">


23  Cattle in herds are liable to two diseases, foot, sickness and craurus. In the

former  their  feet  suffer  from  eruptions,  but  the  animal  recovers  from  the

disease without even the loss of the hoof. It is found of service to smear the

horny parts with warm pitch. In craurus, the breath comes warm at short

intervals; in fact, craurus in cattle answers to fever in man. The symptoms of

the disease are drooping of the ears and disinclination for food. The animal

soon succumbs, and when the carcase is opened the lungs are found to be

rotten.

<

div id="section174" class="section" title="24">


24


  Horses out at pasture are free from all diseases excepting disease of the

feet. From this disease they sometimes lose their hooves: but after losing

them they grow them soon again, for as one hoof is decaying it is being

replaced by another. Symptoms of the malady are a sinking in and wrinkling

of the lip in the middle under the nostrils, and in the case of the male, a

twitching of the right testicle.

  Stall-reared horses are subject to very numerous forms of disease. They are

liable to disease called ‘eileus’. Under this disease the animal trails its hind-

legs under its belly so far forward as almost to fall back on its haunches; if it

goes without food for several days and turns rabid, it may be of service to

draw blood, or to castrate the male. The animal is subject also to tetanus: the

veins get rigid, as also the head and neck, and the animal walks with its legs

stretched out straight. The horse suffers also from abscesses. Another painful

illness afflicts them called the ‘barley-surfeit’. The are a softening of the

palate and heat of the breath; the animal may recover through the strength of

its own constitution, but no formal remedies are of any avail.

  There is also a disease called nymphia, in which the animal is said to stand

still and droop its head on hearing flute-music; if during this ailment the

horse be mounted, it will run off at a gallop until it is pulled. Even with this

rabies in full force, it preserves a dejected spiritless appearance; some of the

symptoms are a throwing back of the ears followed by a projection of them,

great languor, and heavy breathing. Heart-ache also is incurable, of which the

symptom is a drawing in of the flanks; and so is displacement of the bladder,

which is accompanied by a retention of urine and a drawing up of the hoovesand haunches. Neither is there any cure if the animal swallow the grape-

beetle, which is about the size of the sphondyle or knuckle-beetle. The bite of

the shrewmouse is dangerous to horses and other draught animals as well; it

is followed by boils. The bite is all the more dangerous if the mouse be

pregnant when she bites, for the boils then burst, but do not burst otherwise.

The cicigna-called ‘chalcis’ by some, and ‘zignis’ by others-either causes

death by its bite or, at all events, intense pain; it is like a small lizard, with the

colour of the blind snake. In point of fact, according to experts, the horse and

the sheep have pretty well as many ailments as the human species. The drug

known under the name of ‘sandarace’ or realgar, is extremely injurious to a

horse, and to all draught animals; it is given to the animal as a medicine in a

solution of water, the liquid being filtered through a colander. The mare when

pregnant apt to miscarry when disturbed by the odour of an extinguished

candle;  and  a  similar  accident  happens  occasionally  to  women  in  their

pregnancy. So much for the diseases of the horse.

The so-called hippomanes grows, as has stated, on the foal, and the mare

nibbles  it  off  as  she  licks  and  cleans  the  foal.  All  the  curious  stories

connected with the hippomanes are due to old wives and to the venders of

charms.  What  is  called  the  ‘polium’  or  foal’s  membrane,  is,  as  all  the

accounts state, delivered by the mother before the foal appears.

A horse will recognize the neighing of any other horse with which it may

have  fought  at  any  previous  period.  The  horse  delights  in  meadows  and

marshes, and likes to drink muddy water; in fact, if water be clear, the horse

will trample in it to make it turbid, will then drink it, and afterwards will

wallow in it. The animal is fond of water in every way, whether for drinking

or for bathing purposes; and this explains the peculiar constitution of the

hippopotamus or river-horse. In regard to water the ox is the opposite of the

horse; for if the water be impure or cold, or mixed up with alien matter, it will

refuse to drink it.

<

div id="section175" class="section" title="25">


25


The ass suffers chiefly from one particular disease which they call ‘melis’.

It arises first in the head, and a clammy humour runs down the nostrils, thick

and red; if it stays in the head the animal may recover, but if it descends intothe lungs the animal will die. Of all animals on its of its kind it is the least

capable of enduring extreme cold, which circumstance will account for the

fact that the animal is not found on the shores of the Euxine, nor in Scythia.

<

div id="section176" class="section" title="26">


26


  Elephants suffer from flatulence, and when thus afflicted can void neither

solid nor liquid residuum. If the elephant swallow earth-mould it suffers from

relaxation; but if it go on taking it steadily, it will experience no harm. From

time to time it takes to swallowing stones. It suffers also from diarrhoea: in

this case they administer draughts of lukewarm water or dip its fodder in

honey, and either one or the other prescription will prove a costive. When

they suffer from insomnia, they will be restored to health if their shoulders be

rubbed with salt, olive-oil, and warm water; when they have aches in their

shoulders they will derive great benefit from the application of roast pork.

Some elephants like olive oil, and others do not. If there is a bit of iron in the

inside of an elephant it is said that it will pass out if the animal takes a drink

of olive-oil; if the animal refuses olive-oil, they soak a root in the oil and give

it the root to swallow. So much, then, for quadrupeds.

<

div id="section177" class="section" title="27">


27


  Insects, as a general rule, thrive best in the time of year in which they come

into being, especially if the season be moist and warm, as in spring.

In bee-hives are found creatures that do great damage to the combs; for

instance, the grub that spins a web and ruins the honeycomb: it is called the

‘cleros’.  It  engenders  an  insect  like  itself,  of  a  spider-shape,  and  brings

disease into the swarm. There is another insect resembling the moth, called

by  some  the  ‘pyraustes’,  that  flies  about  a  lighted  candle:  this  creature

engenders a brood full of a fine down. It is never stung by a bee, and can only

be got out of a hive by fumigation. A caterpillar also is engendered in hives,

of a species nicknamed the teredo, or ‘borer’, with which creature the beenever interferes. Bees suffer most when flowers are covered with mildew, or

in seasons of drought.

All insects, without exception, die if they be smeared over with oil; and

they die all the more rapidly if you smear their head with the oil and lay them

out in the sun.

<

div id="section178" class="section" title="28">


28


  Variety in animal life may be produced by variety of locality: thus in one

place an animal will not be found at all, in another it will be small, or short-

lived, or will not thrive. Sometimes this sort of difference is observed in

closely adjacent districts. Thus, in the territory of Miletus, in one district

cicadas are found while there are none in the district close adjoining; and in

Cephalenia there is a river on one side of which the cicada is found and not

on the other. In Pordoselene there is a public road one side of which the

weasel is found but not on the other. In Boeotia the mole is found in great

abundance  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Orchomenus,  but  there  are  none  in

Lebadia though it is in the immediate vicinity, and if a mole be transported

from the one district to the other it will refuse to burrow in the soil. The hare

cannot live in Ithaca if introduced there; in fact it will be found dead, turned

towards the point of the beach where it was landed. The horseman-ant is not

found  in  Sicily;  the  croaking  frog  has  only  recently  appeared  in  the

neighbourhood of Cyrene. In the whole of Libya there is neither wild boar,

nor  stag,  nor  wild  goat;  and  in  India,  according  to  Ctesias-no  very  good

authority, by the way-there are no swine, wild or tame, but animals that are

devoid of blood and such as go into hiding or go torpid are all of immense

size there. In the Euxine there are no small molluscs nor testaceans, except a

few here and there; but in the Red Sea all the testaceans are exceedingly

large. In Syria the sheep have tails a cubit in breadth; the goats have ears a

span and a palm long, and some have ears that flap down to the ground; and

the cattle have humps on their shoulders, like the camel. In Lycia goats are

shorn for their fleece, just as sheep are in all other countries. In Libya the

long-horned ram is born with horns, and not the ram only, as Homer’ words

it, but the ewe as well; in Pontus, on the confines of Scythia, the ram is

without horns.In Egypt animals, as a rule, are larger than their congeners in Greece, as

the cow and the sheep; but some are less, as the dog, the wolf, the hare, the

fox, the raven, and the hawk; others are of pretty much the same size, as the

crow and the goat. The difference, where it exists, is attributed to the food, as

being abundant in one case and insufficient in another, for instance for the

wolf and the hawk; for provision is scanty for the carnivorous animals, small

birds being scarce; food is scanty also for the hare and for all frugivorous

animals, because neither the nuts nor the fruit last long.

In many places the climate will account for peculiarities; thus in Illyria,

Thrace, and Epirus the ass is small, and in Gaul and in Scythia the ass is not

found at all owing to the coldness of the climate of these countries. In Arabia

the lizard is more than a cubit in length, and the mouse is much larger than

our field-mouse, with its hind-legs a span long and its front legs the length of

the first finger-joint. In Libya, according to all accounts, the length of the

serpents is something appalling; sailors spin a yarn to the effect that some

crews once put ashore and saw the bones of a number of oxen, and that they

were sure that the oxen had been devoured by serpents, for, just as they were

putting  out  to  sea,  serpents  came  chasing  their  galleys  at  full  speed  and

overturned one galley and set upon the crew. Again, lions are more numerous

in Libya, and in that district of Europe that lies between the Achelous and the

Nessus; the leopard is more abundant in Asia Minor, and is not found in

Europe at all. As a general rule, wild animals are at their wildest in Asia, at

their boldest in Europe, and most diverse in form in Libya; in fact, there is an

old saying, ‘Always something fresh in Libya.’

It would appear that in that country animals of diverse species meet, on

account  of  the  rainless  climate,  at  the  watering-places,  and  there  pair

together; and that such pairs will often breed if they be nearly of the same

size and have periods of gestation of the same length. For it is said that they

are tamed down in their behaviour towards each other by extremity of thirst.

And, by the way, unlike animals elsewhere, they require to drink more in

wintertime  than  in  summer:  for  they  acquire  the  habit  of  not  drinking  in

summer, owing to the circumstance that there is usually no water then; and

the  mice,  if  they  drink,  die.  Elsewhere  also  bastard-animals  are  born  to

heterogeneous pairs; thus in Cyrene the wolf and the bitch will couple and

breed; and the Laconian hound is a cross between the fox and the dog. They

say that the Indian dog is a cross between the tiger and the bitch, not the first

cross, but a cross in the third generation; for they say that the first cross is asavage creature. They take the bitch to a lonely spot and tie her up: if the tiger

be in an amorous mood he will pair with her; if not he will eat her up, and

this casualty is of frequent occurrence.

<

div id="section179" class="section" title="29">


29


  Locality will differentiate habits also: for instance, rugged highlands will

not  produce  the  same  results  as  the  soft  lowlands.  The  animals  of  the

highlands look fiercer and bolder, as is seen in the swine of Mount Athos; for

a lowland boar is no match even for a mountain sow.

  Again, locality is an important element in regard to the bite of an animal.

Thus, in Pharos and other places, the bite of the scorpion is not dangerous;

elsewhere-in Caria, for instances-where scorpions are venomous as well as

plentiful and of large size, the sting is fatal to man or beast, even to the pig,

and especially to a black pig, though the pig, by the way, is in general most

singularly indifferent to the bite of any other creature. If a pig goes into water

after being struck by the scorpion of Caria, it will surely die.

  There is great variety in the effects produced by the bites of serpents. The

asp is found in Libya; the so-called ‘septic’ drug is made from the body of the

animal, and is the only remedy known for the bite of the original. Among the

silphium, also, a snake is found, for the bite or which a certain stone is said to

be a cure: a stone that is brought from the grave of an ancient king, which

stone is put into water and drunk off. In certain parts of Italy the bite of the

gecko is fatal. But the deadliest of all bites of venomous creatures is when

one venomous animal has bitten another; as, for instance, a viper’s after it has

bitten a scorpion. To the great majority of such creatures man’s is fatal. There

is a very little snake, by some entitled the ‘holy-snake’, which is dreaded by

even the largest serpents. It is about an ell long, and hairy-looking; whenever

it bites an animal, the flesh all round the wound will at once mortify. There is

in India a small snake which is exceptional in this respect, that for its bite no

specific whatever is known.

<

div id="section180" class="section" title="30">


30  Animals also vary as to their condition of health in connexion with their

pregnancy.

  Testaceans, such as scallops and all the oyster-family, and crustaceans,

such as the lobster family, are best when with spawn. Even in the case of the

testacean we speak of spawning (or pregnancy); but whereas the crustaceans

may be seen coupling and laying their spawn, this is never the case with

testaceans. Molluscs are best in the breeding time, as the calamary, the sepia,

and the octopus.

  Fishes, when they begin to breed, are nearly all good for the table; but after

the female has gone long with spawn they are good in some cases, and in

others are out of season. The maenis, for instance, is good at the breeding

time. The female of this fish is round, the male longer and flatter; when the

female is beginning to breed the male turns black and mottled, and is quite

unfit for the table; at this period he is nicknamed the ‘goat’.

The wrasses called the owzel and the thrush, and the smaris have different

colours at different seasons, as is the case with the plumage of certain birds;

that is to say, they become black in the spring and after the spring get white

again. The phycis also changes its hue: in general it is white, but in spring it

is mottled; it is the only sea-fish which is said make a bed for itself, and the

female lays her spawn in this bed or nest. The maenis, as was observed,

changes its colour as does the smaris, and in summer-time changes back from

whitish to black, the change being especially marked about the fins and gills.

The  coracine,  like  the  maenis,  is  in  best  condition  at  breeding  time;  the

mullet, the basse, and scaly fishes in general are in bad condition at this

period. A few fish are in much the same condition at all times, whether with

spawn or not, as the glaucus. Old fishes also are bad eating; the old tunny is

unfit even for pickling, as a great part of its flesh wastes away with age, and

the same wasting is observed in all old fishes. The age of a scaly fish may be

told by the size and the hardness of its scales. An old tunny has been caught

weighing fifteen talents, with the span of its tail two cubits and a palm broad.

  River-fish and lake-fish are best after they have discharged the spawn in

the case of the female and the milt in the case of the male: that is, when they

have fully recovered from the exhaustion of such discharge. Some are good

in the breeding time, as the saperdis, and some bad, as the sheat-fish. As a

general rule, the male fish is better eating than the female; but the reverse

holds good of the sheat-fish. The eels that are called females are the best for

the table: they look as though they were female, but they really are not so.                    The History of Animals, Book IX


translated by D’Arcy Wentworth Thompson


<

div id="book9" class="chapter" title="Book IX">


1


Of  the  animals  that  are  comparatively  obscure  and  short-lived  the

characters or dispositions are not so obvious to recognition as are those of

animals that are longer-lived. These latter animals appear to have a natural

capacity  corresponding  to  each  of  the  passions:  to  cunning  or  simplicity,

courage  or  timidity,  to  good  temper  or  to  bad,  and  to  other  similar

dispositions of mind.

  Some also are capable of giving or receiving instruction-of receiving it

from one another or from man: those that have the faculty of hearing, for

instance;  and,  not  to  limit  the  matter  to  audible  sound,  such  as  can

differentiate the suggested meanings of word and gesture.

In all genera in which the distinction of male and female is found, Nature

makes a similar differentiation in the mental characteristics of the two sexes.

This differentiation is the most obvious in the case of human kind and in that

of the larger animals and the viviparous quadrupeds. In the case of these

latter the female softer in character, is the sooner tamed, admits more readily

of  caressing,  is  more  apt  in  the  way  of  learning;  as,  for  instance,  in  the

Laconian  breed  of  dogs  the  female  is  cleverer  than  the  male.  Of  the

Molossian breed of dogs, such as are employed in the chase are pretty much

the same as those elsewhere; but sheep-dogs of this breed are superior to the

others in size, and in the courage with which they face the attacks of wild

animals.

  Dogs  that  are  born  of  a  mixed  breed  between  these  two  kinds  are

remarkable for courage and endurance of hard labour.

In all cases, excepting those of the bear and leopard, the female is less

spirited than the male; in regard to the two exceptional cases, the superiority

in courage rests with the female. With all other animals the female is softer indisposition than the male, is more mischievous, less simple, more impulsive,

and more attentive to the nurture of the young: the male, on the other hand, is

more spirited than the female, more savage, more simple and less cunning.

The  traces  of  these  differentiated  characteristics  are  more  or  less  visible

everywhere,  but  they  are  especially  visible  where  character  is  the  more

developed, and most of all in man.

The fact is, the nature of man is the most rounded off and complete, and

consequently in man the qualities or capacities above referred to are found in

their perfection. Hence woman is more compassionate than man, more easily

moved to tears, at the same time is more jealous, more querulous, more apt to

scold and to strike. She is, furthermore, more prone to despondency and less

hopeful  than  the  man,  more  void  of  shame  or  self-respect,  more  false  of

speech, more deceptive, and of more retentive memory. She is also more

wakeful, more shrinking, more difficult to rouse to action, and requires a

smaller quantity of nutriment.

As was previously stated, the male is more courageous than the female,

and more sympathetic in the way of standing by to help. Even in the case of

molluscs, when the cuttle-fish is struck with the trident the male stands by to

help the female; but when the male is struck the female runs away.

  There is enmity between such animals as dwell in the same localities or

subsist on the food. If the means of subsistence run short, creatures of like

kind will fight together. Thus it is said that seals which inhabit one and the

same district will fight, male with male, and female with female, until one

combatant kills the other, or one is driven away by the other; and their young

do even in like manner.

All creatures are at enmity with the carnivores, and the carnivores with all

the rest, for they all subsist on living creatures. Soothsayers take notice of

cases  where  animals  keep  apart  from  one  another,  and  cases  where  they

congregate  together;  calling  those  that  live  at  war  with  one  another

‘dissociates’, and those that dwell in peace with one another ‘associates’. One

may go so far as to say that if there were no lack or stint of food, then those

animals that are now afraid of man or are wild by nature would be tame and

familiar with him, and in like manner with one another. This is shown by the

way animals are treated in Egypt, for owing to the fact that food is constantly

supplied to them the very fiercest creatures live peaceably together. The fact

is they are tamed by kindness, and in some places crocodiles are tame to their

priestly  keeper  from  being  fed  by  him.  And  elsewhere  also  the  samephenomenon is to be observed.

The eagle and the snake are enemies, for the eagle lives on snakes; so are

the  ichneumon  and  the  venom-spider,  for  the  ichneumon  preys  upon  the

latter. In the case of birds, there is mutual enmity between the poecilis, the

crested  lark,  the  woodpecker  (?),  and  the  chloreus,  for  they  devour  one

another’s eggs; so also between the crow and the owl; for, owing to the fact

that the owl is dim-sighted by day, the crow at midday preys upon the owl’s

eggs, and the owl at night upon the crow’s, each having the whip-hand of the

other, turn and turn about, night and day.

  There is enmity also between the owl and the wren; for the latter also

devours the owl’s eggs. In the daytime all other little birds flutter round the

owl-a  practice  which  is  popularly  termed  ‘admiring  him’-buffet  him,  and

pluck out his feathers; in consequence of this habit, bird-catchers use the owl

as a decoy for catching little birds of all kinds.

The so-called presbys or ‘old man’ is at war with the weasel and the crow,

for they prey on her eggs and her brood; and so the turtle-dove with the

pyrallis, for they live in the same districts and on the same food; and so with

the green wood pecker and the libyus; and so with kite and the raven, for,

owing to his having the advantage from stronger talons and more rapid flight

the former can steal whatever the latter is holding, so that it is food also that

makes enemies of these. In like manner there is war between birds that get

their living from the sea, as between the brenthus, the gull, and the harpe; and

so between the buzzard on one side and the toad and snake on the other, for

the buzzard preys upon the eggs of the two others; and so between the turtle-

dove and the chloreus; the chloreus kills the dove, and the crow kills the so-

called drummer-bird.

The  aegolius,  and  birds  of  prey  in  general,  prey  upon  the  calaris,  and

consequently there is war between it and them; and so is there war between

the gecko-lizard and the spider, for the former preys upon the latter; and so

between the woodpecker and the heron, for the former preys upon the eggs

and brood of the latter. And so between the aegithus and the ass, owing to the

fact  that  the  ass,  in  passing  a  furze-bush,  rubs  its  sore  and  itching  parts

against the prickles; by so doing, and all the more if it brays, it topples the

eggs and the brood out of the nest, the young ones tumble out in fright, and

the mother-bird, to avenge this wrong, flies at the beast and pecks at his sore

places.

The  wolf  is  at  war  with  the  ass,  the  bull,  and  the  fox,  for  as  being  acarnivore, he attacks these other animals; and so for the same reason with the

fox  and  the  circus,  for  the  circus,  being  carnivorous  and  furnished  with

crooked talons, attacks and maims the animal. And so the raven is at war with

the bull and the ass, for it flies at them, and strikes them, and pecks at their

eyes; and so with the eagle and the heron, for the former, having crooked

talons, attacks the latter, and the latter usually succumbs to the attack; and so

the merlin with the vulture; and the crex with the eleus-owl, the blackbird,

and the oriole (of this latter bird, by the way, the story goes that he was

originally born out of a funeral pyre): the cause of warfare is that the crex

injures both them and their young. The nuthatch and the wren are at war with

the eagle; the nuthatch breaks the eagle’s eggs, so the eagle is at war with it

on special grounds, though, as a bird of prey, it carries on a general war all

round. The horse and the anthus are enemies, and the horse will drive the bird

out of the field where he is grazing: the bird feeds on grass, and sees too

dimly to foresee an attack; it mimics the whinnying of the horse, flies at him,

and  tries  to  frighten  him  away;  but  the  horse  drives  the  bird  away,  and

whenever he catches it he kills it: this bird lives beside rivers or on marsh

ground; it has pretty plumage, and finds its without trouble. The ass is at

enmity  with  the  lizard,  for  the  lizard  sleeps  in  his  manger,  gets  into  his

nostril, and prevents his eating.

Of herons there are three kinds: the ash coloured, the white, and the starry

heron (or bittern). Of these the first mentioned submits with reluctance to the

duties of incubation, or to union of the sexes; in fact, it screams during the

union, and it is said drips blood from its eyes; it lays its eggs also in an

awkward manner, not unattended with pain. It is at war with certain creatures

that do it injury: with the eagle for robbing it, with the fox for worrying it at

night, and with the lark for stealing its eggs.

The snake is at war with the weasel and the pig; with the weasel when they

are both at home, for they live on the same food; with the pig for preying on

her kind. The merlin is at war with the fox; it strikes and claws it, and, as it

has crooked talons, it kills the animal’s young. The raven and the fox are

good friends, for the raven is at enmity with the merlin; and so when the

merlin assails the fox the raven comes and helps the animal. The vulture and

the merlin are mutual enemies, as being both furnished with crooked talons.

The vulture fights with the eagle, and so, by the way, does does swan; and the

swan is often victorious: moreover, of all birds swans are most prone to the

killing of one another.In regard to wild creatures, some sets are at enmity with other sets at all

times and under all circumstances; others, as in the case of man and man, at

special times and under incidental circumstances. The ass and the acanthis are

enemies; for the bird lives on thistles, and the ass browses on thistles when

they are young and tender. The anthus, the acanthis, and the aegithus are at

enmity  with  one  another;  it  is  said  that  the  blood  of  the  anthus  will  not

intercommingle with the blood of the aegithus. The crow and the heron are

friends, as also are the sedge-bird and lark, the laedus and the celeus or green

woodpecker; the woodpecker lives on the banks of rivers and beside brakes,

the laedus lives on rocks and bills, and is greatly attached to its nesting-place.

The piphinx, the harpe, and the kite are friends; as are the fox and the snake,

for both burrow underground; so also are the blackbird and the turtle-dove.

The lion and the thos or civet are enemies, for both are carnivorous and live

on the same food. Elephants fight fiercely with one another, and stab one

another with their tusks; of two combatants the beaten one gets completely

cowed, and dreads the sound of his conqueror’s voice. These animals differ

from  one  another  an  extraordinary  extent  in  the  way  of  courage.  Indians

employ  these  animals  for  war  purposes,  irrespective  of  sex;  the  females,

however, are less in size and much inferior in point of spirit. An elephant by

pushing with his big tusks can batter down a wall, and will butt with his

forehead at a palm until he brings it down, when he stamps on it and lays it in

orderly fashion on the ground. Men hunt the elephant in the following way:

they mount tame elephants of approved spirit and proceed in quest of wild

animals; when they come up with these they bid the tame brutes to beat the

wild ones until they tire the latter completely. Hereupon the driver mounts a

wild brute and guides him with the application of his metal prong; after this

the creature soon becomes tame, and obeys guidance. Now when the driver is

on their back they are all tractable, but after he has dismounted, some are

tame and others vicious; in the case of these latter, they tie their front-legs

with ropes to keep them quiet. The animal is hunted whether young or full

grown.

  Thus we see that in the case of the creatures above mentioned their mutual

friendship or the is due to the food they feed on and the life they lead.

<

div id="section182" class="section" title="2">


2Of fishes, such as swim in shoals together are friendly to one another; such

as do not so swim are enemies. Some fishes swarm during the spawning

season; others after they have spawned. To state the matter comprehensively,

we may say that the following are shoaling fish: the tunny, the maenis, the

sea-gudgeon, the bogue, the horse-mackerel, the coracine, the synodon or

dentex, the red mullet, the sphyraena, the anthias, the eleginus, the atherine,

the sarginus, the gar-fish, (the squid,) the rainbow-wrasse, the pelamyd, the

mackerel, the coly-mackerel. Of these some not only swim in shoals, but go

in pairs inside the shoal; the rest without exception swim in pairs, and only

swim in shoals at certain periods: that is, as has been said, when they are

heavy with spawn or after they have spawned.

The basse and the grey mullet are bitter enemies, but they swarm together

at certain times; for at times not only do fishes of the same species swarm

together, but also those whose feeding-grounds are identical or adjacent, if

the food-supply be abundant. The grey mullet is often found alive with its tail

lopped off, and the conger with all that part of its body removed that lies to

the rear of the vent; in the case of the mullet the injury is wrought by the

basse, in that of the conger-eel by the muraena. There is war between the

larger and the lesser fishes: for the big fishes prey on the little ones. So much

on the subject of marine animals.

<

div id="section183" class="section" title="3">


3


The  characters  of  animals,  as  has  been  observed,  differ  in  respect  to

timidity,  to  gentleness,  to  courage,  to  tameness,  to  intelligence,  and  to

stupidity.

The sheep is said to be naturally dull and stupid. Of all quadrupeds it is the

most foolish: it will saunter away to lonely places with no object in view;

oftentimes in stormy weather it will stray from shelter; if it be overtaken by a

snowstorm, it will stand still unless the shepherd sets it in motion; it will stay

behind and perish unless the shepherd brings up the rams; it will then follow

home.

If  you  catch  hold  of  a  goat’s  beard  at  the  extremity-the  beard  is  of  a

substance  resembling  hair-all  the  companion  goats  will  stand  stock  still,

staring at this particular goat in a kind of dumbfounderment.You will have a warmer bed in amongst the goats than among the sheep,

because the goats will be quieter and will creep up towards you; for the goat

is more impatient of cold than the sheep.

  Shepherds train sheep to close in together at a clap of their hands, for if,

when a thunderstorm comes on, a ewe stays behind without closing in, the

storm will kill it if it be with young; consequently if a sudden clap or noise is

made, they close in together within the sheepfold by reason of their training.

  Even bulls, when they are roaming by themselves apart from the herd, are

killed by wild animals.

  Sheep and goats lie crowded together, kin by kin. When the sun turns early

towards its setting, the goats are said to lie no longer face to face, but back to

back.

<

div id="section184" class="section" title="4">


4


  Cattle at pasture keep together in their accustomed herds, and if one animal

strays  away  the  rest  will  follow;  consequently  if  the  herdsmen  lose  one

particular animal, they keep close watch on all the rest.

  When mares with their colts pasture together in the same field, if one dam

dies the others will take up the rearing of the colt. In point of fact, the mare

appears  to  be  singularly  prone  by  nature  to  maternal  fondness;  in  proof

whereof a barren mare will steal the foal from its dam, will tend it with all the

solicitude of a mother, but, as it will be unprovided with mother’s milk, its

solicitude will prove fatal to its charge.

<

div id="section185" class="section" title="5">


5


  Among wild quadrupeds the hind appears to be pre-eminently intelligent;

for example, in its habit of bringing forth its young on the sides of public

roads, where the fear of man forbids the approach of wild animals. Again,

after parturition, it first swallows the afterbirth, then goes in quest of the

seseli shrub, and after eating of it returns to its young. The mother takes itsyoung betimes to her lair, so leading it to know its place of refuge in time of

danger; this lair is a precipitous rock, with only one approach, and there it is

said to hold its own against all comers. The male when it gets fat, which it

does in a high degree in autumn, disappears, abandoning its usual resorts,

apparently under an idea that its fatness facilitates its capture. They shed their

horns  in  places  difficult  of  access  or  discovery,  whence  the  proverbial

expression of ‘the place where the stag sheds his horns’; the fact being that,

as having parted with their weapons, they take care not to be seen. The saying

is that no man has ever seen the animal’s left horn; that the creature keeps it

out of sight because it possesses some medicinal property.

In their first year stags grow no horns, but only an excrescence indicating

where horns will be, this excrescence being short and thick. In their second

year they grow their horns for the first time, straight in shape, like pegs for

hanging clothes on; and on this account they have an appropriate nickname.

In  the  third  year  the  antlers  are  bifurcate;  in  the  fourth  year  they  grow

trifurcate; and so they go on increasing in complexity until the creature is six

years old: after this they grow their horns without any specific differentiation,

so  that  you  cannot  by  observation  of  them  tell  the  animal’s  age.  But  the

patriarchs of the herd may be told chiefly by two signs; in the first place they

have few teeth or none at all, and, in the second place, they have ceased to

grow  the  pointed  tips  to  their  antlers.  The  forward-pointing  tips  of  the

growing horns (that is to say the brow antlers), with which the animal meets

attack, are technically termed its ‘defenders’; with these the patriarchs are

unprovided, and their antlers merely grow straight upwards. Stags shed their

horns annually, in or about the month of May; after shedding, they conceal

themselves, it is said, during the daytime, and, to avoid the flies, hide in thick

copses; during this time, until they have grown their horns, they feed at night-

time. The horns at first grow in a kind of skin envelope, and get rough by

degrees; when they reach their full size the animal basks in the sun, to mature

and dry them. When they need no longer rub them against tree-trunks they

quit their hiding places, from a sense of security based upon the possession of

arms  defensive  and  offensive.  An  Achaeine  stag  has  been  caught  with  a

quantity of green ivy grown over its horns, it having grown apparently, as on

fresh green wood, when the horns were young and tender. When a stag is

stung by a venom-spider or similar insect, it gathers crabs and eats them; it is

said  to  be  a  good  thing  for  man  to  drink  the  juice,  but  the  taste  is

disagreeable. The hinds after parturition at once swallow the afterbirth, and itis impossible to secure it, for the hind catches it before it falls to the ground:

now this substance is supposed to have medicinal properties. When hunted

the creatures are caught by singing or pipe-playing on the part of the hunters;

they are so pleased with the music that they lie down on the grass. If there be

two hunters, one before their eyes sings or plays the pipe, the other keeps out

of sight and shoots, at a signal given by the confederate. If the animal has its

ears cocked, it can hear well and you cannot escape its ken; if its ears are

down, you can.

<

div id="section186" class="section" title="6">


6


  When bears are running away from their pursuers they push their cubs in

front of them, or take them up and carry them; when they are being overtaken

they climb up a tree. When emerging from their winter-den, they at once take

to eating cuckoo-pint, as has been said, and chew sticks of wood as though

they were cutting teeth.

  Many  other  quadrupeds  help  themselves  in  clever  ways.  Wild  goats  in

Crete are said, when wounded by arrows, to go in search of dittany, which is

supposed to have the property of ejecting arrows in the body. Dogs, when

they are ill, eat some kind of grass and produce vomiting. The panther, after

eating panther’s-bane, tries to find some human excrement, which is said to

heal its pain. This panther’s-bane kills lions as well. Hunters hang up human

excrement in a vessel attached to the boughs of a tree, to keep the animal

from straying to any distance; the animal meets its end in leaping up to the

branch and trying to get at the medicine. They say that the panther has found

out that wild animals are fond of the scent it emits; that, when it goes a-

hunting, it hides itself; that the other animals come nearer and nearer, and that

by this stratagem it can catch even animals as swift of foot as stags.

The Egyptian ichneumon, when it sees the serpent called the asp, does not

attack it until it has called in other ichneumons to help; to meet the blows and

bites of their enemy the assailants beplaster themselves with mud, by first

soaking in the river and then rolling on the ground.

  When the crocodile yawns, the trochilus flies into his mouth and cleans his

teeth. The trochilus gets his food thereby, and the crocodile gets ease and

comfort; it makes no attempt to injure its little friend, but, when it wants it togo, it shakes its neck in warning, lest it should accidentally bite the bird.

The tortoise, when it has partaken of a snake, eats marjoram; this action

has been actually observed. A man saw a tortoise perform this operation over

and over again, and every time it plucked up some marjoram go back to

partake of its prey; he thereupon pulled the marjoram up by the roots, and the

consequence was the tortoise died. The weasel, when it fights with a snake,

first eats wild rue, the smell of which is noxious to the snake. The dragon,

when it eats fruit, swallows endive-juice; it has been seen in the act. Dogs,

when they suffer from worms, eat the standing corn. Storks, and all other

birds, when they get a wound fighting, apply marjoram to the place injured.

  Many have seen the locust, when fighting with the snake get a tight hold of

the snake by the neck. The weasel has a clever way of getting the better of

birds;  it  tears  their  throats  open,  as  wolves  do  with  sheep.  Weasels  fight

desperately with mice-catching snakes, as they both prey on the same animal.

In regard to the instinct of hedgehogs, it has been observed in many places

that, when the wind is shifting from north to south, and from south to north,

they  shift  the  outlook  of  their  earth-holes,  and  those  that  are  kept  in

domestication shift over from one wall to the other. The story goes that a man

in Byzantium got into high repute for foretelling a change of weather, all

owing to his having noticed this habit of the hedgehog.

The polecat or marten is about as large as the smaller breed of Maltese

dogs. In the thickness of its fur, in its look, in the white of its belly, and in its

love of mischief, it resembles the weasel; it is easily tamed; from its liking for

honey it is a plague to bee-hives; it preys on birds like the cat. Its genital

organ, as has been said, consists of bone: the organ of the male is supposed to

be a cure for strangury; doctors scrape it into powder, and administer it in that

form.

<

div id="section187" class="section" title="7">


7


In a general way in the lives of animals many resemblances to human life

may  be  observed.  Pre-eminent  intelligence  will  be  seen  more  in  small

creatures than in large ones, as is exemplified in the case of birds by the nest

building of the swallow. In the same way as men do, the bird mixes mud and

chaff together; if it runs short of mud, it souses its body in water and rollsabout in the dry dust with wet feathers; furthermore, just as man does, it

makes  a  bed  of  straw,  putting  hard  material  below  for  a  foundation,  and

adapting all to suit its own size. Both parents co-operate in the rearing of the

young; each of the parents will detect, with practised eye, the young one that

has had a helping, and will take care it is not helped twice over; at first the

parents will rid the nest of excrement, but, when the young are grown, they

will teach their young to shift their position and let their excrement fall over

the side of the nest.

  Pigeons exhibit other phenomena with a similar likeness to the ways of

humankind. In pairing the same male and the same female keep together; and

the union is only broken by the death of one of the two parties. At the time of

parturition  in  the  female  the  sympathetic  attentions  of  the  male  are

extraordinary; if the female is afraid on account of the impending parturition

to enter the nest, the male will beat her and force her to come in. When the

young are born, he will take and masticate pieces of suitable food, will open

the  beaks  of  the  fledglings,  and  inject  these  pieces,  thus  preparing  them

betimes to take food. (When the male bird is about to expel the the young

ones from the nest he cohabits with them all.) As a general rule these birds

show this conjugal fidelity, but occasionally a female will cohabit with other

than her mate. These birds are combative, and quarrel with one another, and

enter each other’s nests, though this occurs but seldom; at a distance from

their  nests  this  quarrelsomeness  is  less  marked,  but  in  the  close

neighbourhood  of  their  nests  they  will  fight  desperately.  A  peculiarity

common to the tame pigeon, the ring-dove and the turtle-dove is that they do

not lean the head back when they are in the act of drinking, but only when

they have fully quenched their thirst. The turtle-dove and the ring-dove both

have but one mate, and let no other come nigh; both sexes co-operate in the

process of incubation. It is difficult to distinguish between the sexes except

by an examination of their interiors. Ring-doves are long-lived; cases have

been known where such birds were twenty-five years old, thirty years old,

and in some cases forty. As they grow old their claws increase in size, and

pigeon-fanciers cut the claws; as far as one can see, the birds suffer no other

perceptible disfigurement by their increase in age. Turtle-doves and pigeons

that are blinded by fanciers for use as decoys, live for eight years. Partridges

live for about fifteen years. Ring-doves and turtle-doves always build their

nests in the same place year after year. The male, as a general rule, is more

long-lived than the female; but in the case of pigeons some assert that themale dies before the female, taking their inference from the statements of

persons  who  keep  decoy-birds  in  captivity.  Some  declare  that  the  male

sparrow lives only a year, pointing to the fact that early in spring the male

sparrow has no black beard, but has one later on, as though the blackbearded

birds of the last year had all died out; they also say that the females are the

longer lived, on the grounds that they are caught in amongst the young birds

and that their age is rendered manifest by the hardness about their beaks.

Turtle-doves in summer live in cold places, (and in warm places during the

winter);  chaffinches  affect  warm  habitations  in  summer  and  cold  ones  in

winter.

<

div id="section188" class="section" title="8">


8


  Birds of a heavy build, such as quails, partridges, and the like, build no

nests; indeed, where they are incapable of flight, it would be of no use if they

could do so. After scraping a hole on a level piece of ground-and it is only in

such a place that they lay their eggs-they cover it over with thorns and sticks

for security against hawks and eagles, and there lay their eggs and hatch

them; after the hatching is over, they at once lead the young out from the

nest,  as  they  are  not  able  to  fly  afield  for  food  for  them.  Quails  and

partridges, like barn-door hens, when they go to rest, gather their brood under

their wings. Not to be discovered, as might be the case if they stayed long in

one spot, they do not hatch the eggs where they laid them. When a man

comes by chance upon a young brood, and tries to catch them, the hen-bird

rolls in front of the hunter, pretending to be lame: the man every moment

thinks he is on the point of catching her, and so she draws him on and on,

until every one of her brood has had time to escape; hereupon she returns to

the nest and calls the young back. The partridge lays not less than ten eggs,

and  often  lays  as  many  as  sixteen.  As  has  been  observed,  the  bird  has

mischievous and deceitful habits. In the spring-time, a noisy scrimmage takes

place, out of which the male-birds emerge each with a hen. Owing to the

lecherous nature of the bird, and from a dislike to the hen sitting, the males, if

they find any eggs, roll them over and over until they break them in pieces; to

provide against this the female goes to a distance and lays the eggs, and

often, under the stress of parturition, lays them in any chance spot that offers;if the male be near at hand, then to keep the eggs intact she refrains from

visiting them. If she be seen by a man, then, just as with her fledged brood,

she entices him off by showing herself close at his feet until she has drawn

him to a distance. When the females have run away and taken to sitting, the

males in a pack take to screaming and fighting; when thus engaged, they have

the nickname of ‘widowers’. The bird who is beaten follows his victor, and

submits  to  be  covered  by  him  only;  and  the  beaten  bird  is  covered  by  a

second  one  or  by  any  other,  only  clandestinely  without  the  victor’s

knowledge; this is so, not at all times, but at a particular season of the year,

and with quails as well as with partridges. A similar proceeding takes place

occasionally with barn-door cocks: for in temples, where cocks are set apart

as dedicate without hens, they all as a matter of course tread any new-comer.

Tame partridges tread wild birds, pecket their heads, and treat them with

every possible outrage. The leader of the wild birds, with a counter-note of

challenge, pushes forward to attack the decoy-bird, and after he has been

netted, another advances with a similar note. This is what is done if the decoy

be a male; but if it be a female that is the decoy and gives the note, and the

leader of the wild birds give a counter one, the rest of the males set upon him

and chase him away from the female for making advances to her instead of to

them; in consequence of this the male often advances without uttering any

cry,  so  that  no  other  may  hear  him  and  come  and  give  him  battle;  and

experienced fowlers assert that sometimes the male bird, when he approaches

the female, makes her keep silence, to avoid having to give battle to other

males who might have heard him. The partridge has not only the note here

referred to, but also a thin shrill cry and other notes. Oftentimes the hen-bird

rises from off her brood when she sees the male showing attentions to the

female decoy; she will give the counter note and remain still, so as to be

trodden by him and divert him from the decoy. The quail and the partridge

are so intent upon sexual union that they often come right in the way of the

decoy-birds, and not seldom alight upon their heads. So much for the sexual

proclivities of the partridge, for the way in which it is hunted, and the general

nasty habits of the bird.

As has been said, quails and partridges build their nests upon the ground,

and so also do some of the birds that are capable of sustained flight. Further,

for instance, of such birds, the lark and the woodcock, as well as the quail, do

not perch on a branch, but squat upon the ground.

<div id="section189" class="section" title="9">


9


The woodpecker does not squat on the ground, but pecks at the bark of

trees to drive out from under it maggots and gnats; when they emerge, it licks

them up with its tongue, which is large and flat. It can run up and down a tree

in any way, even with the head downwards, like the gecko-lizard. For secure

hold upon a tree, its claws are better adapted than those of the daw; it makes

its way by sticking these claws into the bark. One species of woodpecker is

smaller than a blackbird, and has small reddish speckles; a second species is

larger than the blackbird, and a third is not much smaller than a barn-door

hen. It builds a nest on trees, as has been said, on olive trees amongst others.

It feeds on the maggots and ants that are under the bark: it is so eager in the

search  for  maggots  that  it  is  said  sometimes  to  hollow  a  tree  out  to  its

downfall. A woodpecker once, in course of domestication, was seen to insert

an almond into a hole in a piece of timber, so that it might remain steady

under its pecking; at the third peck it split the shell of the fruit, and then ate

the kernel.

<

div id="section190" class="section" title="10">


10


  Many indications of high intelligence are given by cranes. They will fly to

a great distance and up in the air, to command an extensive view; if they see

clouds and signs of bad weather they fly down again and remain still. They,

furthermore,  have  a  leader  in  their  flight,  and  patrols  that  scream  on  the

confines of the flock so as to be heard by all. When they settle down, the

main body go to sleep with their heads under their wing, standing first on one

leg and then on the other, while their leader, with his head uncovered, keeps a

sharp look out, and when he sees anything of importance signals it with a cry.

  Pelicans that live beside rivers swallow the large smooth mussel-shells:

after cooking them inside the crop that precedes the stomach, they spit them

out, so that, now when their shells are open, they may pick the flesh out and

eat it.<

div id="section191" class="section" title="11">


11


Of wild birds, the nests are fashioned to meet the exigencies of existence

and ensure the security of the young. Some of these birds are fond of their

young and take great care of them, others are quite the reverse; some are

clever in procuring subsistence, others are not so. Some of these birds build

in ravines and clefts, and on cliffs, as, for instance, the so-called charadrius,

or stone-curlew; this bird is in no way noteworthy for plumage or voice; it

makes an appearance at night, but in the daytime keeps out of sight.

The hawk also builds in inaccessible places. Although a ravenous bird, it

will never eat the heart of any bird it catches; this has been observed in the

case  of  the  quail,  the  thrush,  and  other  birds.  They  modify  betimes  their

method of hunting, for in summer they do not grab their prey as they do at

other seasons.

Of the vulture, it is said that no one has ever seen either its young or its

nest; on this account and on the ground that all of a sudden great numbers of

them will appear without any one being able to tell from whence they come,

Herodorus, the father of Bryson the sophist, says that it belongs to some

distant  and  elevated  land.  The  reason  is  that  the  bird  has  its  nest  on

inaccessible crags, and is found only in a few localities. The female lays one

egg as a rule, and two at the most.

  Some birds live on mountains or in forests, as the hoopoe and the brenthus;

this latter bird finds his food with ease and has a musical voice. The wren

lives in brakes and crevices; it is difficult of capture, keeps out of sight, is

gentle  of  disposition,  finds  its  food  with  ease,  and  is  something  of  a

mechanic. It goes by the nickname of ‘old man’ or ‘king’; and the story goes

that for this reason the eagle is at war with him.

<

div id="section192" class="section" title="12">


12


  Some  birds  live  on  the  sea-shore,  as  the  wagtail;  the  bird  is  of  amischievous nature, hard to capture, but when caught capable of complete

domestication; it is a cripple, as being weak in its hinder quarters.

  Web-footed birds without exception live near the sea or rivers or pools, as

they  naturally  resort  to  places  adapted  to  their  structure.  Several  birds,

however, with cloven toes live near pools or marshes, as, for instance, the

anthus lives by the side of rivers; the plumage of this bird is pretty, and it

finds its food with ease. The catarrhactes lives near the sea; when it makes a

dive, it will keep under water for as long as it would take a man to walk a

furlong; it is less than the common hawk. Swans are web-footed, and live

near pools and marshes; they find their food with ease, are good-tempered,

are fond of their young, and live to a green old age. If the eagle attacks them

they will repel the attack and get the better of their assailant, but they are

never the first to attack. They are musical, and sing chiefly at the approach of

death; at this time they fly out to sea, and men, when sailing past the coast of

Libya,  have  fallen  in  with  many  of  them  out  at  sea  singing  in  mournful

strains, and have actually seen some of them dying.

The cymindis is seldom seen, as it lives on mountains; it is black in colour,

and about the size of the hawk called the ‘dove-killer’; it is long and slender

in form. The Ionians call the bird by this name; Homer in the Iliad mentions

it in the line:

<

div class="quote">

  Chalcis its name with those of heavenly birth,

But called Cymindis by the sons of earth.

The hybris, said by some to be the same as the eagle-owl, is never seen by

daylight, as it is dim-sighted, but during the night it hunts like the eagle; it

will fight the eagle with such desperation that the two combatants are often

captured  alive  by  shepherds;  it  lays  two  eggs,  and,  like  others  we  have

mentioned, it builds on rocks and in caverns. Cranes also fight so desperately

among themselves as to be caught when fighting, for they will not leave off;

the crane lays two eggs.

<

div id="section193" class="section" title="13">


13


The jay has a great variety of notes: indeed, might almost say it had adifferent note for every day in the year. It lays about nine eggs; builds its nest

on trees, out of hair and tags of wool; when acorns are getting scarce, it lays

up a store of them in hiding.

It is a common story of the stork that the old birds are fed by their grateful

progeny.  Some  tell  a  similar  story  of  the  bee-eater,  and  declare  that  the

parents are fed by their young not only when growing old, but at an early

period, as soon as the young are capable of feeding them; and the parent-

birds stay inside the nest. The under part of the bird’s wing is pale yellow; the

upper part is dark blue, like that of the halcyon; the tips of the wings are

About autumn-time it lays six or seven eggs, in overhanging banks where the

soil is soft; there it burrows into the ground to a depth of six feet.

The greenfinch, so called from the colour of its belly, is as large as a lark;

it lays four or five eggs, builds its nest out of the plant called comfrey, pulling

it up by the roots, and makes an under-mattress to lie on of hair and wool.

The blackbird and the jay build their nests after the same fashion. The nest of

the penduline tit shows great mechanical skill; it has the appearance of a ball

of flax, and the hole for entry is very small.

People  who  live  where  the  bird  comes  from  say  that  there  exists  a

cinnamon bird which brings the cinnamon from some unknown localities,

and  builds  its  nest  out  of  it;  it  builds  on  high  trees  on  the  slender  top

branches. They say that the inhabitants attach leaden weights to the tips of

their arrows and therewith bring down the nests, and from the intertexture

collect the cinnamon sticks.

<

div id="section194" class="section" title="14">


14


The halcyon is not much larger than the sparrow. Its colour is dark blue,

green, and light purple; the whole body and wings, and especially parts about

the  neck,  show  these  colours  in  a  mixed  way,  without  any  colour  being

sharply defined; the beak is light green, long and slender: such, then, is the

look of the bird. Its nest is like sea-balls, i.e. the things that by the name of

halosachne or seafoam, only the colour is not the same. The colour of the nest

is light red, and the shape is that of the long-necked gourd. The nests are

larger than the largest sponge, though they vary in size; they are roofed over,

and great part of them is solid and great part hollow. If you use a sharp knifeit is not easy to cut the nest through; but if you cut it, and at the same time

bruise it with your hand, it will soon crumble to pieces, like the halosachne.

The opening is small, just enough for a tiny entrance, so that even if the nest

upset the sea does not enter in; the hollow channels are like those in sponges.

It  is  not  known  for  certain  of  what  material  the  nest  is  constructed;  it  is

possibly made of the backbones of the gar-fish; for, by the way, the bird lives

on fish. Besides living on the shore, it ascends fresh-water streams. It lays

generally about five eggs, and lays eggs all its life long, beginning to do so at

the age of four months.

<

div id="section195" class="section" title="15">


15


The hoopoe usually constructs its nest out of human excrement. It changes

its appearance in summer and in winter, as in fact do the great majority of

wild birds. (The titmouse is said to lay a very large quantity of eggs: next to

the ostrich the blackheaded tit is said by some to lay the largest number of

eggs; seventeen eggs have been seen; it lays, however, more than twenty; it is

said always to lay an odd number. Like others we have mentioned, it builds

in  trees;  it  feeds  on  caterpillars.)  A  peculiarity  of  this  bird  and  of  the

nightingale is that the outer extremity of the tongue is not sharp-pointed.

The aegithus finds its food with ease, has many young, and walks with a

limp. The golden oriole is apt at learning, is clever at making a living, but is

awkward in flight and has an ugly plumage.

<

div id="section196" class="section" title="16">


16


The  reed-warbler  makes  its  living  as  easily  as  any  other  bird,  sits  in

summer in a shady spot facing the wind, in winter in a sunny and sheltered

place among reeds in a marsh; it is small in size, with a pleasant note. The so-

called  chatterer  has  a  pleasant  note,  beautiful  plumage,  makes  a  living

cleverly, and is graceful in form; it appears to be alien to our country; at all

events it is seldom seen at a distance from its own immediate home.<

div id="section197" class="section" title="17">


17


The crake is quarrelsome, clever at making a living, but in other ways an

unlucky bird. The bird called sitta is quarrelsome, but clever and tidy, makes

its living with ease, and for its knowingness is regarded as uncanny; it has a

numerous brood, of which it is fond, and lives by pecking the bark of trees.

The aegolius-owl flies by night, is seldom seen by day; like others we have

mentioned, it lives on cliffs or in caverns; it feeds on two kinds of food; it has

a strong hold on life and is full of resource. The tree-creeper is a little bird, of

fearless disposition; it lives among trees, feeds on caterpillars, makes a living

with  ease,  and  has  a  loud  clear  note.  The  acanthis  finds  its  food  with

difficulty; its plumage is poor, but its note is musical.

<

div id="section198" class="section" title="18">


18


Of the herons, the ashen-coloured one, as has been said, unites with the

female not without pain; it is full of resource, carries its food with it, is eager

in the quest of it, and works by day; its plumage is poor, and its excrement is

always wet. Of the other two species-for there are three in all-the white heron

has handsome plumage, unites without harm to itself with the female, builds

a nest and lays its eggs neatly in trees; it frequents marshes and lakes and

Plains  and  meadow  land.  The  speckled  heron,  which  is  nicknamed  ‘the

skulker’, is said in folklore stories to be of servile origin, and, as its nickname

implies,  it  is  the  laziest  bird  of  the  three  species.  Such  are  the  habits  of

herons. The bird that is called the poynx has this peculiarity, that it is more

prone than any other bird to peck at the eyes of an assailant or its prey; it is at

war with the harpy, as the two birds live on the same food.

<

div id="section199" class="section" title="19">


19  There are two kinds of owsels; the one is black, and is found everywhere,

the other is quite white, about the same size as the other, and with the same

pipe. This latter is found on Cyllene in Arcadia, and is found nowhere else.

The laius, or blue-thrush, is like the black owsel, only a little smaller; it lives

on cliffs or on tile roofings; it has not a red beak as the black owsel has.

<

div id="section200" class="section" title="20">


20


Of thrushes there are three species. One is the misselthrush; it feeds only

on mistletoe and resin; it is about the size of the jay. A second is the song-

thrush; it has a sharp pipe, and is about the size of the owsel. There is another

species called the Illas; it is the smallest species of the three, and is less

variegated in plumage than the others.

<

div id="section201" class="section" title="21">


21


  There is a bird that lives on rocks, called the blue-bird from its colour. It is

comparatively common in Nisyros, and is somewhat less than the owsel and a

little bigger than the chaffinch. It has large claws, and climbs on the face of

the rocks. It is steel-blue all over; its beak is long and slender; its legs are

short, like those of the woodpecker.

<

div id="section202" class="section" title="22">


22


The oriole is yellow all over; it is not visible during winter, but puts in an

appearance about the time of the summer solstice, and departs again at the

rising of Arcturus; it is the size of the turtle-dove. The so-called soft-head (or

shrike) always settles on one and the same branch, where it falls a prey to the

birdcatcher. Its head is big, and composed of gristle; it is a little smaller than

the thrush; its beak is strong, small, and round; it is ashen-coloured all over;is fleet of foot, but slow of wing. The bird-catcher usually catches it by help

of the owl.

<

div id="section203" class="section" title="23">


23


  There is also the pardalus. As a rule, it is seen in flocks and not singly; it is

ashen-coloured all over, and about the size of the birds last described; it is

fleet of foot and strong of wing, and its pipe is loud and high-pitched. The

collyrion (or fieldfare) feeds on the same food as the owsel; is of the same

size as the above mentioned birds; and is trapped usually in the winter. All

these birds are found at all times. Further, there are the birds that live as a rule

in towns, the raven and the crow. These also are visible at all seasons, never

shift their place of abode, and never go into winter quarters.

<

div id="section204" class="section" title="24">


24


Of daws there are three species. One is the chough; it is as large as the

crow, but has a red beak. There is another, called the ‘wolf’; and further there

is the little daw, called the ‘railer’. There is another kind of daw found in

Lybia and Phrygia, which is web-footed.

<

div id="section205" class="section" title="25">


25


Of larks there are two kinds. One lives on the ground and has a crest on its

head; the other is gregarious, and not sporadic like the first; it is, however, of

the same coloured plumage, but is smaller, and has no crest; it is an article of

human food.

<

div id="section206" class="section" title="26">26


The woodcock is caught with nets in gardens. It is about the size of a barn-

door hen; it has a long beak, and in plumage is like the francolin-partridge. It

runs quickly, and is pretty easily domesticated. The starling is speckled; it is

of the same size as the owsel.

<

div id="section207" class="section" title="27">


27


Of the Egyptian ibis there are two kinds, the white and the black. The

white ones are found over Egypt, excepting in Pelusium; the black ones are

found in Pelusium, and nowhere else in Egypt.

<

div id="section208" class="section" title="28">


28


Of  the  little  horned  owls  there  are  two  kinds,  and  one  is  visible  at  all

seasons, and for that reason has the nickname of ‘all-the-year-round owl’; it

is  not  sufficiently  palatable  to  come  to  table;  another  species  makes  its

appearance sometimes in the autumn, is seen for a single day or at the most

for two days, and is regarded as a table delicacy; it scarcely differs from the

first species save only in being fatter; it has no note, but the other species has.

With regard to their origin, nothing is known from ocular observation; the

only fact known for certain is that they are first seen when a west wind is

blowing.

<

div id="section209" class="section" title="29">


29


The cuckoo, as has been said elsewhere, makes no nest, but deposits its

eggs in an alien nest, generally in the nest of the ring-dove, or on the ground

in the nest of the hypolais or lark, or on a tree in the nest of the green linnet. itlays only one egg and does not hatch it itself, but the mother-bird in whose

nest it has deposited it hatches and rears it; and, as they say, this mother bird,

when the young cuckoo has grown big, thrusts her own brood out of the nest

and lets them perish; others say that this mother-bird kills her own brood and

gives them to the alien to devour, despising her own young owing to the

beauty  of  the  cuckoo.  Personal  observers  agree  in  telling  most  of  these

stories, but are not in agreement as to the instruction of the young. Some say

that the mother-cuckoo comes and devours the brood of the rearing mother;

others say that the young cuckoo from its superior size snaps up the food

brought before the smaller brood have a chance, and that in consequence the

smaller  brood  die  of  hunger;  others  say  that,  by  its  superior  strength,  it

actually  kills  the  other  ones  whilst  it  is  being  reared  up  with  them.  The

cuckoo shows great sagacity in the disposal of its progeny; the fact is, the

mother cuckoo is quite conscious of her own cowardice and of the fact that

she could never help her young one in an emergency, and so, for the security

of the young one, she makes of him a supposititious child in an alien nest.

The truth is, this bird is pre-eminent among birds in the way of cowardice; it

allows itself to be pecked at by little birds, and flies away from their attacks.

<

div id="section210" class="section" title="30">


30


It  has  already  been  stated  that  the  footless  bird,  which  some  term  the

cypselus, resembles the swallow; indeed, it is not easy to distinguish between

the  two  birds,  excepting  in  the  fact  that  the  cypselus  has  feathers  on  the

shank. These birds rear their young in long cells made of mud, and furnished

with a hole just big enough for entry and exit; they build under cover of some

roofing-under a rock or in a cavern-for protection against animals and men.

The so-called goat-sucker lives on mountains; it is a little larger than the

owsel, and less than the cuckoo; it lays two eggs, or three at the most, and is

of a sluggish disposition. It flies up to the she-goat and sucks its milk, from

which habit it derives its name; it is said that, after it has sucked the teat of

the animal, the teat dries up and the animal goes blind. It is dim-sighted in the

day-time, but sees well enough by night.

<

div id="section211" class="section" title="31">31


In narrow circumscribed districts where the food would be insufficient for

more  birds  than  two,  ravens  are  only  found  in  isolated  pairs;  when  their

young are old enough to fly, the parent couple first eject them from the nest,

and by and by chase them from the neighbourhood. The raven lays four or

five  eggs.  About  the  time  when  the  mercenaries  under  Medius  were

slaughtered at Pharsalus, the districts about Athens and the Peloponnese were

left destitute of ravens, from which it would appear that these birds have

some means of intercommunicating with one another.

<

div id="section212" class="section" title="32">


32


Of eagles there are several species. One of them, called ‘the white-tailed

eagle’, is found on low lands, in groves, and in the neighbourhood of cities;

some call it the ‘heron-killer’. It is bold enough to fly to mountains and the

interior of forests. The other eagles seldom visit groves or low-lying land.

There is another species called the ‘plangus’; it ranks second in point of size

and strength; it lives in mountain combes and glens, and by marshy lakes, and

goes  by  the  name  of  ‘duck-killer’  and  ‘swart-eagle.’  It  is  mentioned  by

Homer in his account of the visit made by Priam to the tent of Achilles. There

is another species with black Plumage, the smallest but boldest of all the

kinds. It dwells on mountains or in forests, and is called ‘the black-eagle’ or

‘the hare-killer’; it is the only eagle that rears its young and thoroughly takes

them out with it. It is swift of flight, is neat and tidy in its habits, too proud

for jealousy, fearless, quarrelsome; it is also silent, for it neither whimpers

nor  screams.  There  is  another  species,  the  percnopterus,  very  large,  with

white head, very short wings, long tail-feathers, in appearance like a vulture.

It goes by the name of ‘mountain-stork’ or ‘half-eagle’. It lives in groves; has

all the bad qualities of the other species, and none of the good ones; for it lets

itself be chased and caught by the raven and the other birds. It is clumsy in its

movements, has difficulty in procuring its food, preys on dead animals, is

always hungry, and at all times whining and screaming. There is another

species, called the ‘sea-eagle’ or ‘osprey’. This bird has a large thick neck,

curved wings, and broad tailfeathers; it lives near the sea, grasps its prey withits talons, and often, from inability to carry it, tumbles down into the water.

There is another species called the ‘true-bred’; people say that these are the

only true-bred birds to be found, that all other birds-eagles, hawks, and the

smallest birds-are all spoilt by the interbreeding of different species. The true-

bred eagle is the largest of all eagles; it is larger than the phene; is half as

large again as the ordinary eagle, and has yellow plumage; it is seldom seen,

as is the case with the so-called cymindis. The time for an eagle to be on the

wing in search of prey is from midday to evening; in the morning until the

market-hour it remains on the nest. In old age the upper beak of the eagle

grows gradually longer and more crooked, and the bird dies eventually of

starvation; there is a folklore story that the eagle is thus punished because it

once was a man and refused entertainment to a stranger. The eagle puts aside

its superfluous food for its young; for owing to the difficulty in procuring

food day by day, it at times may come back to the nest with nothing. If it

catch a man prowling about in the neighbourhood of its nest, it will strike him

with its wings and scratch him with its talons. The nest is built not on low

ground but on an elevated spot, generally on an inaccessible ledge of a cliff;

it does, however, build upon a tree. The young are fed until they can fly;

hereupon  the  parent-birds  topple  them  out  of  the  nest,  and  chase  them

completely out of the locality. The fact is that a pair of eagles demands an

extensive  space  for  its  maintenance,  and  consequently  cannot  allow  other

birds to quarter themselves in close neighbourhood. They do not hunt in the

vicinity of their nest, but go to a great distance to find their prey. When the

eagle has captured a beast, it puts it down without attempting to carry it off at

once; if on trial it finds the burden too heavy, it will leave it. When it has

spied a hare, it does not swoop on it at once, but lets it go on into the open

ground;  neither  does  it  descend  to  the  ground  at  one  swoop,  but  goes

gradually  down  from  higher  flights  to  lower  and  lower:  these  devices  it

adopts by way of security against the stratagem of the hunter. It alights on

high places by reason of the difficulty it experiences in soaring up from the

level ground; it flies high in the air to have the more extensive view; from its

high flight it is said to be the only bird that resembles the gods. Birds of prey,

as a rule, seldom alight upon rock, as the crookedness of their talons prevents

a stable footing on hard stone. The eagle hunts hares, fawns, foxes, and in

general all such animals as he can master with ease. It is a long-lived bird,

and this fact might be inferred from the length of time during which the same

nest is maintained in its place.<

div id="section213" class="section" title="33">


33


In Scythia there is found a bird as large as the great bustard. The female

lays two eggs, but does not hatch them, but hides them in the skin of a hare or

fox and leaves them there, and, when it is not in quest of prey, it keeps a

watch on them on a high tree; if any man tries to climb the tree, it fights and

strikes him with its wing, just as eagles do.

<

div id="section214" class="section" title="34">


34


The owl and the night-raven and all the birds see poorly in the daytime

seek their prey in the night, but not all the night through, but at evening and

dawn.  Their  food  consists  of  mice,  lizards,  chafers  and  the  like  little

creatures. The so-called phene, or lammergeier, is fond of its young, provides

its food with ease, fetches food to its nest, and is of a kindly disposition. It

rears its own young and those of the eagle as well; for when the eagle ejects

its young from the nest, this bird catches them up as they fall and feeds them.

For the eagle, by the way, ejects the young birds prematurely, before they are

able to feed themselves, or to fly. It appears to do so from jealousy; for it is

by nature jealous, and is so ravenous as to grab furiously at its food; and

when it does grab at its food, it grabs it in large morsels. It is accordingly

jealous of the young birds as they approach maturity, since they are getting

good appetites, and so it scratches them with its talons. The young birds fight

also with one another, to secure a morsel of food or a comfortable position,

whereupon the mother-bird beats them and ejects them from the nest; the

young ones scream at this treatment, and the phene hearing them catches

them as they fall. The phene has a film over its eyes and sees badly, but the

sea-eagle is very keen-sighted, and before its young are fledged tries to make

them stare at the sun, and beats the one that refuses to do so, and twists him

back  in  the  sun’s  direction;  and  if  one  of  them  gets  watery  eyes  in  the

process, it kills him, and rears the other. It lives near the sea, and feeds, as hasbeen said, on sea-birds; when in pursuit of them it catches them one by one,

watching the moment when the bird rises to the surface from its dive. When a

sea-bird,  emerging  from  the  water,  sees  the  sea-eagle,  he  in  terror  dives

under, intending to rise again elsewhere; the eagle, however, owing to its

keenness of vision, keeps flying after him until he either drowns the bird or

catches him on the surface. The eagle never attacks these birds when they are

in a swarm, for they keep him off by raising a shower of water-drops with

their wings.

<

div id="section215" class="section" title="35">


35


The cepphus is caught by means of sea-foam; the bird snaps at the foam,

and consequently fishermen catch it by sluicing with showers of sea-water.

These birds grow to be plump and fat; their flesh has a good odour, excepting

the hinder quarters, which smell of shoreweed.

<

div id="section216" class="section" title="36">


36


Of hawks, the strongest is the buzzard; the next in point of courage is the

merlin; and the circus ranks third; other diverse kinds are the asterias, the

pigeon-hawk, and the pternis; the broaded-winged hawk is called the half-

buzzard;  others  go  by  the  name  of  hobby-hawk,  or  sparrow-hawk,  or

‘smooth-feathered’, or ‘toad-catcher’. Birds of this latter species find their

food with very little difficulty, and flutter along the ground. Some say that

there are ten species of hawks, all differing from one another. One hawk, they

say, will strike and grab the pigeon as it rests on the ground, but never touch

it while it is in flight; another hawk attacks the pigeon when it is perched

upon a tree or any elevation, but never touches it when it is on the ground or

on the wing; other hawks attack their prey only when it is on the wing. They

say that pigeons can distinguish the various species: so that, when a hawk is

an assailant, if it be one that attacks its prey when the prey is on the wing, the

pigeon will sit still; if it be one that attacks sitting prey, the pigeon will riseup and fly away.

In Thrace, in the district sometimes called that of Cedripolis, men hunt for

little birds in the marshes with the aid of hawks. The men with sticks in their

hands go beating at the reeds and brushwood to frighten the birds out, and the

hawks show themselves overhead and frighten them down. The men then

strike them with their sticks and capture them. They give a portion of their

booty to the hawks; that is, they throw some of the birds up in the air, and the

hawks catch them.

In the neighbourhood of Lake Maeotis, it is said, wolves act in concert

with the fishermen, and if the fishermen decline to share with them, they tear

their nets in pieces as they lie drying on the shore of the lake.

<

div id="section217" class="section" title="37">


37


So much for the habits of birds.

In marine creatures, also, one In marine creatures, also, one may observe

many ingenious devices adapted to the circumstances of their lives. For the

accounts commonly given of the so-called fishing-frog are quite true; as are

also those given of the torpedo. The fishing-frog has a set of filaments that

project in front of its eyes; they are long and thin like hairs, and are round at

the tips; they lie on either side, and are used as baits. Accordingly, when the

animal stirs up a place full of sand and mud and conceals itself therein, it

raises the filaments, and, when the little fish strike against them, it draws

them in underneath into its mouth. The torpedo narcotizes the creatures that it

wants to catch, overpowering them by the power of shock that is resident in

its body, and feeds upon them; it also hides in the sand and mud, and catches

all  the  creatures  that  swim  in  its  way  and  come  under  its  narcotizing

influence. This phenomenon has been actually observed in operation. The

sting-ray  also  conceals  itself,  but  not  exactly  in  the  same  way.  That  the

creatures get their living by this means is obvious from the fact that, whereas

they  are  peculiarly  inactive,  they  are  often  caught  with  mullets  in  their

interior, the swiftest of fishes. Furthermore, the fishing-frog is unusually thin

when he is caught after losing the tips of his filaments, and the torpedo is

known to cause a numbness even in human beings. Again, the hake, the ray,

the  flat-fish,  and  the  angelfish  burrow  in  the  sand,  and  after  concealingthemselves angle with the filaments on their mouths, that fishermen call their

fishing-rods,  and  the  little  creatures  on  which  they  feed  swim  up  to  the

filaments taking them for bits of sea-weed, such as they feed upon.

  Wherever an anthias-fish is seen, there will be no dangerous creatures in

the  vicinity,  and  sponge-divers  will  dive  in  security,  and  they  call  these

signal-fishes ‘holy-fish’. It is a sort of perpetual coincidence, like the fact that

wherever snails are present you may be sure there is neither pig nor partridge

in the neighbourhood; for both pig and partridge eat up the snails.

The sea-serpent resembles the conger in colour and shape, but is of lesser

bulk and more rapid in its movements. If it be caught and thrown away, it

will bore a hole with its snout and burrow rapidly in the sand; its snout, by

the  way,  is  sharper  than  that  of  ordinary  serpents.  The  so-called  sea-

scolopendra, after swallowing the hook, turns itself inside out until it ejects it,

and then it again turns itself outside in. The sea-scolopendra, like the land-

scolopendra, will come to a savoury bait; the creature does not bite with its

teeth, but stings by contact with its entire body, like the so-called sea-nettle.

The so-called fox-shark, when it finds it has swallowed the hook, tries to get

rid of it as the scolopendra does, but not in the same way; in other words, it

runs up the fishing-line, and bites it off short; it is caught in some districts in

deep and rapid waters, with night-lines.

The bonitos swarm together when they espy a dangerous creature, and the

largest of them swim round it, and if it touches one of the shoal they try to

repel it; they have strong teeth. Amongst other large fish, a lamia-shark, after

falling in amongst a shoal, has been seen to be covered with wounds.

Of  river-fish,  the  male  of  the  sheat-fish  is  remarkably  attentive  to  the

young. The female after parturition goes away; the male stays and keeps on

guard where the spawn is most abundant, contenting himself with keeping off

all other little fishes that might steal the spawn or fry, and this he does for

forty or fifty days, until the young are sufficiently grown to make away from

the other fishes for themselves. The fishermen can tell where he is on guard:

for, in warding off the little fishes, he makes a rush in the water and gives

utterance to a kind of muttering noise. He is so earnest in the performance of

his parental duties that the fishermen at times, if the eggs be attached to the

roots of water-plants deep in the water, drag them into as shallow a place as

possible; the male fish will still keep by the young, and, if it so happen, will

be  caught  by  the  hook  when  snapping  at  the  little  fish  that  come  by;  if,

however, he be sensible by experience of the danger of the hook, he will stillkeep by his charge, and with his extremely strong teeth will bite the hook in

pieces.

All  fishes,  both  those  that  wander  about  and  those  that  are  stationary,

occupy the districts where they were born or very similar places, for their

natural food is found there. Carnivorous fish wander most; and all fish are

carnivorous with the exception of a few, such as the mullet, the saupe, the red

mullet, and the chalcis. The so-called pholis gives out a mucous discharge,

which envelops the creature in a kind of nest. Of shell-fish, and fish that are

finless, the scallop moves with greatest force and to the greatest distance,

impelled along by some internal energy; the murex or purple-fish, and others

that resemble it, move hardly at all. Out of the lagoon of Pyrrha all the fishes

swim in winter-time, except the sea-gudgeon; they swim out owing to the

cold, for the narrow waters are colder than the outer sea, and on the return of

the early summer they all swim back again. In the lagoon no scarus is found,

nor thritta, nor any other species of the spiny fish, no spotted dogfish, no

spiny  dogfish,  no  sea-crawfish,  no  octopus  either  of  the  common  or  the

musky kinds, and certain other fish are also absent; but of fish that are found

in the lagoon the white gudgeon is not a marine fish. Of fishes the oviparous

are in their prime in the early summer until the spawning time; the viviparous

in the autumn, as is also the case with the mullet, the red mullet, and all such

fish. In the neighbourhood of Lesbos, the fishes of the outer sea, or of the

lagoon, bring forth their eggs or young in the lagoon; sexual union takes

place  in  the  autumn,  and  parturition  in  the  spring.  With  fishes  of  the

cartilaginous kind, the males and females swarm together in the autumn for

the sake of sexual union; in the early summer they come swimming in, and

keep apart until after parturition; the two sexes are often taken linked together

in sexual union.

Of molluscs the sepia is the most cunning, and is the only species that

employs its dark liquid for the sake of concealment as well as from fear: the

octopus and calamary make the discharge solely from fear. These creatures

never discharge the pigment in its entirety; and after a discharge the pigment

accumulates  again.  The  sepia,  as  has  been  said,  often  uses  its  colouring

pigment for concealment; it shows itself in front of the pigment and then

retreats back into it; it also hunts with its long tentacles not only little fishes,

but  oftentimes  even  mullets.  The  octopus  is  a  stupid  creature,  for  it  will

approach a man’s hand if it be lowered in the water; but it is neat and thrifty

in its habits: that is, it lays up stores in its nest, and, after eating up all that iseatable,  it  ejects  the  shells  and  sheaths  of  crabs  and  shell-fish,  and  the

skeletons of little fishes. It seeks its prey by so changing its colour as to

render it like the colour of the stones adjacent to it; it does so also when

alarmed. By some the sepia is said to perform the same trick; that is, they say

it can change its colour so as to make it resemble the colour of its habitat. The

only fish that can do this is the angelfish, that is, it can change its colour like

the octopus. The octopus as a rule does not live the year out. It has a natural

tendency to run off into liquid; for, if beaten and squeezed, it keeps losing

substance and at last disappears. The female after parturition is peculiarly

subject to this colliquefaction; it becomes stupid; if tossed about by waves, it

submits impassively; a man, if he dived, could catch it with the hand; it gets

covered over with slime, and makes no effort to catch its wonted prey. The

male becomes leathery and clammy. As a proof that they do not live into a

second year there is the fact that, after the birth of the little octopuses in the

late summer or beginning of autumn, it is seldom that a large-sized octopus is

visible, whereas a little before this time of year the creature is at its largest.

After the eggs are laid, they say that both the male and the female grow so

old and feeble that they are preyed upon by little fish, and with ease dragged

from their holes; and that this could not have been done previously; they say

also that this is not the case with the small and young octopus, but that the

young creature is much stronger than the grown-up one. Neither does the

sepia live into a second year. The octopus is the only mollusc that ventures on

to dry land; it walks by preference on rough ground; it is firm all over when

you squeeze it, excepting in the neck. So much for the mollusca.

It is also said that they make a thin rough shell about them like a hard

sheath, and that this is made larger and larger as the animal grows larger, and

that it comes out of the sheath as though out of a den or dwelling place.

The nautilus (or argonaut) is a poulpe or octopus, but one peculiar both in

its nature and its habits. It rises up from deep water and swims on the surface;

it rises with its shell down-turned in order that it may rise the more easily and

swim with it empty, but after reaching the surface it shifts the position of the

shell.  In  between  its  feelers  it  has  a  certain  amount  of  web-growth,

resembling the substance between the toes of web-footed birds; only that with

these latter the substance is thick, while with the nautilus it is thin and like a

spider’s web. It uses this structure, when a breeze is blowing, for a sail, and

lets down some of its feelers alongside as rudder-oars. If it be frightened it

fills its shell with water and sinks. With regard to the mode of generation andthe growth of the shell knowledge from observation is not yet satisfactory;

the shell, however, does not appear to be there from the beginning, but to

grow in their cases as in that of other shell-fish; neither is it ascertained for

certain whether the animal can live when stripped of the shell.

<

div id="section218" class="section" title="38">


38


Of all insects, one may also say of all living creatures, the most industrious

are the ant, the bee, the hornet, the wasp, and in point of fact all creatures

akin to these; of spiders some are more skilful and more resourceful than

others. The way in which ants work is open to ordinary observation; how

they all march one after the other when they are engaged in putting away and

storing up their food; all this may be seen, for they carry on their work even

during bright moonlight nights.

<

div id="section219" class="section" title="39">


39


Of  spiders  and  phalangia  there  are  many  species.  Of  the  venomous

phalangia there are two; one that resembles the so-called wolf-spider, small,

speckled, and tapering to a point; it moves with leaps, from which habit it is

nicknamed ‘the flea’: the other kind is large, black in colour, with long front

legs; it is heavy in its movements, walks slowly, is not very strong, and never

leaps. (Of all the other species wherewith poison-vendors supply themselves,

some give a weak bite, and others never bite at all. There is another kind,

comprising the so-called wolf-spiders.) Of these spiders the small one weaves

no web, and the large weaves a rude and poorly built one on the ground or on

dry stone walls. It always builds its web over hollow places inside of which it

keeps a watch on the end-threads, until some creature gets into the web and

begins to struggle, when out the spider pounces. The speckled kind makes a

little shabby web under trees.

  There is a third species of this animal, preeminently clever and artistic. It

first weaves a thread stretching to all the exterior ends of the future web; thenfrom the centre, which it hits upon with great accuracy, it stretches the warp;

on the warp it puts what corresponds to the woof, and then weaves the whole

together. It sleeps and stores its food away from the centre, but it is at the

centre that it keeps watch for its prey. Then, when any creature touches the

web and the centre is set in motion, it first ties and wraps the creature round

with threads until it renders it helpless, then lifts it and carries it off, and, if it

happens to be hungry, sucks out the life-juices—for that is the way it feeds;

but, if it be not hungry, it first mends any damage done and then hastens

again to its quest of prey. If something comes meanwhile into the net, the

spider at first makes for the centre, and then goes back to its entangled prey

as from a fixed starting point. If any one injures a portion of the web, it

recommences weaving at sunrise or at sunset, because it is chiefly at these

periods that creatures are caught in the web. It is the female that does the

weaving and the hunting, but the male takes a share of the booty captured.

Of the skilful spiders, weaving a substantial web, there are two kinds, the

larger and the smaller. The one has long legs and keeps watch while swinging

downwards from the web: from its large size it cannot easily conceal itself,

and so it keeps underneath, so that its prey may not be frightened off, but may

strike upon the web’s upper surface; the less awkwardly formed one lies in

wait on the top, using a little hole for a lurking-place. Spiders can spin webs

from  the  time  of  their  birth,  not  from  their  interior  as  a  superfluity  or

excretion, as Democritus avers, but off their body as a kind of tree-bark, like

the creatures that shoot out with their hair, as for instance the porcupine. The

creature  can  attack  animals  larger  than  itself,  and  enwrap  them  with  its

threads: in other words, it will attack a small lizard, run round and draw

threads about its mouth until it closes the mouth up; then it comes up and

bites it.

<

div id="section220" class="section" title="40">


40


So much for the spider. Of insects, there is a genus that has no one name

that  comprehends  all  the  species,  though  all  the  species  are  akin  to  one

another in form; it consists of all the insects that construct a honeycomb: to

wit, the bee, and all the insects that resemble it in form.

  There are nine varieties, of which six are gregarious-the bee, the king-bee,the drone bee, the annual wasp, and, furthermore, the anthrene (or hornet),

and the tenthredo (or ground-wasp); three are solitary-the smaller siren, of a

dun colour, the larger siren, black and speckled, and the third, the largest of

all, that is called the humble-bee. Now ants never go a-hunting, but gather up

what is ready to hand; the spider makes nothing, and lays up no store, but

simply goes a-hunting for its food; while the bee—for we shall by and by

treat of the nine varieties—does not go a-hunting, but constructs its food out

of gathered material and stores it away, for honey is the bee’s food. This fact

is shown by the beekeepers’ attempt to remove the combs; for the bees, when

they are fumigated, and are suffering great distress from the process, then

devour the honey most ravenously, whereas at other times they are never

observed to be so greedy, but apparently are thrifty and disposed to lay by for

their future sustenance. They have also another food which is called bee-

bread; this is scarcer than honey and has a sweet figlike taste; this they carry

as they do the wax on their legs.

Very remarkable diversity is observed in their methods of working and

their general habits. When the hive has been delivered to them clean and

empty,  they  build  their  waxen  cells,  bringing  in  the  juice  of  all  kinds  of

flowers and the ‘tears’ or exuding sap of trees, such as willows and elms and

such  others  as  are  particularly  given  to  the  exudation  of  gum.  With  this

material they besmear the groundwork, to provide against attacks of other

creatures; the bee-keepers call this stuff ‘stop-wax’. They also with the same

material narrow by side-building the entrances to the hive if they are too

wide. They first build cells for themselves; then for the so-called kings and

the drones; for themselves they are always building, for the kings only when

the brood of young is numerous, and cells for the drones they build if a

superabundance of honey should suggest their doing so. They build the royal

cells next to their own, and they are of small bulk; the drones’ cells they build

near by, and these latter are less in bulk than the bee’s cells.

  They begin building the combs downwards from the top of the hive, and

go down and down building many combs connected together until they reach

the bottom. The cells, both those for the honey and those also for the grubs,

are double-doored; for two cells are ranged about a single base, one pointing

one  way  and  one  the  other,  after  the  manner  of  a  double  (or  hour-glass-

shaped) goblet. The cells that lie at the commencement of the combs and are

attached to the hives, to the extent of two or three concentric circular rows,

are small and devoid of honey; the cells that are well filled with honey aremost thoroughly luted with wax. At the entry to the hive the aperture of the

doorway is smeared with mitys; this substance is a deep black, and is a sort of

dross or residual by-product of wax; it has a pungent odour, and is a cure for

bruises and suppurating sores. The greasy stuff that comes next is pitch-wax;

it has a less pungent odour and is less medicinal than the mitys. Some say

that the drones construct combs by themselves in the same hive and in the

same comb that they share with the bees; but that they make no honey, but

subsist, they and their grubs also, on the honey made by the bees. The drones,

as a rule, keep inside the hive; when they go out of doors, they soar up in the

air in a stream, whirling round and round in a kind of gymnastic exercise;

when this is over, they come inside the hive and feed to repletion ravenously.

The kings never quit the hive, except in conjunction with the entire swarm,

either for food or for any other reason. They say that, if a young swarm go

astray, it will turn back upon its route and by the aid of scent seek out its

leader. It is said that if he is unable to fly he is carried by the swarm, and that

if he dies the swarm perishes; and that, if this swarm outlives the king for a

while and constructs combs, no honey is produced and the bees soon die out.

Bees scramble up the stalks of flowers and rapidly gather the bees-wax

with their front legs; the front legs wipe it off on to the middle legs, and these

pass it on to the hollow curves of the hind-legs; when thus laden, they fly

away home, and one may see plainly that their load is a heavy one. On each

expedition the bee does not fly from a flower of one kind to a flower of

another, but flies from one violet, say, to another violet, and never meddles

with another flower until it has got back to the hive; on reaching the hive they

throw off their load, and each bee on his return is accompanied by three or

four companions. One cannot well tell what is the substance they gather, nor

the  exact  process  of  their  work.  Their  mode  of  gathering  wax  has  been

observed  on  olive-trees,  as  owing  to  the  thickness  of  the  leaves  the  bees

remain  stationary  for  a  considerable  while.  After  this  work  is  over,  they

attend to the grubs. There is nothing to prevent grubs, honey, and drones

being all found in one and the same comb. As long as the leader is alive, the

drones are said to be produced apart by themselves; if he be no longer living,

they are said to be reared by the bees in their own cells, and under these

circumstances to become more spirited: for this reason they are called ‘sting-

drones’, not that they really have stings, but that they have the wish without

the power, to use such weapons. The cells for the drones are larger than the

others; sometimes the bees construct cells for the drones apart, but usuallythey put them in amongst their own; and when this is the case the bee-keepers

cut the drone-cells out of the combs.

  There are several species of bees, as has been said; two of ‘kings’, the

better  kind  red,  the  other  black  and  variegated,  and  twice  as  big  as  the

working-bee.  The  best  workingbee  is  small,  round,  and  speckled:  another

kind is long and like an anthrene wasp; another kind is what is called the

robber-bee, black and flat-bellied; then there is the drone, the largest of all,

but devoid of sting, and lazy. There is a difference between the progeny of

bees that inhabit cultivated land and of those from the mountains: the forest-

bees are more shaggy, smaller, more industrious and more fierce. Working-

bees make their combs all even, with the superficial covering quite smooth.

Each comb is of one kind only: that is, it contains either bees only, or grubs

only, or drones only; if it happen, however, that they make in one and the

same  comb  all  these  kinds  of  cells,  each  separate  kind  will  be  built  in  a

continuous row right through. The long bees build uneven combs, with the

lids of the cells protuberant, like those of the anthrene; grubs and everything

else  have  no  fixed  places,  but  are  put  anywhere;  from  these  bees  come

inferior kings, a large quantity of drones, and the so-called robber-bee; they

produce either no honey at all, or honey in very small quantities. Bees brood

over the combs and so mature them; if they fail to do so, the combs are said

to go bad and to get covered with a sort of spider’s web. If they can keep

brooding over the part undamaged, the damaged part simply eats itself away;

if they cannot so brood, the entire comb perishes; in the damaged combs

small worms are engendered, which take on wings and fly away. When the

combs keep settling down, the bees restore the level surface, and put props

underneath the combs to give themselves free passage-room; for if such free

passage be lacking they cannot brood, and the cobwebs come on. When the

robber-bee and the drone appear, not only do they do no work themselves,

but they actually damage the work of the other bees; if they are caught in the

act, they are killed by the working-bees. These bees also kill without mercy

most of their kings, and especially kings of the inferior sort; and this they do

for fear a multiplicity of kings should lead to a dismemberment of the hive.

They kill them especially when the hive is deficient in grubs, and a swarm is

not intended to take place; under these circumstances they destroy the cells of

the  kings  if  they  have  been  prepared,  on  the  ground  that  these  kings  are

always ready to lead out swarms. They destroy also the combs of the drones

if a failure in the supply be threatening and the hive runs short of provisions;under such circumstances they fight desperately with all who try to take their

honey, and eject from the hive all the resident drones; and oftentimes the

drones are to be seen sitting apart in the hive. The little bees fight vigorously

with the long kind, and try to banish them from the hives; if they succeed, the

hive will be unusually productive, but if the bigger bees get left mistresses of

the field they pass the time in idleness, and no good at all but die out before

the autumn. Whenever the working-bees kill an enemy they try to do so out

of doors; and whenever one of their own body dies, they carry the dead bee

out of doors also. The so-called robber-bees spoil their own combs, and, if

they can do so unnoticed, enter and spoil the combs of other bees; if they are

caught in the act they are put to death. It is no easy task for them to escape

detection, for there are sentinels on guard at every entry; and, even if they do

escape detection on entering, afterwards from a surfeit of food they cannot

fly, but go rolling about in front of the hive, so that their chances of escape

are small indeed. The kings are never themselves seen outside the hive except

with a swarm in flight: during which time all the other bees cluster around

them.  When  the  flight  of  a  swarm  is  imminent,  a  monotonous  and  quite

peculiar sound made by all the bees is heard for several days, and for two or

three days in advance a few bees are seen flying round the hive; it has never

as yet been ascertained, owing to the difficulty of the observation, whether or

no the king is among these. When they have swarmed, they fly away and

separate off to each of the kings; if a small swarm happens to settle near to a

large one, it will shift to join this large one, and if the king whom they have

abandoned follows them, they put him to death. So much for the quitting of

the hive and the swarmflight. Separate detachments of bees are told off for

diverse operations; that is, some carry flower-produce, others carry water,

others smooth and arrange the combs. A bee carries water when it is rearing

grubs. No bee ever settles on the flesh of any creature, or ever eats animal

food.  They  have  no  fixed  date  for  commencing  work;  but  when  their

provender is forthcoming and they are in comfortable trim, and by preference

in  summer,  they  set  to  work,  and  when  the  weather  is  fine  they  work

incessantly.

The bee, when quite young and in fact only three days old, after shedding

its chrysalis-case, begins to work if it be well fed. When a swarm is settling,

some bees detach themselves in search of food and return back to the swarm.

In  hives  that  are  in  good  condition  the  production  of  young  bees  is

discontinued only for the forty days that follow the winter solstice. When thegrubs  are  grown,  the  bees  put  food  beside  them  and  cover  them  with  a

coating of wax; and, as soon as the grub is strong enough, he of his own

accord breaks the lid and comes out. Creatures that make their appearance in

hives and spoil the combs the working-bees clear out, but the other bees from

sheer laziness look with indifference on damage done to their produce. When

the bee-masters take out the combs, they leave enough food behind for winter

use; if it be sufficient in quantity, the occupants of the hive will survive; if it

be insufficient, then, if the weather be rough, they die on the spot, but if it be

fair, they fly away and desert the hive. They feed on honey summer and

winter; but they store up another article of food resembling wax in hardness,

which by some is called sandarace, or bee-bread. Their worst enemies are

wasps and the birds named titmice, and furthermore the swallow and the bee-

eater. The frogs in the marsh also catch them if they come in their way by the

water-side, and for this reason bee-keepers chase the frogs from the ponds

from which the bees take water; they destroy also wasps’ nests, and the nests

of swallows, in the neighbourhood of the hives, and also the nests of bee-

eaters. Bees have fear only of one another. They fight with one another and

with wasps. Away from the hive they attack neither their own species nor any

other creature, but in the close proximity of the hive they kill whatever they

get hold of. Bees that sting die from their inability to extract the sting without

at the same time extracting their intestines. True, they often recover, if the

person stung takes the trouble to press the sting out; but once it loses its sting

the bee must die. They can kill with their stings even large animals; in fact, a

horse has been known to have been stung to death by them. The kings are the

least disposed to show anger or to inflict a sting. Bees that die are removed

from the hive, and in every way the creature is remarkable for its cleanly

habits;  in  point  of  fact,  they  often  fly  away  to  a  distance  to  void  their

excrement because it is malodorous; and, as has been said, they are annoyed

by all bad smells and by the scent of perfumes, so much so that they sting

people that use perfumes.

  They perish from a number of accidental causes, and when their kings

become too numerous and try each to carry away a portion of the swarm.

The toad also feeds on bees; he comes to the doorway of the hive, puffs

himself out as he sits on the watch, and devours the creatures as they come

flying out; the bees can in no way retaliate, but the bee-keeper makes a point

of killing him.

As for the class of bee that has been spoken of as inferior or good-for-nothing, and as constructing its combs so roughly, some bee-keepers say that

it is the young bees that act so from inexperience; and the bees of the current

year are termed young. The young bees do not sting as the others do; and it is

for this reason that swarms may be safely carried, as it is of young bees that

they are composed. When honey runs short they expel the drones, and the

bee-keepers supply the bees with figs and sweet-tasting articles of food. The

elder bees do the indoor work, and are rough and hairy from staying indoors;

the young bees do the outer carrying, and are comparatively smooth. They

kill  the  drones  also  when  in  their  work  they  are  confined  for  room;  the

drones, by the way, live in the innermost recess of the hive. On one occasion,

when a hive was in a poor condition, some of the occupants assailed a foreign

hive; proving victorious in a combat they took to carrying off the honey;

when the bee-keeper tried to kill them, the other bees came out and tried to

beat off the enemy but made no attempt to sting the man.

The diseases that chiefly attack prosperous hives are first of all the clerus-

this consists in a growth of little worms on the floor, from which, as they

develop, a kind of cobweb grows over the entire hive, and the combs decay;

another diseased condition is indicated in a lassitude on the part of the bees

and in malodorousness of the hive. Bees feed on thyme; and the white thyme

is better than the red. In summer the place for the hive should be cool, and in

winter warm. They are very apt to fall sick if the plant they are at work on be

mildewed. In a high wind they carry a stone by way of ballast to steady them.

If a stream be near at hand, they drink from it and from it only, but before

they drink they first deposit their load; if there be no water near at hand, they

disgorge their honey as they drink elsewhere, and at once make off to work.

There  are  two  seasons  for  making  honey,  spring  and  autumn;  the  spring

honey is sweeter, whiter, and in every way better than the autumn honey.

Superior  honey  comes  from  fresh  comb,  and  from  young  shoots;  the  red

honey is inferior, and owes its inferiority to the comb in which it is deposited,

just as wine is apt to be spoiled by its cask; consequently, one should have it

looked to and dried. When the thyme is in flower and the comb is full, the

honey does not harden. The honey that is golden in hue is excellent. White

honey does not come from thyme pure and simple; it is good as a salve for

sore eyes and wounds. Poor honey always floats on the surface and should be

skimmed off; the fine clear honey rests below. When the floral world is in

full bloom, then they make wax; consequently you must then take the wax

out of the hive, for they go to work on new wax at once. The flowers fromwhich they gather honey are as follows: the spindle-tree, the melilot-clover,

king’s-spear, myrtle, flowering-reed, withy, and broom. When they work at

thyme, they mix in water before sealing up the comb. As has been already

stated, they all either fly to a distance to discharge their excrement or make

the discharge into one single comb. The little bees, as has been said, are more

industrious than the big ones; their wings are battered; their colour is black,

and they have a burnt-up aspect. Gaudy and showy bees, like gaudy and

showy women, are good-for-nothings.

Bees  seem  to  take  a  pleasure  in  listening  to  a  rattling  noise;  and

consequently men say that they can muster them into a hive by rattling with

crockery or stones; it is uncertain, however, whether or no they can hear the

noise at all and also whether their procedure is due to pleasure or alarm. They

expel  from  the  hive  all  idlers  and  unthrifts.  As  has  been  said,  they

differentiate their work; some make wax, some make honey, some make bee-

bread,  some  shape  and  mould  combs,  some  bring  water  to  the  cells  and

mingle it with the honey, some engage in out-of-door work. At early dawn

they make no noise, until some one particular bee makes a buzzing noise two

or three times and thereby awakes the rest; hereupon they all fly in a body to

work. By and by they return and at first are noisy; then the noise gradually

decreases, until at last some one bee flies round about, making a buzzing

noise, and apparently calling on the others to go to sleep; then all of a sudden

there is a dead silence.

The hive is known to be in good condition if the noise heard within it is

loud, and if the bees make a flutter as they go out and in; for at this time they

are  constructing  brood-cells.  They  suffer  most  from  hunger  when  they

recommence  work  after  winter.  They  become  somewhat  lazy  if  the  bee-

keeper, in robbing the hive, leave behind too much honey; still one should

leave cells numerous in proportion to the population, for the bees work in a

spiritless way if too few combs are left. They become idle also, as being

dispirited, if the hive be too big. A hive yields to the bee-keeper six or nine

pints  of  honey;  a  prosperous  hive  will  yield  twelve  or  fifteen  pints,

exceptionally good hives eighteen. Sheep and, as has been said, wasps are

enemies to the bees. Bee-keepers entrap the latter, by putting a flat dish on

the ground with pieces of meat on it; when a number of the wasps settle on it,

they cover them with a lid and put the dish and its contents on the fire. It is a

good thing to have a few drones in a hive, as their presence increases the

industry of the workers. Bees can tell the approach of rough weather or ofrain; and the proof is that they will not fly away, but even while it is as yet

fine they go fluttering about within a restricted space, and the bee-keeper

knows from this that they are expecting bad weather. When the bees inside

the  hive  hang  clustering  to  one  another,  it  is  a  sign  that  the  swarm  is

intending to quit; consequently, occasion, when a bee-keepers, on seeing this,

besprinkle the hive with sweet wine. It is advisable to plant about the hives

pear-trees, beans, Median-grass, Syrian-grass, yellow pulse, myrtle, poppies,

creeping-thyme, and almond-trees. Some bee-keepers sprinkle their bees with

flour, and can distinguish them from others when they are at work out of

doors. If the spring be late, or if there be drought or blight, then grubs are all

the fewer in the hives. So much for the habits of bees.

<

div id="section221" class="section" title="41">


41


Of wasps, there are two kinds. Of these kinds one is wild and scarce, lives

on  the  mountains,  engenders  grubs  not  underground  but  on  oak-trees,  is

larger, longer, and blacker than the other kind, is invariably speckled and

furnished with a sting, and is remarkably courageous. The pain from its sting

is more severe than that caused by the others, for the instrument that causes

the pain is larger, in proportion to its own larger size. These wild live over

into a second year, and in winter time, when oaks have been in course of

felling, they may be seen coming out and flying away. They lie concealed

during the winter, and live in the interior of logs of wood. Some of them are

mother-wasps and some are workers, as with the tamer kind; but it is by

observation of the tame wasps that one may learn the varied characteristics of

the mothers and the workers. For in the case of the tame wasps also there are

two kinds; one consists of leaders, who are called mothers, and the other of

workers. The leaders are far larger and milder-tempered than the others. The

workers do not live over into a second year, but all die when winter comes

on; and this can be proved, for at the commencement of winter the workers

become drowsy, and about the time of the winter solstice they are never seen

at all. The leaders, the so-called mothers, are seen all through the winter, and

live in holes underground; for men when ploughing or digging in winter have

often  come  upon  mother-wasps,  but  never  upon  workers.  The  mode  of

reproduction of wasps is as follows. At the approach of summer, when theleaders have found a sheltered spot, they take to moulding their combs, and

construct  the  so-called  sphecons,-little  nests  containing  four  cells  or

thereabouts, and in these are produced working-wasps but not mothers. When

these are grown up, then they construct other larger combs upon the first, and

then again in like manner others; so that by the close of autumn there are

numerous large combs in which the leader, the so-called mother, engenders

no longer working-wasps but mothers. These develop high up in the nest as

large grubs, in cells that occur in groups of four or rather more, pretty much

in the same way as we have seen the grubs of the king-bees to be produced in

their cells. After the birth of the working-grubs in the cells, the leaders do

nothing and the workers have to supply them with nourishment; and this is

inferred from the fact that the leaders (of the working-wasps) no longer fly

out at this time, but rest quietly indoors. Whether the leaders of last year after

engendering new leaders are killed by the new brood, and whether this occurs

invariably or whether they can live for a longer time, has not been ascertained

by  actual  observation;  neither  can  we  speak  with  certainty,  as  from

observation, as to the age attained by the mother-wasp or by the wild wasps,

or as to any other similar phenomenon. The mother-wasp is broad and heavy,

fatter and larger than the ordinary wasp, and from its weight not very strong

on the wing; these wasps cannot fly far, and for this reason they always rest

inside the nest, building and managing its indoor arrangements. The so-called

mother-wasps are found in most of the nests; it is a matter of doubt whether

or no they are provided with stings; in all probability, like the king-bees, they

have stings, but never protrude them for offence. Of the ordinary wasps some

are destitute of stings, like the drone-bees, and some are provided with them.

Those unprovided therewith are smaller and less spirited and never fight,

while the others are big and courageous; and these latter, by some, are called

males, and the stingless, females. At the approach of winter many of the

wasps  that  have  stings  appear  to  lose  them;  but  we  have  never  met  an

eyewitness  of  this  phenomenon.  Wasps  are  more  abundant  in  times  of

drought  and  in  wild  localities.  They  live  underground;  their  combs  they

mould out of chips and earth, each comb from a single origin, like a kind of

root. They feed on certain flowers and fruits, but for the most part on animal

food. Some of the tame wasps have been observed when sexually united, but

it was not determined whether both, or neither, had stings, or whether one

had a sting and the other had not; wild wasps have been seen under similar

circumstances, when one was seen to have a sting but the case of the otherwas left undetermined. The wasp-grub does not appear to come into existence

by parturition, for at the outset the grub is too big to be the offspring of a

wasp. If you take a wasp by the feet and let him buzz with the vibration of his

wings, wasps that have no stings will fly toward it, and wasps that have stings

will not; from which fact it is inferred by some that one set are males and the

other females. In holes in the ground in winter-time wasps are found, some

with stings, and some without. Some build cells, small and few in number;

others build many and large ones. The so-called mothers are caught at the

change of season, mostly on elm-trees, while gathering a substance sticky and

gumlike. A large number of mother-wasps are found when in the previous

year wasps have been numerous and the weather rainy; they are captured in

precipitous places, or in vertical clefts in the ground, and they all appear to be

furnished with stings.

<

div id="section222" class="section" title="42">


42


So much for the habits of wasps.

  Anthrenae do not subsist by culling from flowers as bees do, but for the

most part on animal food: for this reason they hover about dung; for they

chase the large flies, and after catching them lop off their heads and fly away

with the rest of the carcases; they are furthermore fond of sweet fruits. Such

is their food. They have also kings or leaders like bees and wasps; and their

leaders are larger in proportion to themselves than are wasp-kings to wasps or

bee-kings  to  bees.  The  anthrena-king,  like  the  wasp-king,  lives  indoors.

Anthrenae build their nests underground, scraping out the soil like ants; for

neither anthrenae nor wasps go off in swarms as bees do, but successive

layers of young anthrenae keep to the same habitat, and go on enlarging their

nest by scraping out more and more of soil. The nest accordingly attains a

great size; in fact, from a particularly prosperous nest have been removed

three and even four baskets full of combs. They do not, like bees, store up

food, but pass the winter in a torpid condition; the greater part of them die in

the winter, but it is uncertain whether that can be said of them all, In the hives

of bees several kings are found and they lead off detachments in swarms, but

in the anthrena’s nest only one king is found. When individual anthrenae

have strayed from their nest, they cluster on a tree and construct combs, asmay be often seen above-ground, and in this nest they produce a king; when

the  king  is  full-grown,  he  leads  them  away  and  settles  them  along  with

himself in a hive or nest. With regard to their sexual unions, and the method

of their reproduction, nothing is known from actual observation. Among bees

both the drones and the kings are stingless, and so are certain wasps, as has

been said; but anthrenae appear to be all furnished with stings: though, by the

way, it would well be worth while to carry out investigation as to whether the

anthrena-king has a sting or not.

<

div id="section223" class="section" title="43">


43


  Humble-bees produce their young under a stone, right on the ground, in a

couple of cells or little more; in these cells is found an attempt at honey, of a

poor description. The tenthredon is like the anthrena, but speckled, and about

as broad as a bee. Being epicures as to their food, they fly, one at a time, into

kitchens and on to slices of fish and the like dainties. The tenthredon brings

forth, like the wasp, underground, and is very prolific; its nest is much bigger

and longer than that of the wasp. So much for the methods of working and

the habits of life of the bee, the wasp, and all the other similar insects.

<

div id="section224" class="section" title="44">


44


As regards the disposition or temper of animals, as has been previously

observed, one may detect great differences in respect to courage and timidity,

as also, even among wild animals, in regard to tameness and wildness. The

lion, while he is eating, is most ferocious; but when he is not hungry and has

had a good meal, he is quite gentle. He is totally devoid of suspicion or

nervous fear, is fond of romping with animals that have been reared along

with  him  and  to  whom  he  is  accustomed,  and  manifests  great  affection

towards them. In the chase, as long as he is in view, he makes no attempt to

run and shows no fear, but even if he be compelled by the multitude of the

hunters to retreat, he withdraws deliberately, step by step, every now and thenturning his head to regard his pursuers. If, however, he reach wooded cover,

then he runs at full speed, until he comes to open ground, when he resumes

his leisurely retreat. When, in the open, he is forced by the number of the

hunters to run while in full view, he does run at the top of his speed, but

without leaping and bounding. This running of his is evenly and continuously

kept up like the running of a dog; but when he is in pursuit of his prey and is

close behind, he makes a sudden pounce upon it. The two statements made

regarding him are quite true; the one that he is especially afraid of fire, as

Homer pictures him in the line-’and glowing torches, which, though fierce he

dreads,’-and the other, that he keeps a steady eye upon the hunter who hits

him, and flings himself upon him. If a hunter hit him, without hurting him,

then if with a bound he gets hold of him, he will do him no harm, not even

with his claws, but after shaking him and giving him a fright will let him go

again. They invade the cattle-folds and attack human beings when they are

grown old and so by reason of old age and the diseased condition of their

teeth are unable to pursue their wonted prey. They live to a good old age. The

lion who was captured when lame, had a number of his teeth broken; which

fact was regarded by some as a proof of the longevity of lions, as he could

hardly have been reduced to this condition except at an advanced age. There

are  two  species  of  lions,  the  plump,  curly-maned,  and  the  long-bodied,

straight maned; the latter kind is courageous, and the former comparatively

timid; sometimes they run away with their tail between their legs, like a dog.

A lion was once seen to be on the point of attacking a boar, but to run away

when the boar stiffened his bristles in defence. It is susceptible of hurt from a

wound in the flank, but on any other part of its frame will endure any number

of blows, and its head is especially hard. Whenever it inflicts a wound, either

by its teeth or its claws, there flows from the wounded parts suppurating

matter,  quite  yellow,  and  not  to  be  stanched  by  bandage  or  sponge;  the

treatment for such a wound is the same as that for the bite of a dog.

The thos, or civet, is fond of man’s company; it does him no harm and is

not much afraid of him, but it is an enemy to the dog and the lion, and

consequently is not found in the same habitat with them. The little ones are

the best. Some say that there are two species of the animal, and some say,

three; there are probably not more than three, but, as is the case with certain

of the fishes, birds, and quadrupeds, this animal changes in appearance with

the change of season. His colour in winter is not the same as it is in summer;

in summer the animal is smooth-haired, in winter he is clothed in fur.<

div id="section225" class="section" title="45">


45


The  bison  is  found  in  Paeonia  on  Mount  Messapium,  which  separates

Paeonia from Maedica; and the Paeonians call it the monapos. It is the size of

a bull, but stouter in build, and not long in the body; its skin, stretched tight

on a frame, would give sitting room for seven people. In general it resembles

the ox in appearance, except that it has a mane that reaches down to the point

of the shoulder, as that of the horse reaches down to its withers; but the hair

in  its  mane  is  softer  than  the  hair  in  the  horse’s  mane,  and  clings  more

closely. The colour of the hair is brown-yellow; the mane reaches down to

the eyes, and is deep and thick. The colour of the body is half red, half ashen-

grey, like that of the so-called chestnut horse, but rougher. It has an undercoat

of woolly hair. The animal is not found either very black or very red. It has

the bellow of a bull. Its horns are crooked, turned inwards towards each other

and useless for purposes of self-defence; they are a span broad, or a little

more, and in volume each horn would hold about three pints of liquid; the

black  colour  of  the  horn  is  beautiful  and  bright.  The  tuft  of  hair  on  the

forehead reaches down to the eyes, so that the animal sees objects on either

flank better than objects right in front. It has no upper teeth, as is the case

also with kine and all other horned animals. Its legs are hairy; it is cloven-

footed, and the tail, which resembles that of the ox, seems not big enough for

the size of its body. It tosses up dust and scoops out the ground with its

hooves, like the bull. Its skin is impervious to blows. Owing to the savour of

its flesh it is sought for in the chase. When it is wounded it runs away, and

stops only when thoroughly exhausted. It defends itself against an assailant

by kicking and projecting its excrement to a distance of eight yards; this

device  it  can  easily  adopt  over  and  over  again,  and  the  excrement  is  so

pungent that the hair of hunting-dogs is burnt off by it. It is only when the

animal  is  disturbed  or  alarmed  that  the  dung  has  this  property;  when  the

animal is undisturbed it has no blistering effect. So much for the shape and

habits of the animal. When the season comes for parturition the mothers give

birth  to  their  young  in  troops  upon  the  mountains.  Before  dropping  their

young  they  scatter  their  dung  in  all  directions,  making  a  kind  of  circular

rampart around them; for the animal has the faculty of ejecting excrement inmost extraordinary quantities.

<

div id="section226" class="section" title="46">


46


Of all wild animals the most easily tamed and the gentlest is the elephant.

It  can  be  taught  a  number  of  tricks,  the  drift  and  meaning  of  which  it

understands; as, for instance, it can taught to kneel in presence of the king. It

is very sensitive, and possessed of an intelligence superior to that of other

animals. When the male has had sexual union with the female, and the female

has conceived, the male has no further intercourse with her.

  Some say that the elephant lives for two hundred years; others, for one

hundred and twenty; that the female lives nearly as long as the male; that they

reach  their  prime  about  the  age  of  sixty,  and  that  they  are  sensitive  to

inclement weather and frost. The elephant is found by the banks of rivers, but

he is not a river animal; he can make his way through water, as long as the tip

of  his  trunk  can  be  above  the  surface,  for  he  blows  with  his  trunk  and

breathes through it. The animal is a poor swimmer owing to the heavy weight

of his body.

<

div id="section227" class="section" title="47">


47


The male camel declines intercourse with its mother; if his keeper tries

compulsion, he evinces disinclination. On one occasion, when intercourse

was being declined by the young male, the keeper covered over the mother

and put the young male to her; but, when after the intercourse the wrapping

had been removed, though the operation was completed and could not be

revoked, still by and by he bit his keeper to death. A story goes that the king

of Scythia had a highly-bred mare, and that all her foals were splendid; that

wishing to mate the best of the young males with the mother, he had him

brought to the stall for the purpose; that the young horse declined; that, after

the mother’s head had been concealed in a wrapper he, in ignorance, had

intercourse; and that, when immediately afterwards the wrapper was removedand the head of the mare was rendered visible, the young horse ran way and

hurled himself down a precipice.

<

div id="section228" class="section" title="48">


48


  Among the sea-fishes many stories are told about the dolphin, indicative of

his gentle and kindly nature, and of manifestations of passionate attachment

to boys, in and about Tarentum, Caria, and other places. The story goes that,

after a dolphin had been caught and wounded off the coast of Caria, a shoal

of dolphins came into the harbour and stopped there until the fisherman let

his captive go free; whereupon the shoal departed. A shoal of young dolphins

is always, by way of protection, followed by a large one. On one occasion a

shoal of dolphins, large and small, was seen, and two dolphins at a little

distance appeared swimming in underneath a little dead dolphin when it was

sinking, and supporting it on their backs, trying out of compassion to prevent

its  being  devoured  by  some  predaceous  fish.  Incredible  stories  are  told

regarding  the  rapidity  of  movement  of  this  creature.  It  appears  to  be  the

fleetest of all animals, marine and terrestrial, and it can leap over the masts of

large vessels. This speed is chiefly manifested when they are pursuing a fish

for food; then, if the fish endeavours to escape, they pursue him in their

ravenous hunger down to deep waters; but, when the necessary return swim is

getting too long, they hold in their breath, as though calculating the length of

it, and then draw themselves together for an effort and shoot up like arrows,

trying to make the long ascent rapidly in order to breathe, and in the effort

they spring right over the a ship’s masts if a ship be in the vicinity. This same

phenomenon is observed in divers, when they have plunged into deep water;

that is, they pull themselves together and rise with a speed proportional to

their  strength.  Dolphins  live  together  in  pairs,  male  and  female.  It  is  not

known  for  what  reason  they  run  themselves  aground  on  dry  land;  at  all

events, it is said that they do so at times, and for no obvious reason.

<

div id="section229" class="section" title="49">


49Just  as  with  all  animals  a  change  of  action  follows  a  change  of

circumstance, so also a change of character follows a change of action, and

often some portions of the physical frame undergo a change, occurs in the

case of birds. Hens, for instance, when they have beaten the cock in a fight,

will crow like the cock and endeavour to tread him; the crest rises up on their

head  and  the  tail-feathers  on  the  rump,  so  that  it  becomes  difficult  to

recognize that they are hens; in some cases there is a growth of small spurs.

On the death of a hen a cock has been seen to undertake the maternal duties,

leading the chickens about and providing them with food, and so intent upon

these duties as to cease crowing and indulging his sexual propensities. Some

cock-birds  are  congenitally  so  feminine  that  they  will  submit  patiently  to

other males who attempt to tread them.

<

div id="section230" class="section" title="50">


50


  Some animals change their form and character, not only at certain ages and

at certain seasons, but in consequence of being castrated; and all animals

possessed of testicles may be submitted to this operation. Birds have their

testicles  inside,  and  oviparous  quadrupeds  close  to  the  loins;  and  of

viviparous animals that walk some have them inside, and most have them

outside, but all have them at the lower end of the belly. Birds are castrated at

the rump at the part where the two sexes unite in copulation. If you burn this

twice or thrice with hot irons, then, if the bird be full-grown, his crest grows

sallow, he ceases to crow, and foregoes sexual passion; but if you cauterize

the bird when young, none of these male attributes propensities will come to

him as he grows up. The case is the same with men: if you mutilate them in

boyhood, the later-growing hair never comes, and the voice never changes

but remains high-pitched; if they be mutilated in early manhood, the late

growths of hair quit them except the growth on the groin, and that diminishes

but does not entirely depart. The congenital growths of hair never fall out, for

a eunuch never grows bald. In the case of all castrated or mutilated male

quadrupeds the voice changes to the feminine voice. All other quadrupeds

when  castrated,  unless  the  operation  be  performed  when  they  are  young,

invariably die; but in the case of boars, and in their case only, the age at

which  the  operation  is  performed  produces  no  difference.  All  animals,  ifoperated on when they are young, become bigger and better looking than

their unmutilated fellows; if they be mutilated when full-grown, they do not

take on any increase of size. If stags be mutilated, when, by reason of their

age,  they  have  as  yet  no  horns,  they  never  grow  horns  at  all;  if  they  be

mutilated when they have horns, the horns remain unchanged in size, and the

animal does not lose them. Calves are mutilated when a year old; otherwise,

they turn out uglier and smaller. Steers are mutilated in the following way:

they turn the animal over on its back, cut a little off the scrotum at the lower

end, and squeeze out the testicles, then push back the roots of them as far as

they can, and stop up the incision with hair to give an outlet to suppurating

matter;  if  inflammation  ensues,  they  cauterize  the  scrotum  and  put  on  a

plaster. If a full-grown bull be mutilated, he can still to all appearance unite

sexually with the cow. The ovaries of sows are excised with the view of

quenching in them sexual appetites and of stimulating growth in size and

fatness. The sow has first to be kept two days without food, and, after being

hung up by the hind legs, it is operated on; they cut the lower belly, about the

place where the boars have their testicles, for it is there that the ovary grows,

adhering to the two divisions (or horns) of the womb; they cut off a little

piece and stitch up the incision. Female camels are mutilated when they are

wanted for war purposes, and are mutilated to prevent their being got with

young.  Some  of  the  inhabitants  of  Upper  Asia  have  as  many  as  three

thousand camels: when they run, they run, in consequence of the length of

their  stride,  much  quicker  than  the  horses  of  Nisaea.  As  a  general  rule,

mutilated animals grow to a greater length than the unmutilated.

All animals that ruminate derive profit and pleasure from the process of

rumination, as they do from the process of eating. It is the animals that lack

the upper teeth that ruminate, such as kine, sheep, and goats. In the case of

wild animals no observation has been possible; save in the case of animals

that are occasionally domesticated, such as the stag, and it, we know, chews

the cud. All animals that ruminate generally do so when lying down on the

ground. They carry on the process to the greatest extent in winter, and stall-

fed ruminants carry it on for about seven months in the year; beasts that go in

herds, as they get their food out of doors, ruminate to a lesser degree and over

a  lesser  period.  Some,  also,  of  the  animals  that  have  teeth  in  both  jaws

ruminate; as, for instance, the Pontic mice, and the fish which from the habit

is by some called ‘the Ruminant’, (as well as other fish).

  Long-limbed animals have loose faeces, and broad-chested animals vomitwith comparative facility, and these remarks are, in a general way, applicable

to quadrupeds, birds, and men.

<

div id="section231" class="section" title="49B">


49B


A considerable number of birds change according to season the colour of

their  plumage  and  their  note;  as,  for  instance,  the  owsel  becomes  yellow

instead of black, and its note gets altered, for in summer it has a musical note

and in winter a discordant chatter. The thrush also changes its colour; about

the throat it is marked in winter with speckles like a starling, in summer

distinctly spotted: however, it never alters its note. The nightingale, when the

hills  are  taking  on  verdure,  sings  continually  for  fifteen  days  and  fifteen

nights; afterwards it sings, but not continuously. As summer advances it has a

different  song,  not  so  varied  as  before,  nor  so  deep,  nor  so  intricately

modulated,  but  simple;  it  also  changes  its  colour,  and  in  Italy  about  this

season it goes by a different name. It goes into hiding, and is consequently

visible only for a brief period. The erithacus (or redbreast) and the so-called

redstart  change  into  one  another;  the  former  is  a  winter  bird,  the  latter  a

summer one, and the difference between them is practically limited to the

coloration  of  their  plumage.  In  the  same  way  with  the  beccafico  and  the

blackcap;  these  change  into  one  another.  The  beccafico  appears  about

autumn, and the blackcap as soon as autumn has ended. These birds, also,

differ from one another only in colour and note; that these birds, two in name,

are one in reality is proved by the fact that at the period when the change is in

progress each one has been seen with the change as yet incomplete. It is not

so very strange that in these cases there is a change in note and in plumage,

for  even  the  ring-dove  ceases  to  coo  in  winter,  and  recommences  cooing

when spring comes in; in winter, however, when fine weather has succeeded

to very stormy weather, this bird has been known to give its cooing note, to

the astonishment of such as were acquainted with its usual winter silence. As

a  general  rule,  birds  sing  most  loudly  and  most  diversely  in  the  pairing

season. The cuckoo changes its colour, and its note is not clearly heard for a

short time previous to its departure. It departs about the rising of the Dog-

star, and it reappears from springtime to the rising of the Dog-star. At the rise

of this star the bird called by some oenanthe disappears, and reappears whenit is setting: thus keeping clear at one time of extreme cold, and at another

time of extreme heat. The hoopoe also changes its colour and appearance, as

Aeschylus has represented in the following lines:—

<

div class="quote">

The Hoopoe, witness to his own distress,

Is clad by Zeus in variable dress:-

Now a gay mountain-bird, with knightly crest,

Now in the white hawk’s silver plumage drest,

For, timely changing, on the hawk’s white wing

He greets the apparition of the Spring.

Thus twofold form and colour are conferred,

In youth and age, upon the selfsame bird.

The spangled raiment marks his youthful days,

The argent his maturity displays;

And when the fields are yellow with ripe corn

Again his particoloured plumes are worn.

But evermore, in sullen discontent,

He seeks the lonely hills, in self-sought banishment.

Of birds, some take a dust-bath by rolling in dust, some take a water-bath,

and some take neither the one bath nor the other. Birds that do not fly but

keep on the ground take the dust-bath, as for instance the hen, the partridge,

the  francolin,  the  crested  lark,  the  pheasant;  some  of  the  straight-taloned

birds, and such as live on the banks of a river, in marshes, or by the sea, take

a water-bath; some birds take both the dust-bath and the waterbath, as for

instance the pigeon and the sparrow; of the crooked-taloned birds the greater

part take neither the one bath nor the other. So much for the ways of the

above-mentioned, but some birds have a peculiar habit of making a noise at

their hinder quarters, as, for instance, the turtle-dove; and they make a violent

movement  of  their  tails  at  the  same  time  that  they  produce  this  peculiar

sound.                    On the Parts of Animals, Book I


Translated by William Ogle


<

div id="book1" class="chapter">


1


  Every  systematic  science,  the  humblest  and  the  noblest  alike,  seems  to

admit of two distinct kinds of proficiency; one of which may be properly

called  scientific  knowledge  of  the  subject,  while  the  other  is  a  kind  of

educational acquaintance with it. For an educated man should be able to form

a fair off-hand judgement as to the goodness or badness of the method used

by a professor in his exposition. To be educated is in fact to be able to do

this; and even the man of universal education we deem to be such in virtue of

his having this ability. It will, however, of course, be understood that we only

ascribe universal education to one who in his own individual person is thus

critical in all or nearly all branches of knowledge, and not to one who has a

like ability merely in some special subject. For it is possible for a man to

have this competence in some one branch of knowledge without having it in

all.

It is plain then that, as in other sciences, so in that which inquires into

nature, there must be certain canons, by reference to which a hearer shall be

able to criticize the method of a professed exposition, quite independently of

the question whether the statements made be true or false. Ought we, for

instance (to give an illustration of what I mean), to begin by discussing each

separate species-man, lion, ox, and the like-taking each kind in hand inde.

pendently of the rest, or ought we rather to deal first with the attributes which

they have in common in virtue of some common element of their nature, and

proceed from this as a basis for the consideration of them separately? For

genera  that  are  quite  distinct  yet  oftentimes  present  many  identical

phenomena, sleep, for instance, respiration, growth, decay, death, and other

similar affections and conditions, which may be passed over for the present,

as we are not yet prepared to treat of them with clearness and precision. Nowit is plain that if we deal with each species independently of the rest, we shall

frequently be obliged to repeat the same statements over and over again; for

horse and dog and man present, each and all, every one of the phenomena

just enumerated. A discussion therefore of the attributes of each such species

separately  would  necessarily  involve  frequent  repetitions  as  to  characters,

themselves  identical  but  recurring  in  animals  specifically  distinct.  (Very

possibly  also  there  may  be  other  characters  which,  though  they  present

specific differences, yet come under one and the same category. For instance,

flying, swimming, walking, creeping, are plainly specifically distinct, but yet

are  all  forms  of  animal  progression.)  We  must,  then,  have  some  clear

understanding as to the manner in which our investigation is to be conducted;

whether, I mean, we are first to deal with the common or generic characters,

and afterwards to take into consideration special peculiarities; or whether we

are to start straight off with the ultimate species. For as yet no definite rule

has been laid down in this matter. So also there is a like uncertainty as to

another point now to be mentioned. Ought the writer who deals with the

works of nature to follow the plan adopted by the mathematicians in their

astronomical demonstrations, and after considering the phenomena presented

by  animals,  and  their  several  parts,  proceed  subsequently  to  treat  of  the

causes and the reason why; or ought he to follow some other method? And

when these questions are answered, there yet remains another. The causes

concerned in the generation of the works of nature are, as we see, more than

one. There is the final cause and there is the motor cause. Now we must

decide  which  of  these  two  causes  comes  first,  which  second.  Plainly,

however, that cause is the first which we call the final one. For this is the

Reason, and the Reason forms the starting-point, alike in the works of art and

in works of nature. For consider how the physician or how the builder sets

about his work. He starts by forming for himself a definite picture, in the one

case perceptible to mind, in the other to sense, of his end-the physician of

health, the builder of a house-and this he holds forward as the reason and

explanation of each subsequent step that he takes, and of his acting in this or

that way as the case may be. Now in the works of nature the good end and the

final cause is still more dominant than in works of art such as these, nor is

necessity a factor with the same significance in them all; though almost all

writers,  while  they  try  to  refer  their  origin  to  this  cause,  do  so  without

distinguishing the various senses in which the term necessity is used. For

there is absolute necessity, manifested in eternal phenomena; and there ishypothetical necessity, manifested in everything that is generated by nature as

in everything that is produced by art, be it a house or what it may. For if a

house or other such final object is to be realized, it is necessary that such and

such material shall exist; and it is necessary that first this then that shall be

produced, and first this and then that set in motion, and so on in continuous

succession, until the end and final result is reached, for the sake of which

each prior thing is produced and exists. As with these productions of art, so

also is it with the productions of nature. The mode of necessity, however, and

the mode of ratiocination are different in natural science from what they are

in the theoretical sciences; of which we have spoken elsewhere. For in the

latter the starting-point is that which is; in the former that which is to be. For

it is that which is yet to be-health, let us say, or a man-that, owing to its being

of  such  and  such  characters,  necessitates  the  pre-existence  or  previous

production of this and that antecedent; and not this or that antecedent which,

because it exists or has been generated, makes it necessary that health or a

man is in, or shall come into, existence. Nor is it possible to track back the

series of necessary antecedents to a starting-point, of which you can say that,

existing  itself  from  eternity,  it  has  determined  their  existence  as  its

consequent. These however again, are matters that have been dealt with in

another  treatise.  There  too  it  was  stated  in  what  cases  absolute  and

hypothetical necessity exist; in what cases also the proposition expressing

hypothetical  necessity  is  simply  convertible,  and  what  cause  it  is  that

determines this convertibility.

  Another matter which must not be passed over without consideration is,

whether the proper subject of our exposition is that with which the ancient

writers concerned themselves, namely, what is the process of formation of

each animal; or whether it is not rather, what are the characters of a given

creature when formed. For there is no small difference between these two

views.  The  best  course  appears  to  be  that  we  should  follow  the  method

already mentioned, and begin with the phenomena presented by each group

of animals, and, when this is done, proceed afterwards to state the causes of

those  phenomena,  and  to  deal  with  their  evolution.  For  elsewhere,  as  for

instance in house building, this is the true sequence. The plan of the house, or

the  house,  has  this  and  that  form;  and  because  it  has  this  and  that  form,

therefore is its construction carried out in this or that manner. For the process

of evolution is for the sake of the thing Anally evolved, and not this for the

sake of the process. Empedocles, then, was in error when he said that manyof the characters presented by animals were merely the results of incidental

occurrences during their development; for instance, that the backbone was

divided as it is into vertebrae, because it happened to be broken owing to the

contorted position of the foetus in the womb. In so saying he overlooked the

fact that propagation implies a creative seed endowed with certain formative

properties.  Secondly,  he  neglected  another  fact,  namely,  that  the  parent

animal pre-exists, not only in idea, but actually in time. For man is generated

from man; and thus it is the possession of certain characters by the parent that

determines  the  development  of  like  characters  in  the  child.  The  same

statement holds good also for the operations of art, and even for those which

are apparently spontaneous. For the same result as is produced by art may

occur  spontaneously.  Spontaneity,  for  instance,  may  bring  about  the

restoration of health. The products of art, however, require the pre-existence

of an efficient cause homogeneous with themselves, such as the statuary’s art,

which  must  necessarily  precede  the  statue;  for  this  cannot  possibly  be

produced spontaneously. Art indeed consists in the conception of the result to

be produced before its realization in the material. As with spontaneity, so

with chance; for this also produces the same result as art, and by the same

process.

The fittest mode, then, of treatment is to say, a man has such and such

parts, because the conception of a man includes their presence, and because

they are necessary conditions of his existence, or, if we cannot quite say this,

which would be best of all, then the next thing to it, namely, that it is either

quite impossible for him to exist without them, or, at any rate, that it is better

for him that they should be there; and their existence involves the existence

of other antecedents. Thus we should say, because man is an animal with

such  and  such  characters,  therefore  is  the  process  of  his  development

necessarily such as it is; and therefore is it accomplished in such and such an

order, this part being formed first, that next, and so on in succession; and

after a like fashion should we explain the evolution of all other works of

nature.

Now that with which the ancient writers, who first philosophized about

Nature, busied themselves, was the material principle and the material cause.

They  inquired  what  this  is,  and  what  its  character;  how  the  universe  is

generated out of it, and by what motor influence, whether, for instance, by

antagonism or friendship, whether by intelligence or spontaneous action, the

substratum of matter being assumed to have certain inseparable properties;