the soul of the student must first have been cultivated by means of habits for

noble joy and noble hatred, like earth which is to nourish the seed. For he

who lives as passion directs will not hear argument that dissuades him, nor

understand it if he does; and how can we persuade one in such a state to

change his ways? And in general passion seems to yield not to argument but

to force. The character, then, must somehow be there already with a kinship

to virtue, loving what is noble and hating what is base.

But it is difficult to get from youth up a right training for virtue if one has

not been brought up under right laws; for to live temperately and hardily is

not pleasant to most people, especially when they are young. For this reason

their nurture and occupations should be fixed by law; for they will not be

painful when they have become customary. But it is surely not enough that

when they are young they should get the right nurture and attention; since

they must, even when they are grown up, practise and be habituated to them,

we shall need laws for this as well, and generally speaking to cover the whole

of life; for most people obey necessity rather than argument, and punishments

rather than the sense of what is noble.

This is why some think that legislators ought to stimulate men to virtue and

urge them forward by the motive of the noble, on the assumption that those

who have been well advanced by the formation of habits will attend to such

influences; and that punishments and penalties should be imposed on those

who disobey and are of inferior nature, while the incurably bad should be

completely banished. A good man (they think), since he lives with his mind

fixed on what is noble, will submit to argument, while a bad man, whose

desire is for pleasure, is corrected by pain like a beast of burden. This is, too,

why they say the pains inflicted should be those that are most opposed to the

pleasures such men love.

  However that may be, if (as we have said) the man who is to be good must

be  well  trained  and  habituated,  and  go  on  to  spend  his  time  in  worthy

occupations and neither willingly nor unwillingly do bad actions, and if this

can be brought about if men live in accordance with a sort of reason and right

order, provided this has force,-if this be so, the paternal command indeed has

not the required force or compulsive power (nor in general has the command

of  one  man,  unless  he  be  a  king  or  something  similar),  but  the  law  has

compulsive power, while it is at the same time a rule proceeding from a sort

of practical wisdom and reason. And while people hate men who oppose their

impulses, even if they oppose them rightly, the law in its ordaining of what isgood is not burdensome.

In the Spartan state alone, or almost alone, the legislator seems to have

paid attention to questions of nurture and occupations; in most states such

matters have been neglected, and each man lives as he pleases, Cyclops-

fashion, ‘to his own wife and children dealing law’. Now it is best that there

should be a public and proper care for such matters; but if they are neglected

by the community it would seem right for each man to help his children and

friends towards virtue, and that they should have the power, or at least the

will, to do this.

It would seem from what has been said that he can do this better if he

makes himself capable of legislating. For public control is plainly effected by

laws, and good control by good laws; whether written or unwritten would

seem to make no difference, nor whether they are laws providing for the

education of individuals or of groups-any more than it does in the case of

music  or  gymnastics  and  other  such  pursuits.  For  as  in  cities  laws  and

prevailing types of character have force, so in households do the injunctions

and the habits of the father, and these have even more because of the tie of

blood  and  the  benefits  he  confers;  for  the  children  start  with  a  natural

affection and disposition to obey. Further, private education has an advantage

over public, as private medical treatment has; for while in general rest and

abstinence from food are good for a man in a fever, for a particular man they

may not be; and a boxer presumably does not prescribe the same style of

fighting to all his pupils. It would seem, then, that the detail is worked out

with more precision if the control is private; for each person is more likely to

get what suits his case.

But  the  details  can  be  best  looked  after,  one  by  one,  by  a  doctor  or

gymnastic instructor or any one else who has the general knowledge of what

is good for every one or for people of a certain kind (for the sciences both are

said to be, and are, concerned with what is universal); not but what some

particular detail may perhaps be well looked after by an unscientific person,

if he has studied accurately in the light of experience what happens in each

case, just as some people seem to be their own best doctors, though they

could give no help to any one else. None the less, it will perhaps be agreed

that if a man does wish to become master of an art or science he must go to

the universal, and come to know it as well as possible; for, as we have said, it

is with this that the sciences are concerned.

And surely he who wants to make men, whether many or few, better by hiscare must try to become capable of legislating, if it is through laws that we

can become good. For to get any one whatever-any one who is put before us-

into the right condition is not for the first chance comer; if any one can do it,

it is the man who knows, just as in medicine and all other matters which give

scope for care and prudence.

  Must we not, then, next examine whence or how one can learn how to

legislate? Is it, as in all other cases, from statesmen? Certainly it was thought

to  be  a  part  of  statesmanship.  Or  is  a  difference  apparent  between

statesmanship and the other sciences and arts? In the others the same people

are  found  offering  to  teach  the  arts  and  practising  them,  e.g.  doctors  or

painters; but while the sophists profess to teach politics, it is practised not by

any of them but by the politicians, who would seem to do so by dint of a

certain skill and experience rather than of thought; for they are not found

either  writing  or  speaking  about  such  matters  (though  it  were  a  nobler

occupation  perhaps  than  composing  speeches  for  the  law-courts  and  the

assembly), nor again are they found to have made statesmen of their own

sons or any other of their friends. But it was to be expected that they should if

they could; for there is nothing better than such a skill that they could have

left to their cities, or could prefer to have for themselves, or, therefore, for

those dearest to them. Still, experience seems to contribute not a little; else

they could not have become politicians by familiarity with politics; and so it

seems  that  those  who  aim  at  knowing  about  the  art  of  politics  need

experience as well.

But those of the sophists who profess the art seem to be very far from

teaching it. For, to put the matter generally, they do not even know what kind

of thing it is nor what kinds of things it is about; otherwise they would not

have  classed  it  as  identical  with  rhetoric  or  even  inferior  to  it,  nor  have

thought it easy to legislate by collecting the laws that are thought well of;

they say it is possible to select the best laws, as though even the selection did

not demand intelligence and as though right judgement were not the greatest

thing, as in matters of music. For while people experienced in any department

judge rightly the works produced in it, and understand by what means or how

they are achieved, and what harmonizes with what, the inexperienced must be

content if they do not fail to see whether the work has been well or ill made-

as in the case of painting. Now laws are as it were the’ works’ of the political

art; how then can one learn from them to be a legislator, or judge which are

best? Even medical men do not seem to be made by a study of text-books.Yet people try, at any rate, to state not only the treatments, but also how

particular classes of people can be cured and should be treated-distinguishing

the various habits of body; but while this seems useful to experienced people,

to the inexperienced it is valueless. Surely, then, while collections of laws,

and of constitutions also, may be serviceable to those who can study them

and judge what is good or bad and what enactments suit what circumstances,

those who go through such collections without a practised faculty will not

have right judgement (unless it be as a spontaneous gift of nature), though

they may perhaps become more intelligent in such matters.

Now  our  predecessors  have  left  the  subject  of  legislation  to  us

unexamined; it is perhaps best, therefore, that we should ourselves study it,

and in general study the question of the constitution, in order to complete to

the best of our ability our philosophy of human nature. First, then, if anything

has been said well in detail by earlier thinkers, let us try to review it; then in

the light of the constitutions we have collected let us study what sorts of

influence preserve and destroy states, and what sorts preserve or destroy the

particular kinds of constitution, and to what causes it is due that some are

well  and  others  ill  administered.  When  these  have  been  studied  we  shall

perhaps be more likely to see with a comprehensive view, which constitution

is best, and how each must be ordered, and what laws and customs it must

use, if it is to be at its best. Let us make a beginning of our discussion.                                  Politics, Book I


Translated by Benjamin Jowett


<

div id="book1" class="book">


I


  Every  state  is  a  community  of  some  kind,  and  every  community  is

established with a view to some good; for mankind always act in order to

obtain that which they think good. But, if all communities aim at some good,

the  state  or  political  community,  which  is  the  highest  of  all,  and  which

embraces all the rest, aims at good in a greater degree than any other, and at

the highest good.

  Some  people  think  that  the  qualifications  of  a  statesman,  king,

householder, and master are the same, and that they differ, not in kind, but

only in the number of their subjects. For example, the ruler over a few is

called a master; over more, the manager of a household; over a still larger

number, a statesman or king, as if there were no difference between a great

household and a small state. The distinction which is made between the king

and the statesman is as follows: When the government is personal, the ruler is

a king; when, according to the rules of the political science, the citizens rule

and are ruled in turn, then he is called a statesman.

But all this is a mistake; for governments differ in kind, as will be evident

to  any  one  who  considers  the  matter  according  to  the  method  which  has

hitherto guided us. As in other departments of science, so in politics, the

compound should always be resolved into the simple elements or least parts

of the whole. We must therefore look at the elements of which the state is

composed, in order that we may see in what the different kinds of rule differ

from one another, and whether any scientific result can be attained about each

one of them.


IIHe who thus considers things in their first growth and origin, whether a

state or anything else, will obtain the clearest view of them. In the first place

there must be a union of those who cannot exist without each other; namely,

of male and female, that the race may continue (and this is a union which is

formed,  not  of  deliberate  purpose,  but  because,  in  common  with  other

animals and with plants, mankind have a natural desire to leave behind them

an image of themselves), and of natural ruler and subject, that both may be

preserved. For that which can foresee by the exercise of mind is by nature

intended to be lord and master, and that which can with its body give effect to

such foresight is a subject, and by nature a slave; hence master and slave have

the same interest. Now nature has distinguished between the female and the

slave. For she is not niggardly, like the smith who fashions the Delphian

knife  for  many  uses;  she  makes  each  thing  for  a  single  use,  and  every

instrument is best made when intended for one and not for many uses. But

among barbarians no distinction is made between women and slaves, because

there is no natural ruler among them: they are a community of slaves, male

and female. Wherefore the poets say,


It is meet that Hellenes should rule over barbarians;


as if they thought that the barbarian and the slave were by nature one.

  Out of these two relationships between man and woman, master and slave,

the first thing to arise is the family, and Hesiod is right when he says,


First house and wife and an ox for the plough,


for the ox is the poor man’s slave. The family is the association established

by nature for the supply of men’s everyday wants, and the members of it are

called by Charondas ‘companions of the cupboard,’ and by Epimenides the

Cretan, ‘companions of the manger.’ But when several families are united,

and the association aims at something more than the supply of daily needs,

the first society to be formed is the village. And the most natural form of the

village  appears  to  be  that  of  a  colony  from  the  family,  composed  of  the

children and grandchildren, who are said to be suckled ‘with the same milk.’

And this is the reason why Hellenic states were originally governed by kings;

because the Hellenes were under royal rule before they came together, as the

barbarians still are. Every family is ruled by the eldest, and therefore in the

colonies of the family the kingly form of government prevailed because theywere of the same blood. As Homer says:


Each one gives law to his children and to his wives.


For they lived dispersedly, as was the manner in ancient times. Wherefore

men say that the Gods have a king, because they themselves either are or

were in ancient times under the rule of a king. For they imagine, not only the

forms of the Gods, but their ways of life to be like their own.

  When several villages are united in a single complete community, large

enough to be nearly or quite self-sufficing, the state comes into existence,

originating in the bare needs of life, and continuing in existence for the sake

of a good life. And therefore, if the earlier forms of society are natural, so is

the state, for it is the end of them, and the nature of a thing is its end. For

what each thing is when fully developed, we call its nature, whether we are

speaking of a man, a horse, or a family. Besides, the final cause and end of a

thing is the best, and to be self-sufficing is the end and the best.

  Hence it is evident that the state is a creation of nature, and that man is by

nature a political animal. And he who by nature and not by mere accident is

without a state, is either a bad man or above humanity; he is like the


  Tribeless, lawless, hearthless one,


  whom Homer denounces—the natural outcast is forthwith a lover of war;

he may be compared to an isolated piece at draughts.

Now,  that  man  is  more  of  a  political  animal  than  bees  or  any  other

gregarious animals is evident. Nature, as we often say, makes nothing in vain,

and man is the only animal whom she has endowed with the gift of speech.

And  whereas  mere  voice  is  but  an  indication  of  pleasure  or  pain,  and  is

therefore found in other animals (for their nature attains to the perception of

pleasure and pain and the intimation of them to one another, and no further),

the power of speech is intended to set forth the expedient and inexpedient,

and therefore likewise the just and the unjust. And it is a characteristic of man

that he alone has any sense of good and evil, of just and unjust, and the like,

and the association of living beings who have this sense makes a family and a

state.

  Further,  the  state  is  by  nature  clearly  prior  to  the  family  and  to  the

individual, since the whole is of necessity prior to the part; for example, if the

whole  body  be  destroyed,  there  will  be  no  foot  or  hand,  except  in  anequivocal sense, as we might speak of a stone hand; for when destroyed the

hand will be no better than that. But things are defined by their working and

power; and we ought not to say that they are the same when they no longer

have their proper quality, but only that they have the same name. The proof

that the state is a creation of nature and prior to the individual is that the

individual, when isolated, is not self-sufficing; and therefore he is like a part

in relation to the whole. But he who is unable to live in society, or who has

no need because he is sufficient for himself, must be either a beast or a god:

he is no part of a state. A social instinct is implanted in all men by nature, and

yet he who first founded the state was the greatest of benefactors. For man,

when perfected, is the best of animals, but, when separated from law and

justice, he is the worst of all; since armed injustice is the more dangerous,

and he is equipped at birth with arms, meant to be used by intelligence and

virtue, which he may use for the worst ends. Wherefore, if he have not virtue,

he is the most unholy and the most savage of animals, and the most full of

lust  and  gluttony.  But  justice  is  the  bond  of  men  in  states,  for  the

administration of justice, which is the determination of what is just, is the

principle of order in political society.


III


Seeing then that the state is made up of households, before speaking of the

state  we  must  speak  of  the  management  of  the  household.  The  parts  of

household  management  correspond  to  the  persons  who  compose  the

household, and a complete household consists of slaves and freemen. Now

we should begin by examining everything in its fewest possible elements; and

the first and fewest possible parts of a family are master and slave, husband

and wife, father and children. We have therefore to consider what each of

these three relations is and ought to be: I mean the relation of master and

servant, the marriage relation (the conjunction of man and wife has no name

of  its  own),  and  thirdly,  the  procreative  relation  (this  also  has  no  proper

name).  And  there  is  another  element  of  a  household,  the  so-called  art  of

getting  wealth,  which,  according  to  some,  is  identical  with  household

management, according to others, a principal part of it; the nature of this art

will also have to be considered by us.

Let us first speak of master and slave, looking to the needs of practical life

and also seeking to attain some better theory of their relation than exists atpresent. For some are of opinion that the rule of a master is a science, and

that the management of a household, and the mastership of slaves, and the

political and royal rule, as I was saying at the outset, are all the same. Others

affirm that the rule of a master over slaves is contrary to nature, and that the

distinction between slave and freeman exists by law only, and not by nature;

and being an interference with nature is therefore unjust.


IV


  Property is a part of the household, and the art of acquiring property is a

part of the art of managing the household; for no man can live well, or indeed

live at all, unless he be provided with necessaries. And as in the arts which

have a definite sphere the workers must have their own proper instruments

for  the  accomplishment  of  their  work,  so  it  is  in  the  management  of  a

household.  Now  instruments  are  of  various  sorts;  some  are  living,  others

lifeless; in the rudder, the pilot of a ship has a lifeless, in the look-out man, a

living instrument; for in the arts the servant is a kind of instrument. Thus, too,

a possession is an instrument for maintaining life. And so, in the arrangement

of the family, a slave is a living possession, and property a number of such

instruments; and the servant is himself an instrument which takes precedence

of all other instruments. For if every instrument could accomplish its own

work, obeying or anticipating the will of others, like the statues of Daedalus,

or the tripods of Hephaestus, which, says the poet,


of their own accord entered the assembly of the Gods;


if, in like manner, the shuttle would weave and the plectrum touch the lyre

without a hand to guide them, chief workmen would not want servants, nor

masters  slaves.  Here,  however,  another  distinction  must  be  drawn;  the

instruments  commonly  so  called  are  instruments  of  production,  whilst  a

possession is an instrument of action. The shuttle, for example, is not only of

use; but something else is made by it, whereas of a garment or of a bed there

is only the use. Further, as production and action are different in kind, and

both require instruments, the instruments which they employ must likewise

differ in kind. But life is action and not production, and therefore the slave is

the minister of action. Again, a possession is spoken of as a part is spoken of;

for the part is not only a part of something else, but wholly belongs to it; andthis is also true of a possession. The master is only the master of the slave; he

does not belong to him, whereas the slave is not only the slave of his master,

but wholly belongs to him. Hence we see what is the nature and office of a

slave; he who is by nature not his own but another’s man, is by nature a

slave; and he may be said to be another’s man who, being a human being, is

also  a  possession.  And  a  possession  may  be  defined  as  an  instrument  of

action, separable from the possessor.


V


But is there any one thus intended by nature to be a slave, and for whom

such a condition is expedient and right, or rather is not all slavery a violation

of nature?

  There is no difficulty in answering this question, on grounds both of reason

and of fact. For that some should rule and others be ruled is a thing not only

necessary, but expedient; from the hour of their birth, some are marked out

for subjection, others for rule.

And there are many kinds both of rulers and subjects (and that rule is the

better which is exercised over better subjects—for example, to rule over men

is better than to rule over wild beasts; for the work is better which is executed

by better workmen, and where one man rules and another is ruled, they may

be said to have a work); for in all things which form a composite whole and

which are made up of parts, whether continuous or discrete, a distinction

between the ruling and the subject element comes to fight. Such a duality

exists in living creatures, but not in them only; it originates in the constitution

of the universe; even in things which have no life there is a ruling principle,

as  in  a  musical  mode.  But  we  are  wandering  from  the  subject.  We  will

therefore restrict ourselves to the living creature, which, in the first place,

consists of soul and body: and of these two, the one is by nature the ruler, and

the other the subject. But then we must look for the intentions of nature in

things which retain their nature, and not in things which are corrupted. And

therefore we must study the man who is in the most perfect state both of body

and soul, for in him we shall see the true relation of the two; although in bad

or corrupted natures the body will often appear to rule over the soul, because

they  are  in  an  evil  and  unnatural  condition.  At  all  events  we  may  firstly

observe in living creatures both a despotical and a constitutional rule; for the

soul rules the body with a despotical rule, whereas the intellect rules theappetites with a constitutional and royal rule. And it is clear that the rule of

the soul over the body, and of the mind and the rational element over the

passionate, is natural and expedient; whereas the equality of the two or the

rule of the inferior is always hurtful. The same holds good of animals in

relation to men; for tame animals have a better nature than wild, and all tame

animals  are  better  off  when  they  are  ruled  by  man;  for  then  they  are

preserved. Again, the male is by nature superior, and the female inferior; and

the one rules, and the other is ruled; this principle, of necessity, extends to all

mankind.

  Where then there is such a difference as that between soul and body, or

between men and animals (as in the case of those whose business is to use

their  body,  and  who  can  do  nothing  better),  the  lower  sort  are  by  nature

slaves, and it is better for them as for all inferiors that they should be under

the rule of a master. For he who can be, and therefore is, another’s and he

who participates in rational principle enough to apprehend, but not to have,

such a principle, is a slave by nature. Whereas the lower animals cannot even

apprehend a principle; they obey their instincts. And indeed the use made of

slaves and of tame animals is not very different; for both with their bodies

minister to the needs of life. Nature would like to distinguish between the

bodies of freemen and slaves, making the one strong for servile labor, the

other upright, and although useless for such services, useful for political life

in the arts both of war and peace. But the opposite often happens—that some

have the souls and others have the bodies of freemen. And doubtless if men

differed from one another in the mere forms of their bodies as much as the

statues of the Gods do from men, all would acknowledge that the inferior

class should be slaves of the superior. And if this is true of the body, how

much more just that a similar distinction should exist in the soul? but the

beauty of the body is seen, whereas the beauty of the soul is not seen. It is

clear, then, that some men are by nature free, and others slaves, and that for

these latter slavery is both expedient and right.


VI


But that those who take the opposite view have in a certain way right on

their side, may be easily seen. For the words slavery and slave are used in

two senses. There is a slave or slavery by law as well as by nature. The law of

which I speak is a sort of convention—the law by which whatever is taken inwar is supposed to belong to the victors. But this right many jurists impeach,

as they would an orator who brought forward an unconstitutional measure:

they detest the notion that, because one man has the power of doing violence

and is superior in brute strength, another shall be his slave and subject. Even

among  philosophers  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion.  The  origin  of  the

dispute,  and  what  makes  the  views  invade  each  other’s  territory,  is  as

follows: in some sense virtue, when furnished with means, has actually the

greatest power of exercising force; and as superior power is only found where

there is superior excellence of some kind, power seems to imply virtue, and

the  dispute  to  be  simply  one  about  justice  (for  it  is  due  to  one  party

identifying justice with goodwill while the other identifies it with the mere

rule of the stronger). If these views are thus set out separately, the other

views have no force or plausibility against the view that the superior in virtue

ought  to  rule,  or  be  master.  Others,  clinging,  as  they  think,  simply  to  a

principle of justice (for law and custom are a sort of justice), assume that

slavery in accordance with the custom of war is justified by law, but at the

same moment they deny this. For what if the cause of the war be unjust? And

again, no one would ever say he is a slave who is unworthy to be a slave.

Were this the case, men of the highest rank would be slaves and the children

of slaves if they or their parents chance to have been taken captive and sold.

Wherefore Hellenes do not like to call Hellenes slaves, but confine the term

to barbarians. Yet, in using this language, they really mean the natural slave

of  whom  we  spoke  at  first;  for  it  must  be  admitted  that  some  are  slaves

everywhere, others nowhere. The same principle applies to nobility. Hellenes

regard themselves as noble everywhere, and not only in their own country,

but they deem the barbarians noble only when at home, thereby implying that

there  are  two  sorts  of  nobility  and  freedom,  the  one  absolute,  the  other

relative. The Helen of Theodectes says:


Who would presume to call me servant who am on both sides

sprung from the stem of the Gods?


  What does this mean but that they distinguish freedom and slavery, noble

and humble birth, by the two principles of good and evil? They think that as

men and animals beget men and animals, so from good men a good man

springs. But this is what nature, though she may intend it, cannot always

accomplish.We see then that there is some foundation for this difference of opinion,

and that all are not either slaves by nature or freemen by nature, and also that

there  is  in  some  cases  a  marked  distinction  between  the  two  classes,

rendering it expedient and right for the one to be slaves and the others to be

masters: the one practicing obedience, the others exercising the authority and

lordship which nature intended them to have. The abuse of this authority is

injurious to both; for the interests of part and whole, of body and soul, are the

same, and the slave is a part of the master, a living but separated part of his

bodily frame. Hence, where the relation of master and slave between them is

natural they are friends and have a common interest, but where it rests merely

on law and force the reverse is true.


VII


The previous remarks are quite enough to show that the rule of a master is

not a constitutional rule, and that all the different kinds of rule are not, as

some affirm, the same with each other. For there is one rule exercised over

subjects who are by nature free, another over subjects who are by nature

slaves. The rule of a household is a monarchy, for every house is under one

head: whereas constitutional rule is a government of freemen and equals. The

master is not called a master because he has science, but because he is of a

certain character, and the same remark applies to the slave and the freeman.

Still there may be a science for the master and science for the slave. The

science of the slave would be such as the man of Syracuse taught, who made

money by instructing slaves in their ordinary duties. And such a knowledge

may be carried further, so as to include cookery and similar menial arts. For

some duties are of the more necessary, others of the more honorable sort; as

the proverb says, ‘slave before slave, master before master.’ But all such

branches of knowledge are servile. There is likewise a science of the master,

which teaches the use of slaves; for the master as such is concerned, not with

the acquisition, but with the use of them. Yet this so-called science is not

anything great or wonderful; for the master need only know how to order that

which  the  slave  must  know  how  to  execute.  Hence  those  who  are  in  a

position  which  places  them  above  toil  have  stewards  who  attend  to  their

households while they occupy themselves with philosophy or with politics.

But the art of acquiring slaves, I mean of justly acquiring them, differs both

from the art of the master and the art of the slave, being a species of huntingor war. Enough of the distinction between master and slave.


VIII


Let  us  now  inquire  into  property  generally,  and  into  the  art  of  getting

wealth, in accordance with our usual method, for a slave has been shown to

be a part of property. The first question is whether the art of getting wealth is

the same with the art of managing a household or a part of it, or instrumental

to it; and if the last, whether in the way that the art of making shuttles is

instrumental to the art of weaving, or in the way that the casting of bronze is

instrumental to the art of the statuary, for they are not instrumental in the

same way, but the one provides tools and the other material; and by material I

mean  the  substratum  out  of  which  any  work  is  made;  thus  wool  is  the

material of the weaver, bronze of the statuary. Now it is easy to see that the

art of household management is not identical with the art of getting wealth,

for the one uses the material which the other provides. For the art which uses

household  stores  can  be  no  other  than  the  art  of  household  management.

There is, however, a doubt whether the art of getting wealth is a part of

household management or a distinct art. If the getter of wealth has to consider

whence wealth and property can be procured, but there are many sorts of

property and riches, then are husbandry, and the care and provision of food in

general, parts of the wealth-getting art or distinct arts? Again, there are many

sorts of food, and therefore there are many kinds of lives both of animals and

men; they must all have food, and the differences in their food have made

differences in their ways of life. For of beasts, some are gregarious, others are

solitary;  they  live  in  the  way  which  is  best  adapted  to  sustain  them,

accordingly as they are carnivorous or herbivorous or omnivorous: and their

habits are determined for them by nature in such a manner that they may

obtain with greater facility the food of their choice. But, as different species

have different tastes, the same things are not naturally pleasant to all of them;

and therefore the lives of carnivorous or herbivorous animals further differ

among themselves. In the lives of men too there is a great difference. The

laziest are shepherds, who lead an idle life, and get their subsistence without

trouble from tame animals; their flocks having to wander from place to place

in search of pasture, they are compelled to follow them, cultivating a sort of

living  farm.  Others  support  themselves  by  hunting,  which  is  of  different

kinds.  Some,  for  example,  are  brigands,  others,  who  dwell  near  lakes  ormarshes or rivers or a sea in which there are fish, are fishermen, and others

live by the pursuit of birds or wild beasts. The greater number obtain a living

from the cultivated fruits of the soil. Such are the modes of subsistence which

prevail among those whose industry springs up of itself, and whose food is

not  acquired  by  exchange  and  retail  trade—there  is  the  shepherd,  the

husbandman, the brigand, the fisherman, the hunter. Some gain a comfortable

maintenance out of two employments, eking out the deficiencies of one of

them by another: thus the life of a shepherd may be combined with that of a

brigand, the life of a farmer with that of a hunter. Other modes of life are

similarly  combined  in  any  way  which  the  needs  of  men  may  require.

Property,  in  the  sense  of  a  bare  livelihood,  seems  to  be  given  by  nature

herself to all, both when they are first born, and when they are grown up. For

some animals bring forth, together with their offspring, so much food as will

last  until  they  are  able  to  supply  themselves;  of  this  the  vermiparous  or

oviparous animals are an instance; and the viviparous animals have up to a

certain time a supply of food for their young in themselves, which is called

milk. In like manner we may infer that, after the birth of animals, plants exist

for their sake, and that the other animals exist for the sake of man, the tame

for use and food, the wild, if not all at least the greater part of them, for food,

and  for  the  provision  of  clothing  and  various  instruments.  Now  if  nature

makes nothing incomplete, and nothing in vain, the inference must be that

she has made all animals for the sake of man. And so, in one point of view,

the art of war is a natural art of acquisition, for the art of acquisition includes

hunting, an art which we ought to practice against wild beasts, and against

men who, though intended by nature to be governed, will not submit; for war

of such a kind is naturally just.

Of the art of acquisition then there is one kind which by nature is a part of

the management of a household, in so far as the art of household management

must either find ready to hand, or itself provide, such things necessary to life,

and useful for the community of the family or state, as can be stored. They

are the elements of true riches; for the amount of property which is needed

for a good life is not unlimited, although Solon in one of his poems says that


No bound to riches has been fixed for man.


But there is a boundary fixed, just as there is in the other arts; for the

instruments  of  any  art  are  never  unlimited,  either  in  number  or  size,  andriches may be defined as a number of instruments to be used in a household

or in a state. And so we see that there is a natural art of acquisition which is

practiced  by  managers  of  households  and  by  statesmen,  and  what  is  the

reason of this.


IX


  There is another variety of the art of acquisition which is commonly and

rightly called an art of wealth-getting, and has in fact suggested the notion

that  riches  and  property  have  no  limit.  Being  nearly  connected  with  the

preceding, it is often identified with it. But though they are not very different,

neither are they the same. The kind already described is given by nature, the

other is gained by experience and art.

Let  us  begin  our  discussion  of  the  question  with  the  following

considerations:

Of everything which we possess there are two uses: both belong to the

thing as such, but not in the same manner, for one is the proper, and the other

the improper or secondary use of it. For example, a shoe is used for wear, and

is used for exchange; both are uses of the shoe. He who gives a shoe in

exchange for money or food to him who wants one, does indeed use the shoe

as a shoe, but this is not its proper or primary purpose, for a shoe is not made

to be an object of barter. The same may be said of all possessions, for the art

of exchange extends to all of them, and it arises at first from what is natural,

from the circumstance that some have too little, others too much. Hence we

may infer that retail trade is not a natural part of the art of getting wealth; had

it been so, men would have ceased to exchange when they had enough. In the

first community, indeed, which is the family, this art is obviously of no use,

but it begins to be useful when the society increases. For the members of the

family originally had all things in common; later, when the family divided

into parts, the parts shared in many things, and different parts in different

things, which they had to give in exchange for what they wanted, a kind of

barter which is still practiced among barbarous nations who exchange with

one another the necessaries of life and nothing more; giving and receiving

wine, for example, in exchange for coin, and the like. This sort of barter is

not part of the wealth-getting art and is not contrary to nature, but is needed

for the satisfaction of men’s natural wants. The other or more complex form

of exchange grew, as might have been inferred, out of the simpler. When theinhabitants of one country became more dependent on those of another, and

they imported what they needed, and exported what they had too much of,

money necessarily came into use. For the various necessaries of life are not

easily carried about, and hence men agreed to employ in their dealings with

each other something which was intrinsically useful and easily applicable to

the purposes of life, for example, iron, silver, and the like. Of this the value

was at first measured simply by size and weight, but in process of time they

put a stamp upon it, to save the trouble of weighing and to mark the value.

  When  the  use  of  coin  had  once  been  discovered,  out  of  the  barter  of

necessary articles arose the other art of wealth getting, namely, retail trade;

which was at first probably a simple matter, but became more complicated as

soon  as  men  learned  by  experience  whence  and  by  what  exchanges  the

greatest profit might be made. Originating in the use of coin, the art of getting

wealth is generally thought to be chiefly concerned with it, and to be the art

which  produces  riches  and  wealth;  having  to  consider  how  they  may  be

accumulated. Indeed, riches is assumed by many to be only a quantity of

coin, because the arts of getting wealth and retail trade are concerned with

coin. Others maintain that coined money is a mere sham, a thing not natural,

but conventional only, because, if the users substitute another commodity for

it,  it  is  worthless,  and  because  it  is  not  useful  as  a  means  to  any  of  the

necessities of life, and, indeed, he who is rich in coin may often be in want of

necessary food. But how can that be wealth of which a man may have a great

abundance  and  yet  perish  with  hunger,  like  Midas  in  the  fable,  whose

insatiable prayer turned everything that was set before him into gold?

  Hence men seek after a better notion of riches and of the art of getting

wealth than the mere acquisition of coin, and they are right. For natural riches

and the natural art of wealth-getting are a different thing; in their true form

they are part of the management of a household; whereas retail trade is the art

of producing wealth, not in every way, but by exchange. And it is thought to

be concerned with coin; for coin is the unit of exchange and the measure or

limit of it. And there is no bound to the riches which spring from this art of

wealth getting. As in the art of medicine there is no limit to the pursuit of

health, and as in the other arts there is no limit to the pursuit of their several

ends, for they aim at accomplishing their ends to the uttermost (but of the

means there is a limit, for the end is always the limit), so, too, in this art of

wealth-getting there is no limit of the end, which is riches of the spurious

kind,  and  the  acquisition  of  wealth.  But  the  art  of  wealth-getting  whichconsists  in  household  management,  on  the  other  hand,  has  a  limit;  the

unlimited acquisition of wealth is not its business. And, therefore, in one

point of view, all riches must have a limit; nevertheless, as a matter of fact,

we find the opposite to be the case; for all getters of wealth increase their

hoard  of  coin  without  limit.  The  source  of  the  confusion  is  the  near

connection between the two kinds of wealth-getting; in either, the instrument

is the same, although the use is different, and so they pass into one another;

for each is a use of the same property, but with a difference: accumulation is

the end in the one case, but there is a further end in the other. Hence some

persons  are  led  to  believe  that  getting  wealth  is  the  object  of  household

management, and the whole idea of their lives is that they ought either to

increase their money without limit, or at any rate not to lose it. The origin of

this disposition in men is that they are intent upon living only, and not upon

living well; and, as their desires are unlimited they also desire that the means

of gratifying them should be without limit. Those who do aim at a good life

seek the means of obtaining bodily pleasures; and, since the enjoyment of

these appears to depend on property, they are absorbed in getting wealth: and

so there arises the second species of wealth-getting. For, as their enjoyment is

in excess, they seek an art which produces the excess of enjoyment; and, if

they are not able to supply their pleasures by the art of getting wealth, they

try other arts, using in turn every faculty in a manner contrary to nature. The

quality of courage, for example, is not intended to make wealth, but to inspire

confidence; neither is this the aim of the general’s or of the physician’s art;

but the one aims at victory and the other at health. Nevertheless, some men

turn every quality or art into a means of getting wealth; this they conceive to

be  the  end,  and  to  the  promotion  of  the  end  they  think  all  things  must

contribute.

  Thus,  then,  we  have  considered  the  art  of  wealth-getting  which  is

unnecessary, and why men want it; and also the necessary art of wealth-

getting, which we have seen to be different from the other, and to be a natural

part of the art of managing a household, concerned with the provision of

food, not, however, like the former kind, unlimited, but having a limit.


X


And we have found the answer to our original question, Whether the art of

getting  wealth  is  the  business  of  the  manager  of  a  household  and  of  thestatesman or not their business? viz., that wealth is presupposed by them. For

as political science does not make men, but takes them from nature and uses

them, so too nature provides them with earth or sea or the like as a source of

food. At this stage begins the duty of the manager of a household, who has to

order the things which nature supplies; he may be compared to the weaver

who has not to make but to use wool, and to know, too, what sort of wool is

good and serviceable or bad and unserviceable. Were this otherwise, it would

be difficult to see why the art of getting wealth is a part of the management of

a  household  and  the  art  of  medicine  not;  for  surely  the  members  of  a

household  must  have  health  just  as  they  must  have  life  or  any  other

necessary. The answer is that as from one point of view the master of the

house and the ruler of the state have to consider about health, from another

point of view not they but the physician; so in one way the art of household

management,  in  another  way  the  subordinate  art,  has  to  consider  about

wealth. But, strictly speaking, as I have already said, the means of life must

be provided beforehand by nature; for the business of nature is to furnish

food to that which is born, and the food of the offspring is always what

remains over of that from which it is produced. Wherefore the art of getting

wealth out of fruits and animals is always natural.

  There  are  two  sorts  of  wealth-getting,  as  I  have  said;  one  is  a  part  of

household management, the other is retail trade: the former necessary and

honorable, while that which consists in exchange is justly censured; for it is

unnatural, and a mode by which men gain from one another. The most hated

sort, and with the greatest reason, is usury, which makes a gain out of money

itself, and not from the natural object of it. For money was intended to be

used in exchange, but not to increase at interest. And this term interest, which

means the birth of money from money, is applied to the breeding of money

because the offspring resembles the parent. Wherefore of an modes of getting

wealth this is the most unnatural.


XI


  Enough has been said about the theory of wealth-getting; we will now

proceed to the practical part. The discussion of such matters is not unworthy

of philosophy, but to be engaged in them practically is illiberal and irksome.

The useful parts of wealth-getting are, first, the knowledge of livestock—

which are most profitable, and where, and how—as, for example, what sortof horses or sheep or oxen or any other animals are most likely to give a

return.  A  man  ought  to  know  which  of  these  pay  better  than  others,  and

which pay best in particular places, for some do better in one place and some

in another. Secondly, husbandry, which may be either tillage or planting, and

the keeping of bees and of fish, or fowl, or of any animals which may be

useful to man. These are the divisions of the true or proper art of wealth-

getting and come first. Of the other, which consists in exchange, the first and

most important division is commerce (of which there are three kinds—the

provision of a ship, the conveyance of goods, exposure for sale—these again

differing as they are safer or more profitable), the second is usury, the third,

service for hire—of this, one kind is employed in the mechanical arts, the

other in unskilled and bodily labor. There is still a third sort of wealth getting

intermediate  between  this  and  the  first  or  natural  mode  which  is  partly

natural, but is also concerned with exchange, viz., the industries that make

their profit from the earth, and from things growing from the earth which,

although  they  bear  no  fruit,  are  nevertheless  profitable;  for  example,  the

cutting of timber and all mining. The art of mining, by which minerals are

obtained, itself has many branches, for there are various kinds of things dug

out  of  the  earth.  Of  the  several  divisions  of  wealth-getting  I  now  speak

generally; a minute consideration of them might be useful in practice, but it

would be tiresome to dwell upon them at greater length now.

  Those occupations are most truly arts in which there is the least element of

chance; they are the meanest in which the body is most deteriorated, the most

servile in which there is the greatest use of the body, and the most illiberal in

which there is the least need of excellence.

  Works  have  been  written  upon  these  subjects  by  various  persons;  for

example,  by  Chares  the  Parian,  and  Apollodorus  the  Lemnian,  who  have

treated of Tillage and Planting, while others have treated of other branches;

any one who cares for such matters may refer to their writings. It would be

well also to collect the scattered stories of the ways in which individuals have

succeeded in amassing a fortune; for all this is useful to persons who value

the art of getting wealth. There is the anecdote of Thales the Milesian and his

financial device, which involves a principle of universal application, but is

attributed to him on account of his reputation for wisdom. He was reproached

for his poverty, which was supposed to show that philosophy was of no use.

According to the story, he knew by his skill in the stars while it was yet

winter that there would be a great harvest of olives in the coming year; so,having a little money, he gave deposits for the use of all the olive-presses in

Chios and Miletus, which he hired at a low price because no one bid against

him. When the harvest-time came, and many were wanted all at once and of a

sudden, he let them out at any rate which he pleased, and made a quantity of

money. Thus he showed the world that philosophers can easily be rich if they

like, but that their ambition is of another sort. He is supposed to have given a

striking proof of his wisdom, but, as I was saying, his device for getting

wealth  is  of  universal  application,  and  is  nothing  but  the  creation  of  a

monopoly. It is an art often practiced by cities when they are want of money;

they make a monopoly of provisions.

  There was a man of Sicily, who, having money deposited with him, bought

up an the iron from the iron mines; afterwards, when the merchants from

their various markets came to buy, he was the only seller, and without much

increasing the price he gained 200 per cent. Which when Dionysius heard, he

told him that he might take away his money, but that he must not remain at

Syracuse, for he thought that the man had discovered a way of making money

which was injurious to his own interests. He made the same discovery as

Thales;  they  both  contrived  to  create  a  monopoly  for  themselves.  And

statesmen as well ought to know these things; for a state is often as much in

want of money and of such devices for obtaining it as a household, or even

more so; hence some public men devote themselves entirely to finance.


XII


Of household management we have seen that there are three parts—one is

the rule of a master over slaves, which has been discussed already, another of

a father, and the third of a husband. A husband and father, we saw, rules over

wife and children, both free, but the rule differs, the rule over his children

being a royal, over his wife a constitutional rule. For although there may be

exceptions to the order of nature, the male is by nature fitter for command

than the female, just as the elder and full-grown is superior to the younger

and more immature. But in most constitutional states the citizens rule and are

ruled by turns, for the idea of a constitutional state implies that the natures of

the citizens are equal, and do not differ at all. Nevertheless, when one rules

and the other is ruled we endeavor to create a difference of outward forms

and names and titles of respect, which may be illustrated by the saying of

Amasis about his foot-pan. The relation of the male to the female is of thiskind, but there the inequality is permanent. The rule of a father over his

children is royal, for he rules by virtue both of love and of the respect due to

age, exercising a kind of royal power. And therefore Homer has appropriately

called Zeus ‘father of Gods and men,’ because he is the king of them all. For

a king is the natural superior of his subjects, but he should be of the same kin

or kind with them, and such is the relation of elder and younger, of father and

son.


XIII


  Thus it is clear that household management attends more to men than to

the acquisition of inanimate things, and to human excellence more than to the

excellence of property which we call wealth, and to the virtue of freemen

more than to the virtue of slaves. A question may indeed be raised, whether

there  is  any  excellence  at  all  in  a  slave  beyond  and  higher  than  merely

instrumental and ministerial qualities—whether he can have the virtues of

temperance, courage, justice, and the like; or whether slaves possess only

bodily and ministerial qualities. And, whichever way we answer the question,

a  difficulty  arises;  for,  if  they  have  virtue,  in  what  will  they  differ  from

freemen?  On  the  other  hand,  since  they  are  men  and  share  in  rational

principle, it seems absurd to say that they have no virtue. A similar question

may be raised about women and children, whether they too have virtues:

ought a woman to be temperate and brave and just, and is a child to be called

temperate,  and  intemperate,  or  note  So  in  general  we  may  ask  about  the

natural ruler, and the natural subject, whether they have the same or different

virtues. For if a noble nature is equally required in both, why should one of

them always rule, and the other always be ruled? Nor can we say that this is a

question  of  degree,  for  the  difference  between  ruler  and  subject  is  a

difference of kind, which the difference of more and less never is. Yet how

strange is the supposition that the one ought, and that the other ought not, to

have virtue! For if the ruler is intemperate and unjust, how can he rule well?

If the subject, how can he obey well? If he be licentious and cowardly, he

will certainly not do his duty. It is evident, therefore, that both of them must

have  a  share  of  virtue,  but  varying  as  natural  subjects  also  vary  among

themselves. Here the very constitution of the soul has shown us the way; in it

one part naturally rules, and the other is subject, and the virtue of the ruler we

in maintain to be different from that of the subject; the one being the virtue ofthe rational, and the other of the irrational part. Now, it is obvious that the

same principle applies generally, and therefore almost all things rule and are

ruled according to nature. But the kind of rule differs; the freeman rules over

the slave after another manner from that in which the male rules over the

female, or the man over the child; although the parts of the soul are present in

an  of  them,  they  are  present  in  different  degrees.  For  the  slave  has  no

deliberative faculty at all; the woman has, but it is without authority, and the

child has, but it is immature. So it must necessarily be supposed to be with

the moral virtues also; all should partake of them, but only in such manner

and degree as is required by each for the fulfillment of his duty. Hence the

ruler  ought  to  have  moral  virtue  in  perfection,  for  his  function,  taken

absolutely,  demands  a  master  artificer,  and  rational  principle  is  such  an

artificer; the subjects, oil the other hand, require only that measure of virtue

which is proper to each of them. Clearly, then, moral virtue belongs to all of

them; but the temperance of a man and of a woman, or the courage and

justice of a man and of a woman, are not, as Socrates maintained, the same;

the courage of a man is shown in commanding, of a woman in obeying. And

this holds of all other virtues, as will be more clearly seen if we look at them

in detail, for those who say generally that virtue consists in a good disposition

of the soul, or in doing rightly, or the like, only deceive themselves. Far

better than such definitions is their mode of speaking, who, like Gorgias,

enumerate  the  virtues.  All  classes  must  be  deemed  to  have  their  special

attributes; as the poet says of women,


  Silence is a woman’s glory,


but  this  is  not  equally  the  glory  of  man.  The  child  is  imperfect,  and

therefore  obviously  his  virtue  is  not  relative  to  himself  alone,  but  to  the

perfect man and to his teacher, and in like manner the virtue of the slave is

relative to a master. Now we determined that a slave is useful for the wants of

life,  and  therefore  he  will  obviously  require  only  so  much  virtue  as  will

prevent  him  from  failing  in  his  duty  through  cowardice  or  lack  of  self-

control. Some one will ask whether, if what we are saying is true, virtue will

not be required also in the artisans, for they often fail in their work through

the lack of self control? But is there not a great difference in the two cases?

For the slave shares in his master’s life; the artisan is less closely connected

with him, and only attains excellence in proportion as he becomes a slave.The meaner sort of mechanic has a special and separate slavery; and whereas

the  slave  exists  by  nature,  not  so  the  shoemaker  or  other  artisan.  It  is

manifest, then, that the master ought to be the source of such excellence in

the slave, and not a mere possessor of the art of mastership which trains the

slave in his duties. Wherefore they are mistaken who forbid us to converse

with slaves and say that we should employ command only, for slaves stand

even more in need of admonition than children.

So much for this subject; the relations of husband and wife, parent and

child, their several virtues, what in their intercourse with one another is good,

and what is evil, and how we may pursue the good and good and escape the

evil,  will  have  to  be  discussed  when  we  speak  of  the  different  forms  of

government. For, inasmuch as every family is a part of a state, and these

relationships are the parts of a family, and the virtue of the part must have

regard to the virtue of the whole, women and children must be trained by

education with an eye to the constitution, if the virtues of either of them are

supposed to make any difference in the virtues of the state. And they must

make a difference: for the children grow up to be citizens, and half the free

persons in a state are women.

Of these matters, enough has been said; of what remains, let us speak at

another time. Regarding, then, our present inquiry as complete, we will make

a new beginning. And, first, let us examine the various theories of a perfect

state.                                  Politics, Book II


Translated by Benjamin Jowett


<

div id="book2" class="book">


I


Our purpose is to consider what form of political community is best of all

for those who are most able to realize their ideal of life. We must therefore

examine not only this but other constitutions, both such as actually exist in

well-governed states, and any theoretical forms which are held in esteem; that

what is good and useful may be brought to light. And let no one suppose that

in seeking for something beyond them we are anxious to make a sophistical

display  at  any  cost;  we  only  undertake  this  inquiry  because  all  the

constitutions with which we are acquainted are faulty.

We will begin with the natural beginning of the subject. Three alternatives

are conceivable: The members of a state must either have (1) all things or (2)

nothing in common, or (3) some things in common and some not. That they

should have nothing in common is clearly impossible, for the constitution is a

community, and must at any rate have a common place—one city will be in

one place, and the citizens are those who share in that one city. But should a

well ordered state have all things, as far as may be, in common, or some only

and not others? For the citizens might conceivably have wives and children

and  property  in  common,  as  Socrates  proposes  in  the  Republic  of  Plato.

Which is better, our present condition, or the proposed new order of society.


II


  There are many difficulties in the community of women. And the principle

on which Socrates rests the necessity of such an institution evidently is not

established  by  his  arguments.  Further,  as  a  means  to  the  end  which  he

ascribes to the state, the scheme, taken literally is impracticable, and how we

are to interpret it is nowhere precisely stated. I am speaking of the premisefrom which the argument of Socrates proceeds, ‘that the greater the unity of

the state the better.’ Is it not obvious that a state may at length attain such a

degree of unity as to be no longer a state? since the nature of a state is to be a

plurality, and in tending to greater unity, from being a state, it becomes a

family, and from being a family, an individual; for the family may be said to

be more than the state, and the individual than the family. So that we ought

not  to  attain  this  greatest  unity  even  if  we  could,  for  it  would  be  the

destruction of the state. Again, a state is not made up only of so many men,

but of different kinds of men; for similars do not constitute a state. It is not

like a military alliance The usefulness of the latter depends upon its quantity

even where there is no difference in quality (for mutual protection is the end

aimed at), just as a greater weight of anything is more useful than a less (in

like  manner,  a  state  differs  from  a  nation,  when  the  nation  has  not  its

population organized in villages, but lives an Arcadian sort of life); but the

elements out of which a unity is to be formed differ in kind. Wherefore the

principle of compensation, as I have already remarked in the Ethics, is the

salvation of states. Even among freemen and equals this is a principle which

must be maintained, for they cannot an rule together, but must change at the

end of a year or some other period of time or in some order of succession.

The result is that upon this plan they all govern; just as if shoemakers and

carpenters were to exchange their occupations, and the same persons did not

always continue shoemakers and carpenters. And since it is better that this

should  be  so  in  politics  as  well,  it  is  clear  that  while  there  should  be

continuance of the same persons in power where this is possible, yet where

this is not possible by reason of the natural equality of the citizens, and at the

same time it is just that an should share in the government (whether to govern

be a good thing or a bad), an approximation to this is that equals should in

turn retire from office and should, apart from official position, be treated

alike. Thus the one party rule and the others are ruled in turn, as if they were

no longer the same persons. In like manner when they hold office there is a

variety in the offices held. Hence it is evident that a city is not by nature one

in that sense which some persons affirm; and that what is said to be the

greatest good of cities is in reality their destruction; but surely the good of

things must be that which preserves them. Again, in another point of view,

this extreme unification of the state is clearly not good; for a family is more

self-sufficing than an individual, and a city than a family, and a city only

comes into being when the community is large enough to be self-sufficing. Ifthen  self-sufficiency  is  to  be  desired,  the  lesser  degree  of  unity  is  more

desirable than the greater.


III


But,  even  supposing  that  it  were  best  for  the  community  to  have  the

greatest degree of unity, this unity is by no means proved to follow from the

fact ‘of all men saying “mine” and “not mine” at the same instant of time,’

which, according to Socrates, is the sign of perfect unity in a state. For the

word ‘all’ is ambiguous. If the meaning be that every individual says ‘mine’

and ‘not mine’ at the same time, then perhaps the result at which Socrates

aims  may  be  in  some  degree  accomplished;  each  man  will  call  the  same

person his own son and the same person his wife, and so of his property and

of all that falls to his lot. This, however, is not the way in which people

would speak who had their had their wives and children in common; they

would  say  ‘all’  but  not  ‘each.’  In  like  manner  their  property  would  be

described as belonging to them, not severally but collectively. There is an

obvious fallacy in the term ‘all’: like some other words, ‘both,’ ‘odd,’ ‘even,’

it is ambiguous, and even in abstract argument becomes a source of logical

puzzles. That all persons call the same thing mine in the sense in which each

does so may be a fine thing, but it is impracticable; or if the words are taken

in the other sense, such a unity in no way conduces to harmony. And there is

another objection to the proposal. For that which is common to the greatest

number has the least care bestowed upon it. Every one thinks chiefly of his

own,  hardly  at  all  of  the  common  interest;  and  only  when  he  is  himself

concerned as an individual. For besides other considerations, everybody is

more inclined to neglect the duty which he expects another to fulfill; as in

families many attendants are often less useful than a few. Each citizen will

have a thousand sons who will not be his sons individually but anybody will

be equally the son of anybody, and will therefore be neglected by all alike.

Further, upon this principle, every one will use the word ‘mine’ of one who is

prospering or the reverse, however small a fraction he may himself be of the

whole number; the same boy will be ‘so and so’s son,’ the son of each of the

thousand, or whatever be the number of the citizens; and even about this he

will not be positive; for it is impossible to know who chanced to have a child,

or whether, if one came into existence, it has survived. But which is better—

for each to say ‘mine’ in this way, making a man the same relation to twothousand or ten thousand citizens, or to use the word ‘mine’ in the ordinary

and more restricted sense? For usually the same person is called by one man

his own son whom another calls his own brother or cousin or kinsman—

blood relation or connection by marriage either of himself or of some relation

of his, and yet another his clansman or tribesman; and how much better is it

to be the real cousin of somebody than to be a son after Plato’s fashion! Nor

is there any way of preventing brothers and children and fathers and mothers

from  sometimes  recognizing  one  another;  for  children  are  born  like  their

parents, and they will necessarily be finding indications of their relationship

to one another. Geographers declare such to be the fact; they say that in part

of Upper Libya, where the women are common, nevertheless the children

who are born are assigned to their respective fathers on the ground of their

likeness. And some women, like the females of other animals—for example,

mares and cows—have a strong tendency to produce offspring resembling

their parents, as was the case with the Pharsalian mare called Honest.


IV


  Other  evils,  against  which  it  is  not  easy  for  the  authors  of  such  a

community to guard, will be assaults and homicides, voluntary as well as

involuntary,  quarrels  and  slanders,  all  which  are  most  unholy  acts  when

committed against fathers and mothers and near relations, but not equally

unholy when there is no relationship. Moreover, they are much more likely to

occur  if  the  relationship  is  unknown,  and,  when  they  have  occurred,  the

customary expiations of them cannot be made. Again, how strange it is that

Socrates, after having made the children common, should hinder lovers from

carnal  intercourse  only,  but  should  permit  love  and  familiarities  between

father and son or between brother and brother, than which nothing can be

more unseemly, since even without them love of this sort is improper. How

strange, too, to forbid intercourse for no other reason than the violence of the

pleasure, as though the relationship of father and son or of brothers with one

another made no difference.

This  community  of  wives  and  children  seems  better  suited  to  the

husbandmen than to the guardians, for if they have wives and children in

common, they will be bound to one another by weaker ties, as a subject class

should be, and they will remain obedient and not rebel. In a word, the result

of such a law would be just the opposite of which good laws ought to have,and the intention of Socrates in making these regulations about women and

children would defeat itself. For friendship we believe to be the greatest good

of states and the preservative of them against revolutions; neither is there

anything which Socrates so greatly lauds as the unity of the state which he

and all the world declare to be created by friendship. But the unity which he

commends  would  be  like  that  of  the  lovers  in  the  Symposium,  who,  as

Aristophanes says, desire to grow together in the excess of their affection,

and from being two to become one, in which case one or both would certainly

perish. Whereas in a state having women and children common, love will be

watery; and the father will certainly not say ‘my son,’ or the son ‘my father.’

As a little sweet wine mingled with a great deal of water is imperceptible in

the mixture, so, in this sort of community, the idea of relationship which is

based upon these names will be lost; there is no reason why the so-called

father should care about the son, or the son about the father, or brothers about

one another. Of the two qualities which chiefly inspire regard and affection—

that a thing is your own and that it is your only one-neither can exist in such a

state as this.

  Again, the transfer of children as soon as they are born from the rank of

husbandmen  or  of  artisans  to  that  of  guardians,  and  from  the  rank  of

guardians into a lower rank, will be very difficult to arrange; the givers or

transferrers cannot but know whom they are giving and transferring, and to

whom. And the previously mentioned evils, such as assaults, unlawful loves,

homicides, will happen more often amongst those who are transferred to the

lower classes, or who have a place assigned to them among the guardians; for

they will no longer call the members of the class they have left brothers, and

children,  and  fathers,  and  mothers,  and  will  not,  therefore,  be  afraid  of

committing any crimes by reason of consanguinity. Touching the community

of wives and children, let this be our conclusion.


V


Next  let  us  consider  what  should  be  our  arrangements  about  property:

should the citizens of the perfect state have their possessions in common or

not? This question may be discussed separately from the enactments about

women and children. Even supposing that the women and children belong to

individuals, according to the custom which is at present universal, may there

not be an advantage in having and using possessions in common? Three casesare possible: (1) the soil may be appropriated, but the produce may be thrown

for consumption into the common stock; and this is the practice of some

nations. Or (2), the soil may be common, and may be cultivated in common,

but the produce divided among individuals for their private use; this is a form

of common property which is said to exist among certain barbarians. Or (3),

the soil and the produce may be alike common.

  When the husbandmen are not the owners, the case will be different and

easier to deal with; but when they till the ground for themselves the question

of  ownership  will  give  a  world  of  trouble.  If  they  do  not  share  equally

enjoyments and toils, those who labor much and get little will necessarily

complain of those who labor little and receive or consume much. But indeed

there  is  always  a  difficulty  in  men  living  together  and  having  all  human

relations in common, but especially in their having common property. The

partnerships  of  fellow-travelers  are  an  example  to  the  point;  for  they

generally fall out over everyday matters and quarrel about any trifle which

turns up. So with servants: we are most able to take offense at those with

whom we most we most frequently come into contact in daily life.

  These are only some of the disadvantages which attend the community of

property;  the  present  arrangement,  if  improved  as  it  might  be  by  good

customs and laws, would be far better, and would have the advantages of

both systems. Property should be in a certain sense common, but, as a general

rule,  private;  for,  when  everyone  has  a  distinct  interest,  men  will  not

complain of one another, and they will make more progress, because every

one will be attending to his own business. And yet by reason of goodness,

and in respect of use, ‘Friends,’ as the proverb says, ‘will have all things

common.’ Even now there are traces of such a principle, showing that it is

not impracticable, but, in well-ordered states, exists already to a certain extent

and may be carried further. For, although every man has his own property,

some things he will place at the disposal of his friends, while of others he

shares  the  use  with  them.  The  Lacedaemonians,  for  example,  use  one

another’s slaves, and horses, and dogs, as if they were their own; and when

they lack provisions on a journey, they appropriate what they find in the

fields  throughout  the  country.  It  is  clearly  better  that  property  should  be

private, but the use of it common; and the special business of the legislator is

to  create  in  men  this  benevolent  disposition.  Again,  how  immeasurably

greater is the pleasure, when a man feels a thing to be his own; for surely the

love of self is a feeling implanted by nature and not given in vain, althoughselfishness is rightly censured; this, however, is not the mere love of self, but

the love of self in excess, like the miser’s love of money; for all, or almost

all, men love money and other such objects in a measure. And further, there

is the greatest pleasure in doing a kindness or service to friends or guests or

companions, which can only be rendered when a man has private property.

These advantages are lost by excessive unification of the state. The exhibition

of two virtues, besides, is visibly annihilated in such a state: first, temperance

towards women (for it is an honorable action to abstain from another’s wife

for temperance’ sake); secondly, liberality in the matter of property. No one,

when men have all things in common, will any longer set an example of

liberality or do any liberal action; for liberality consists in the use which is

made of property.

  Such  legislation  may  have  a  specious  appearance  of  benevolence;  men

readily listen to it, and are easily induced to believe that in some wonderful

manner everybody will become everybody’s friend, especially when some

one is heard denouncing the evils now existing in states, suits about contracts,

convictions for perjury, flatteries of rich men and the like, which are said to

arise out of the possession of private property. These evils, however, are due

to a very different cause—the wickedness of human nature. Indeed, we see

that  there  is  much  more  quarrelling  among  those  who  have  all  things  in

common, though there are not many of them when compared with the vast

numbers who have private property.

  Again, we ought to reckon, not only the evils from which the citizens will

be saved, but also the advantages which they will lose. The life which they

are to lead appears to be quite impracticable. The error of Socrates must be

attributed to the false notion of unity from which he starts. Unity there should

be, both of the family and of the state, but in some respects only. For there is

a point at which a state may attain such a degree of unity as to be no longer a

state, or at which, without actually ceasing to exist, it will become an inferior

state, like harmony passing into unison, or rhythm which has been reduced to

a single foot. The state, as I was saying, is a plurality which should be united

and made into a community by education; and it is strange that the author of a

system of education which he thinks will make the state virtuous, should

expect  to  improve  his  citizens  by  regulations  of  this  sort,  and  not  by

philosophy or by customs and laws, like those which prevail at Sparta and

Crete respecting common meals, whereby the legislator has made property

common. Let us remember that we should not disregard the experience ofages;  in  the  multitude  of  years  these  things,  if  they  were  good,  would

certainly not have been unknown; for almost everything has been found out,

although sometimes they are not put together; in other cases men do not use

the knowledge which they have. Great light would be thrown on this subject

if  we  could  see  such  a  form  of  government  in  the  actual  process  of

construction;  for  the  legislator  could  not  form  a  state  at  all  without

distributing and dividing its constituents into associations for common meals,

and into phratries and tribes. But all this legislation ends only in forbidding

agriculture to the guardians, a prohibition which the Lacedaemonians try to

enforce already.

But, indeed, Socrates has not said, nor is it easy to decide, what in such a

community will be the general form of the state. The citizens who are not

guardians are the majority, and about them nothing has been determined: are

the  husbandmen,  too,  to  have  their  property  in  common?  Or  is  each

individual to have his own? And are the wives and children to be individual

or common. If, like the guardians, they are to have all things in common,

what do they differ from them, or what will they gain by submitting to their

government? Or, upon what principle would they submit, unless indeed the

governing class adopt the ingenious policy of the Cretans, who give their

slaves the same institutions as their own, but forbid them gymnastic exercises

and the possession of arms. If, on the other hand, the inferior classes are to be

like other cities in respect of marriage and property, what will be the form of

the community? Must it not contain two states in one, each hostile to the

other  He  makes  the  guardians  into  a  mere  occupying  garrison,  while  the

husbandmen and artisans and the rest are the real citizens. But if so the suits

and quarrels, and all the evils which Socrates affirms to exist in other states,

will  exist  equally  among  them.  He  says  indeed  that,  having  so  good  an

education, the citizens will not need many laws, for example laws about the

city or about the markets; but then he confines his education to the guardians.

Again, he makes the husbandmen owners of the property upon condition of

their  paying  a  tribute.  But  in  that  case  they  are  likely  to  be  much  more

unmanageable  and  conceited  than  the  Helots,  or  Penestae,  or  slaves  in

general. And whether community of wives and property be necessary for the

lower equally with the higher class or not, and the questions akin to this, what

will be the education, form of government, laws of the lower class, Socrates

has  nowhere  determined:  neither  is  it  easy  to  discover  this,  nor  is  their

character of small importance if the common life of the guardians is to bemaintained.

  Again, if Socrates makes the women common, and retains private property,

the men will see to the fields, but who will see to the house? And who will do

so  if  the  agricultural  class  have  both  their  property  and  their  wives  in

common? Once more: it is absurd to argue, from the analogy of the animals,

that men and women should follow the same pursuits, for animals have not to

manage  a  household.  The  government,  too,  as  constituted  by  Socrates,

contains elements of danger; for he makes the same persons always rule. And

if this is often a cause of disturbance among the meaner sort, how much more

among high-spirited warriors? But that the persons whom he makes rulers

must be the same is evident; for the gold which the God mingles in the souls

of men is not at one time given to one, at another time to another, but always

to the same: as he says, ‘God mingles gold in some, and silver in others, from

their very birth; but brass and iron in those who are meant to be artisans and

husbandmen.’ Again, he deprives the guardians even of happiness, and says

that the legislator ought to make the whole state happy. But the whole cannot

be happy unless most, or all, or some of its parts enjoy happiness. In this

respect happiness is not like the even principle in numbers, which may exist

only in the whole, but in neither of the parts; not so happiness. And if the

guardians are not happy, who are? Surely not the artisans, or the common

people. The Republic of which Socrates discourses has all these difficulties,

and others quite as great.


VI


The same, or nearly the same, objections apply to Plato’s later work, the

Laws, and therefore we had better examine briefly the constitution which is

therein described. In the Republic, Socrates has definitely settled in all a few

questions  only;  such  as  the  community  of  women  and  children,  the

community of property, and the constitution of the state. The population is

divided  into  two  classes—one  of  husbandmen,  and  the  other  of  warriors;

from this latter is taken a third class of counselors and rulers of the state. But

Socrates has not determined whether the husbandmen and artisans are to have

a share in the government, and whether they, too, are to carry arms and share

in military service, or not. He certainly thinks that the women ought to share

in the education of the guardians, and to fight by their side. The remainder of

the work is filled up with digressions foreign to the main subject, and withdiscussions about the education of the guardians. In the Laws there is hardly

anything but laws; not much is said about the constitution. This, which he had

intended to make more of the ordinary type, he gradually brings round to the

other or ideal form. For with the exception of the community of women and

property, he supposes everything to be the same in both states; there is to be

the  same  education;  the  citizens  of  both  are  to  live  free  from  servile

occupations, and there are to be common meals in both. The only difference

is  that  in  the  Laws,  the  common  meals  are  extended  to  women,  and  the

warriors number 5000, but in the Republic only 1000.

The discourses of Socrates are never commonplace; they always exhibit

grace and originality and thought; but perfection in everything can hardly be

expected. We must not overlook the fact that the number of 5000 citizens,

just now mentioned, will require a territory as large as Babylon, or some

other huge site, if so many persons are to be supported in idleness, together

with their women and attendants, who will be a multitude many times as

great. In framing an ideal we may assume what we wish, but should avoid

impossibilities.

It is said that the legislator ought to have his eye directed to two points—

the  people  and  the  country.  But  neighboring  countries  also  must  not  be

forgotten by him, firstly because the state for which he legislates is to have a

political and not an isolated life. For a state must have such a military force as

will be serviceable against her neighbors, and not merely useful at home.

Even if the life of action is not admitted to be the best, either for individuals

or states, still a city should be formidable to enemies, whether invading or

retreating.

  There is another point: Should not the amount of property be defined in

some way which differs from this by being clearer? For Socrates says that a

man should have so much property as will enable him to live temperately,

which is only a way of saying ‘to live well’; this is too general a conception.

Further, a man may live temperately and yet miserably. A better definition

would be that a man must have so much property as will enable him to live

not  only  temperately  but  liberally;  if  the  two  are  parted,  liberally  will

combine with luxury; temperance will be associated with toil. For liberality

and temperance are the only eligible qualities which have to do with the use

of  property.  A  man  cannot  use  property  with  mildness  or  courage,  but

temperately and liberally he may; and therefore the practice of these virtues is

inseparable  from  property.  There  is  an  inconsistency,  too,  in  too,  inequalizing the property and not regulating the number of the citizens; the

population is to remain unlimited, and he thinks that it will be sufficiently

equalized by a certain number of marriages being unfruitful, however many

are born to others, because he finds this to be the case in existing states. But

greater care will be required than now; for among ourselves, whatever may

be the number of citizens, the property is always distributed among them, and

therefore no one is in want; but, if the property were incapable of division as

in the Laws, the supernumeraries, whether few or many, would get nothing.

One would have thought that it was even more necessary to limit population

than property; and that the limit should be fixed by calculating the chances of

mortality in the children, and of sterility in married persons. The neglect of

this subject, which in existing states is so common, is a never-failing cause of

poverty among the citizens; and poverty is the parent of revolution and crime.

Pheidon the Corinthian, who was one of the most ardent legislators, thought

that  the  families  and  the  number  of  citizens  ought  to  remain  the  same,

although originally all the lots may have been of different sizes: but in the

Laws the opposite principle is maintained. What in our opinion is the right

arrangement will have to be explained hereafter.

  There is another omission in the Laws: Socrates does not tell us how the

rulers differ from their subjects; he only says that they should be related as

the warp and the woof, which are made out of different wools. He allows that

a man’s whole property may be increased fivefold, but why should not his

land also increase to a certain extent? Again, will the good management of a

household be promoted by his arrangement of homesteads? For he assigns to

each individual two homesteads in separate places, and it is difficult to live in

two houses.

The  whole  system  of  government  tends  to  be  neither  democracy  nor

oligarchy, but something in a mean between them, which is usually called a

polity, and is composed of the heavy-armed soldiers. Now, if he intended to

frame a constitution which would suit the greatest number of states, he was

very likely right, but not if he meant to say that this constitutional form came

nearest to his first or ideal state; for many would prefer the Lacedaemonian,

or, possibly, some other more aristocratic government. Some, indeed, say that

the best constitution is a combination of all existing forms, and they praise

the  Lacedaemonian  because  it  is  made  up  of  oligarchy,  monarchy,  and

democracy, the king forming the monarchy, and the council of elders the

oligarchy while the democratic element is represented by the Ephors; for theEphors are selected from the people. Others, however, declare the Ephoralty

to be a tyranny, and find the element of democracy in the common meals and

in  the  habits  of  daily  life.  In  the  Laws  it  is  maintained  that  the  best

constitution  is  made  up  of  democracy  and  tyranny,  which  are  either  not

constitutions at all, or are the worst of all. But they are nearer the truth who

combine many forms; for the constitution is better which is made up of more

numerous elements. The constitution proposed in the Laws has no element of

monarchy at all; it is nothing but oligarchy and democracy, leaning rather to

oligarchy. This is seen in the mode of appointing magistrates; for although

the appointment of them by lot from among those who have been already

selected combines both elements, the way in which the rich are compelled by

law  to  attend  the  assembly  and  vote  for  magistrates  or  discharge  other

political duties, while the rest may do as they like, and the endeavor to have

the greater number of the magistrates appointed out of the richer classes and

the highest officers selected from those who have the greatest incomes, both

these are oligarchical features. The oligarchical principle prevails also in the

choice of the council, for all are compelled to choose, but the compulsion

extends only to the choice out of the first class, and of an equal number out of

the second class and out of the third class, but not in this latter case to all the

voters but to those of the first three classes; and the selection of candidates

out of the fourth class is only compulsory on the first and second. Then, from

the persons so chosen, he says that there ought to be an equal number of each

class  selected.  Thus  a  preponderance  will  be  given  to  the  better  sort  of

people, who have the larger incomes, because many of the lower classes, not

being compelled will not vote. These considerations, and others which will be

adduced when the time comes for examining similar polities, tend to show

that states like Plato’s should not be composed of democracy and monarchy.

There is also a danger in electing the magistrates out of a body who are

themselves  elected;  for,  if  but  a  small  number  choose  to  combine,  the

elections will always go as they desire. Such is the constitution which is

described in the Laws.


VII


  Other constitutions have been proposed; some by private persons, others

by  philosophers  and  statesmen,  which  all  come  nearer  to  established  or

existing ones than either of Plato’s. No one else has introduced such noveltiesas the community of women and children, or public tables for women: other

legislators  begin  with  what  is  necessary.  In  the  opinion  of  some,  the

regulation of property is the chief point of all, that being the question upon

which  all  revolutions  turn.  This  danger  was  recognized  by  Phaleas  of

Chalcedon, who was the first to affirm that the citizens of a state ought to

have equal possessions. He thought that in a new colony the equalization

might be accomplished without difficulty, not so easily when a state was

already established; and that then the shortest way of compassing the desired

end would be for the rich to give and not to receive marriage portions, and for

the poor not to give but to receive them.

  Plato in the Laws was of opinion that, to a certain extent, accumulation

should be allowed, forbidding, as I have already observed, any citizen to

possess more than five times the minimum qualification But those who make

such laws should remember what they are apt to forget—that the legislator

who fixes the amount of property should also fix the number of children; for,

if the children are too many for the property, the law must be broken. And,

besides the violation of the law, it is a bad thing that many from being rich

should  become  poor;  for  men  of  ruined  fortunes  are  sure  to  stir  up

revolutions.  That  the  equalization  of  property  exercises  an  influence  on

political society was clearly understood even by some of the old legislators.

Laws  were  made  by  Solon  and  others  prohibiting  an  individual  from

possessing as much land as he pleased; and there are other laws in states

which forbid the sale of property: among the Locrians, for example, there is a

law that a man is not to sell his property unless he can prove unmistakably

that some misfortune has befallen him. Again, there have been laws which

enjoin the preservation of the original lots. Such a law existed in the island of

Leucas, and the abrogation of it made the constitution too democratic, for the

rulers  no  longer  had  the  prescribed  qualification.  Again,  where  there  is

equality of property, the amount may be either too large or too small, and the

possessor  may  be  living  either  in  luxury  or  penury.  Clearly,  then,  the

legislator  ought  not  only  to  aim  at  the  equalization  of  properties,  but  at

moderation in their amount. Further, if he prescribe this moderate amount

equally to all, he will be no nearer the mark; for it is not the possessions but

the desires of mankind which require to be equalized, and this is impossible,

unless  a  sufficient  education  is  provided  by  the  laws.  But  Phaleas  will

probably reply that this is precisely what he means; and that, in his opinion,

there ought to be in states, not only equal property, but equal education. Stillhe should tell precisely what he means; and that, in his opinion, there ought

to be in be in having one and the same for all, if it is of a sort that predisposes

men to avarice, or ambition, or both. Moreover, civil troubles arise, not only

out of the inequality of property, but out of the inequality of honor, though in

opposite  ways.  For  the  common  people  quarrel  about  the  inequality  of

property, the higher class about the equality of honor; as the poet says,


The bad and good alike in honor share.


  There  are  crimes  of  which  the  motive  is  want;  and  for  these  Phaleas

expects to find a cure in the equalization of property, which will take away

from a man the temptation to be a highwayman, because he is hungry or cold.

But  want  is  not  the  sole  incentive  to  crime;  men  also  wish  to  enjoy

themselves and not to be in a state of desire—they wish to cure some desire,

going beyond the necessities of life, which preys upon them; nay, this is not

the only reason—they may desire superfluities in order to enjoy pleasures

unaccompanied with pain, and therefore they commit crimes.

Now  what  is  the  cure  of  these  three  disorders?  Of  the  first,  moderate

possessions and occupation; of the second, habits of temperance; as to the

third, if any desire pleasures which depend on themselves, they will find the

satisfaction of their desires nowhere but in philosophy; for all other pleasures

we are dependent on others. The fact is that the greatest crimes are caused by

excess and not by necessity. Men do not become tyrants in order that they

may not suffer cold; and hence great is the honor bestowed, not on him who

kills a thief, but on him who kills a tyrant. Thus we see that the institutions of

Phaleas avail only against petty crimes.

  There is another objection to them. They are chiefly designed to promote

the internal welfare of the state. But the legislator should consider also its

relation  to  neighboring  nations,  and  to  all  who  are  outside  of  it.  The

government must be organized with a view to military strength; and of this he

has said not a word. And so with respect to property: there should not only be

enough to supply the internal wants of the state, but also to meet dangers

coming from without. The property of the state should not be so large that

more powerful neighbors may be tempted by it, while the owners are unable

to repel the invaders; nor yet so small that the state is unable to maintain a

war even against states of equal power, and of the same character. Phaleas

has not laid down any rule; but we should bear in mind that abundance ofwealth is an advantage. The best limit will probably be, that a more powerful

neighbor must have no inducement to go to war with you by reason of the

excess  of  your  wealth,  but  only  such  as  he  would  have  had  if  you  had

possessed less. There is a story that Eubulus, when Autophradates was going

to besiege Atarneus, told him to consider how long the operation would take,

and then reckon up the cost which would be incurred in the time. ‘For,’ said

he, ‘I am willing for a smaller sum than that to leave Atarneus at once.’ These

words of Eubulus made an impression on Autophradates, and he desisted

from the siege.

The equalization of property is one of the things that tend to prevent the

citizens from quarrelling. Not that the gain in this direction is very great. For

the nobles will be dissatisfied because they think themselves worthy of more

than an equal share of honors; and this is often found to be a cause of sedition

and revolution. And the avarice of mankind is insatiable; at one time two

obols was pay enough; but now, when this sum has become customary, men

always want more and more without end; for it is of the nature of desire not

to  be  satisfied,  and  most  men  live  only  for  the  gratification  of  it.  The

beginning of reform is not so much to equalize property as to train the nobler

sort of natures not to desire more, and to prevent the lower from getting

more; that is to say, they must be kept down, but not ill-treated. Besides, the

equalization proposed by Phaleas is imperfect; for he only equalizes land,

whereas a man may be rich also in slaves, and cattle, and money, and in the

abundance of what are called his movables. Now either all these things must

be equalized, or some limit must be imposed on them, or they must an be let

alone. It would appear that Phaleas is legislating for a small city only, if, as

he  supposes,  all  the  artisans  are  to  be  public  slaves  and  not  to  form  a

supplementary part of the body of citizens. But if there is a law that artisans

are  to  be  public  slaves,  it  should  only  apply  to  those  engaged  on  public

works, as at Epidamnus, or at Athens on the plan which Diophantus once

introduced.

  From these observations any one may judge how far Phaleas was wrong or

right in his ideas.


VIII


  Hippodamus,  the  son  of  Euryphon,  a  native  of  Miletus,  the  same  who

invented  the  art  of  planning  cities,  and  who  also  laid  out  the  Piraeus—astrange  man,  whose  fondness  for  distinction  led  him  into  a  general

eccentricity of life, which made some think him affected (for he would wear

flowing hair and expensive ornaments; but these were worn on a cheap but

warm garment both in winter and summer); he, besides aspiring to be an

adept in the knowledge of nature, was the first person not a statesman who

made inquiries about the best form of government.

The city of Hippodamus was composed of 10,000 citizens divided into

three  parts—one  of  artisans,  one  of  husbandmen,  and  a  third  of  armed

defenders of the state. He also divided the land into three parts, one sacred,

one public, the third private: the first was set apart to maintain the customary

worship of the Gods, the second was to support the warriors, the third was the

property of the husbandmen. He also divided laws into three classes, and no

more,  for  he  maintained  that  there  are  three  subjects  of  lawsuits—insult,

injury, and homicide. He likewise instituted a single final court of appeal, to

which all causes seeming to have been improperly decided might be referred;

this court he formed of elders chosen for the purpose. He was further of

opinion that the decisions of the courts ought not to be given by the use of a

voting pebble, but that every one should have a tablet on which he might not

only  write  a  simple  condemnation,  or  leave  the  tablet  blank  for  a  simple

acquittal;  but,  if  he  partly  acquitted  and  partly  condemned,  he  was  to

distinguish accordingly. To the existing law he objected that it obliged the

judges to be guilty of perjury, whichever way they voted. He also enacted

that  those  who  discovered  anything  for  the  good  of  the  state  should  be

honored; and he provided that the children of citizens who died in battle

should  be  maintained  at  the  public  expense,  as  if  such  an  enactment  had

never  been  heard  of  before,  yet  it  actually  exists  at  Athens  and  in  other

places. As to the magistrates, he would have them all elected by the people,

that is, by the three classes already mentioned, and those who were elected

were to watch over the interests of the public, of strangers, and of orphans.

These are the most striking points in the constitution of Hippodamus. There is

not much else.

The  first  of  these  proposals  to  which  objection  may  be  taken  is  the

threefold division of the citizens. The artisans, and the husbandmen, and the

warriors, all have a share in the government. But the husbandmen have no

arms, and the artisans neither arms nor land, and therefore they become all

but slaves of the warrior class. That they should share in all the offices is an

impossibility; for generals and guardians of the citizens, and nearly all theprincipal magistrates, must be taken from the class of those who carry arms.

Yet, if the two other classes have no share in the government, how can they

be loyal citizens? It may be said that those who have arms must necessarily

be masters of both the other classes, but this is not so easily accomplished

unless they are numerous; and if they are, why should the other classes share

in the government at all, or have power to appoint magistrates? Further, what

use are farmers to the city? Artisans there must be, for these are wanted in

every city, and they can live by their craft, as elsewhere; and the husbandmen

too, if they really provided the warriors with food, might fairly have a share

in the government. But in the republic of Hippodamus they are supposed to

have land of their own, which they cultivate for their private benefit. Again,

as to this common land out of which the soldiers are maintained, if they are

themselves to be the cultivators of it, the warrior class will be identical with

the  husbandmen,  although  the  legislator  intended  to  make  a  distinction

between them. If, again, there are to be other cultivators distinct both from

the husbandmen, who have land of their own, and from the warriors, they

will make a fourth class, which has no place in the state and no share in

anything. Or, if the same persons are to cultivate their own lands, and those

of the public as well, they will have difficulty in supplying the quantity of

produce which will maintain two households: and why, in this case, should

there be any division, for they might find food themselves and give to the

warriors  from  the  same  land  and  the  same  lots?  There  is  surely  a  great

confusion in all this.

  Neither  is  the  law  to  commended  which  says  that  the  judges,  when  a

simple issue is laid before them, should distinguish in their judgement; for the

judge is thus converted into an arbitrator. Now, in an arbitration, although the

arbitrators are many, they confer with one another about the decision, and

therefore they can distinguish; but in courts of law this is impossible, and,

indeed, most legislators take pains to prevent the judges from holding any

communication with one another. Again, will there not be confusion if the

judge thinks that damages should be given, but not so much as the suitor

demands?  He  asks,  say,  for  twenty  minae,  and  the  judge  allows  him  ten

minae (or in general the suitor asks for more and the judge allows less), while

another judge allows five, another four minae. In this way they will go on

splitting up the damages, and some will grant the whole and others nothing:

how is the final reckoning to be taken? Again, no one contends that he who

votes  for  a  simple  acquittal  or  condemnation  perjures  himself,  if  theindictment has been laid in an unqualified form; and this is just, for the judge

who acquits does not decide that the defendant owes nothing, but that he does

not owe the twenty minae. He only is guilty of perjury who thinks that the

defendant ought not to pay twenty minae, and yet condemns him.

To honor those who discover anything which is useful to the state is a

proposal which has a specious sound, but cannot safely be enacted by law, for

it may encourage informers, and perhaps even lead to political commotions.

This question involves another. It has been doubted whether it is or is not

expedient to make any changes in the laws of a country, even if another law

be better. Now, if an changes are inexpedient, we can hardly assent to the

proposal of Hippodamus; for, under pretense of doing a public service, a man

may introduce measures which are really destructive to the laws or to the

constitution. But, since we have touched upon this subject, perhaps we had

better go a little into detail, for, as I was saying, there is a difference of

opinion,  and  it  may  sometimes  seem  desirable  to  make  changes.  Such

changes  in  the  other  arts  and  sciences  have  certainly  been  beneficial;

medicine, for example, and gymnastic, and every other art and craft have

departed from traditional usage. And, if politics be an art, change must be

necessary in this as in any other art. That improvement has occurred is shown

by the fact that old customs are exceedingly simple and barbarous. For the

ancient Hellenes went about armed and bought their brides of each other. The

remains of ancient laws which have come down to us are quite absurd; for

example,  at  Cumae  there  is  a  law  about  murder,  to  the  effect  that  if  the

accuser produce a certain number of witnesses from among his own kinsmen,

the accused shall be held guilty. Again, men in general desire the good, and

not merely what their fathers had. But the primeval inhabitants, whether they

were born of the earth or were the survivors of some destruction, may be

supposed to have been no better than ordinary or even foolish people among

ourselves (such is certainly the tradition concerning the earth-born men); and

it would be ridiculous to rest contented with their notions. Even when laws

have been written down, they ought not always to remain unaltered. As in

other  sciences,  so  in  politics,  it  is  impossible  that  all  things  should  be

precisely set down in writing; for enactments must be universal, but actions

are concerned with particulars. Hence we infer that sometimes and in certain

cases laws may be changed; but when we look at the matter from another

point of view, great caution would seem to be required. For the habit of

lightly changing the laws is an evil, and, when the advantage is small, someerrors both of lawgivers and rulers had better be left; the citizen will not gain

so much by making the change as he will lose by the habit of disobedience.

The analogy of the arts is false; a change in a law is a very different thing

from a change in an art. For the law has no power to command obedience

except that of habit, which can only be given by time, so that a readiness to

change from old to new laws enfeebles the power of the law. Even if we

admit that the laws are to be changed, are they all to be changed, and in every

state? And are they to be changed by anybody who likes, or only by certain

persons? These are very important questions; and therefore we had better

reserve the discussion of them to a more suitable occasion.


IX


In  the  governments  of  Lacedaemon  and  Crete,  and  indeed  in  all

governments, two points have to be considered: first, whether any particular

law is good or bad, when compared with the perfect state; secondly, whether

it is or is not consistent with the idea and character which the lawgiver has set

before  his  citizens.  That  in  a  well-ordered  state  the  citizens  should  have

leisure  and  not  have  to  provide  for  their  daily  wants  is  generally

acknowledged, but there is a difficulty in seeing how this leisure is to be

attained. The Thessalian Penestae have often risen against their masters, and

the Helots in like manner against the Lacedaemonians, for whose misfortunes

they  are  always  lying  in  wait.  Nothing,  however,  of  this  kind  has  as  yet

happened to the Cretans; the reason probably is that the neighboring cities,

even when at war with one another, never form an alliance with rebellious

serfs, rebellions not being for their interest, since they themselves have a

dependent  population.  Whereas  all  the  neighbors  of  the  Lacedaemonians,

whether Argives, Messenians, or Arcadians, were their enemies. In Thessaly,

again, the original revolt of the slaves occurred because the Thessalians were

still at war with the neighboring Achaeans, Perrhaebians, and Magnesians.

Besides, if there were no other difficulty, the treatment or management of

slaves is a troublesome affair; for, if not kept in hand, they are insolent, and

think that they are as good as their masters, and, if harshly treated, they hate

and conspire against them. Now it is clear that when these are the results the

citizens of a state have not found out the secret of managing their subject

population.

  Again, the license of the Lacedaemonian women defeats the intention ofthe Spartan constitution, and is adverse to the happiness of the state. For, a

husband  and  wife  being  each  a  part  of  every  family,  the  state  may  be

considered as about equally divided into men and women; and, therefore, in

those states in which the condition of the women is bad, half the city may be

regarded as having no laws. And this is what has actually happened at Sparta;

the legislator wanted to make the whole state hardy and temperate, and he has

carried out his intention in the case of the men, but he has neglected the

women, who live in every sort of intemperance and luxury. The consequence

is that in such a state wealth is too highly valued, especially if the citizen fall

under the dominion of their wives, after the manner of most warlike races,

except the Celts and a few others who openly approve of male loves. The old

mythologer would seem to have been right in uniting Ares and Aphrodite, for

all warlike races are prone to the love either of men or of women. This was

exemplified among the Spartans in the days of their greatness; many things

were managed by their women. But what difference does it make whether

women rule, or the rulers are ruled by women? The result is the same. Even

in regard to courage, which is of no use in daily life, and is needed only in

war, the influence of the Lacedaemonian women has been most mischievous.

The evil showed itself in the Theban invasion, when, unlike the women other

cities, they were utterly useless and caused more confusion than the enemy.

This license of the Lacedaemonian women existed from the earliest times,

and  was  only  what  might  be  expected.  For,  during  the  wars  of  the

Lacedaemonians,  first  against  the  Argives,  and  afterwards  against  the

Arcadians and Messenians, the men were long away from home, and, on the

return  of  peace,  they  gave  themselves  into  the  legislator’s  hand,  already

prepared  by  the  discipline  of  a  soldier’s  life  (in  which  there  are  many

elements  of  virtue),  to  receive  his  enactments.  But,  when  Lycurgus,  as

tradition says, wanted to bring the women under his laws, they resisted, and

he gave up the attempt. These then are the causes of what then happened, and

this defect in the constitution is clearly to be attributed to them. We are not,

however, considering what is or is not to be excused, but what is right or

wrong, and the disorder of the women, as I have already said, not only gives

an air of indecorum to the constitution considered in itself, but tends in a

measure to foster avarice.

The mention of avarice naturally suggests a criticism on the inequality of

property.  While  some  of  the  Spartan  citizen  have  quite  small  properties,

others have very large ones; hence the land has passed into the hands of afew. And this is due also to faulty laws; for, although the legislator rightly

holds up to shame the sale or purchase of an inheritance, he allows anybody

who likes to give or bequeath it. Yet both practices lead to the same result.

And nearly two-fifths of the whole country are held by women; this is owing

to the number of heiresses and to the large dowries which are customary. It

would surely have been better to have given no dowries at all, or, if any, but

small  or  moderate  ones.  As  the  law  now  stands,  a  man  may  bestow  his

heiress on any one whom he pleases, and, if he die intestate, the privilege of

giving her away descends to his heir. Hence, although the country is able to

maintain 1500 cavalry and 30,000 hoplites, the whole number of Spartan

citizens fell below 1000. The result proves the faulty nature of their laws

respecting property; for the city sank under a single defeat; the want of men

was their ruin. There is a tradition that, in the days of their ancient kings, they

were in the habit of giving the rights of citizenship to strangers, and therefore,

in spite of their long wars, no lack of population was experienced by them;

indeed, at one time Sparta is said to have numbered not less than 10,000

citizens Whether this statement is true or not, it would certainly have been

better  to  have  maintained  their  numbers  by  the  equalization  of  property.

Again, the law which relates to the procreation of children is adverse to the

correction  of  this  inequality.  For  the  legislator,  wanting  to  have  as  many

Spartans as he could, encouraged the citizens to have large families; and there

is a law at Sparta that the father of three sons shall be exempt from military

service,  and  he  who  has  four  from  all  the  burdens  of  the  state.  Yet  it  is

obvious that, if there were many children, the land being distributed as it is,

many of them must necessarily fall into poverty.

The Lacedaemonian constitution is defective in another point; I mean the

Ephoralty.  This  magistracy  has  authority  in  the  highest  matters,  but  the

Ephors are chosen from the whole people, and so the office is apt to fall into

the hands of very poor men, who, being badly off, are open to bribes. There

have been many examples at Sparta of this evil in former times; and quite

recently, in the matter of the Andrians, certain of the Ephors who were bribed

did their best to ruin the state. And so great and tyrannical is their power, that

even the kings have been compelled to court them, so that, in this way as well

together with the royal office, the whole constitution has deteriorated, and

from  being  an  aristocracy  has  turned  into  a  democracy.  The  Ephoralty

certainly does keep the state together; for the people are contented when they

have a share in the highest office, and the result, whether due to the legislatoror to chance, has been advantageous. For if a constitution is to be permanent,

all  the  parts  of  the  state  must  wish  that  it  should  exist  and  the  same

arrangements be maintained. This is the case at Sparta, where the kings desire

its permanence because they have due honor in their own persons; the nobles

because they are represented in the council of elders (for the office of elder is

a reward of virtue); and the people, because all are eligible to the Ephoralty.

The election of Ephors out of the whole people is perfectly right, but ought

not to be carried on in the present fashion, which is too childish. Again, they

have the decision of great causes, although they are quite ordinary men, and

therefore they should not determine them merely on their own judgment, but

according to written rules, and to the laws. Their way of life, too, is not in

accordance with the spirit of the constitution—they have a deal too much

license; whereas, in the case of the other citizens, the excess of strictness is so

intolerable that they run away from the law into the secret indulgence of

sensual pleasures.

  Again, the council of elders is not free from defects. It may be said that the

elders are good men and well trained in manly virtue; and that, therefore,

there is an advantage to the state in having them. But that judges of important

causes should hold office for life is a disputable thing, for the mind grows old

as well as the body. And when men have been educated in such a manner that

even the legislator himself cannot trust them, there is real danger. Many of

the elders are well known to have taken bribes and to have been guilty of

partiality in public affairs. And therefore they ought not to be irresponsible;

yet  at  Sparta  they  are  so.  But  (it  may  be  replied),  ‘All  magistracies  are

accountable to the Ephors.’ Yes, but this prerogative is too great for them,

and we maintain that the control should be exercised in some other manner.

Further, the mode in which the Spartans elect their elders is childish; and it is

improper  that  the  person  to  be  elected  should  canvass  for  the  office;  the

worthiest  should  be  appointed,  whether  he  chooses  or  not.  And  here  the

legislator clearly indicates the same intention which appears in other parts of

his constitution; he would have his citizens ambitious, and he has reckoned

upon this quality in the election of the elders; for no one would ask to be

elected if he were not. Yet ambition and avarice, almost more than any other

passions, are the motives of crime.

  Whether kings are or are not an advantage to states, I will consider at

another time; they should at any rate be chosen, not as they are now, but with

regard to their personal life and conduct. The legislator himself obviously didnot suppose that he could make them really good men; at least he shows a

great distrust of their virtue. For this reason the Spartans used to join enemies

with them in the same embassy, and the quarrels between the kings were held

to be conservative of the state.

  Neither did the first introducer of the common meals, called ‘phiditia,’

regulate them well. The entertainment ought to have been provided at the

public  cost,  as  in  Crete;  but  among  the  Lacedaemonians  every  one  is

expected to contribute, and some of them are too poor to afford the expense;

thus the intention of the legislator is frustrated. The common meals were

meant to be a popular institution, but the existing manner of regulating them

is the reverse of popular. For the very poor can scarcely take part in them;

and,  according  to  ancient  custom,  those  who  cannot  contribute  are  not

allowed to retain their rights of citizenship.

The law about the Spartan admirals has often been censured, and with

justice; it is a source of dissension, for the kings are perpetual generals, and

this office of admiral is but the setting up of another king.

The charge which Plato brings, in the Laws, against the intention of the

legislator, is likewise justified; the whole constitution has regard to one part

of virtue only—the virtue of the soldier, which gives victory in war. So long

as they were at war, therefore, their power was preserved, but when they had

attained empire they fell for of the arts of peace they knew nothing, and had

never engaged in any employment higher than war. There is another error,

equally great, into which they have fallen. Although they truly think that the

goods for which men contend are to be acquired by virtue rather than by vice,

they err in supposing that these goods are to be preferred to the virtue which

gains them.

  Once more: the revenues of the state are ill-managed; there is no money in

the treasury, although they are obliged to carry on great wars, and they are

unwilling to pay taxes. The greater part of the land being in the hands of the

Spartans, they do not look closely into one another’s contributions. The result

which the legislator has produced is the reverse of beneficial; for he has made

his city poor, and his citizens greedy.

  Enough  respecting  the  Spartan  constitution,  of  which  these  are  the

principal defects.


XThe Cretan constitution nearly resembles the Spartan, and in some few

points is quite as good; but for the most part less perfect in form. The older

constitutions  are  generally  less  elaborate  than  the  later,  and  the

Lacedaemonian is said to be, and probably is, in a very great measure, a copy

of the Cretan. According to tradition, Lycurgus, when he ceased to be the

guardian of King Charillus, went abroad and spent most of his time in Crete.

For the two countries are nearly connected; the Lyctians are a colony of the

Lacedaemonians, and the colonists, when they came to Crete, adopted the

constitution which they found existing among the inhabitants. Even to this

day the Perioeci, or subject population of Crete, are governed by the original

laws  which  Minos  is  supposed  to  have  enacted.  The  island  seems  to  be

intended by nature for dominion in Hellas, and to be well situated; it extends

right across the sea, around which nearly all the Hellenes are settled; and

while one end is not far from the Peloponnese, the other almost reaches to the

region  of  Asia  about  Triopium  and  Rhodes.  Hence  Minos  acquired  the

empire of the sea, subduing some of the islands and colonizing others; at last

he invaded Sicily, where he died near Camicus.

The Cretan institutions resemble the Lacedaemonian. The Helots are the

husbandmen  of  the  one,  the  Perioeci  of  the  other,  and  both  Cretans  and

Lacedaemonians have common meals, which were anciently called by the

Lacedaemonians not ‘phiditia’ but ‘andria’; and the Cretans have the same

word, the use of which proves that the common meals originally came from

Crete. Further, the two constitutions are similar; for the office of the Ephors

is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Cretan  Cosmi,  the  only  difference  being  that

whereas the Ephors are five, the Cosmi are ten in number. The elders, too,

answer to the elders in Crete, who are termed by the Cretans the council. And

the kingly office once existed in Crete, but was abolished, and the Cosmi

have now the duty of leading them in war. All classes share in the ecclesia,

but it can only ratify the decrees of the elders and the Cosmi.

The  common  meals  of  Crete  are  certainly  better  managed  than  the

Lacedaemonian; for in Lacedaemon every one pays so much per head, or, if

he fails, the law, as I have already explained, forbids him to exercise the

rights of citizenship. But in Crete they are of a more popular character. There,

of all the fruits of the earth and cattle raised on the public lands, and of the

tribute which is paid by the Perioeci, one portion is assigned to the Gods and

to the service of the state, and another to the common meals, so that men,

women, and children are all supported out of a common stock. The legislatorhas  many  ingenious  ways  of  securing  moderation  in  eating,  which  he

conceives to be a gain; he likewise encourages the separation of men from

women, lest they should have too many children, and the companionship of

men with one another—whether this is a good or bad thing I shall have an

opportunity  of  considering  at  another  time.  But  that  the  Cretan  common

meals are better ordered than the Lacedaemonian there can be no doubt.

On the other hand, the Cosmi are even a worse institution than the Ephors,

of which they have all the evils without the good. Like the Ephors, they are

any  chance  persons,  but  in  Crete  this  is  not  counterbalanced  by  a

corresponding political advantage. At Sparta every one is eligible, and the

body of the people, having a share in the highest office, want the constitution

to be permanent. But in Crete the Cosmi are elected out of certain families,

and not out of the whole people, and the elders out of those who have been

Cosmi.

The same criticism may be made about the Cretan, which has been already

made about the Lacedaemonian elders. Their irresponsibility and life tenure

is too great a privilege, and their arbitrary power of acting upon their own

judgment, and dispensing with written law, is dangerous. It is no proof of the

goodness  of  the  institution  that  the  people  are  not  discontented  at  being

excluded from it. For there is no profit to be made out of the office as out of

the Ephoralty, since, unlike the Ephors, the Cosmi, being in an island, are

removed from temptation.

The  remedy  by  which  they  correct  the  evil  of  this  institution  is  an

extraordinary one, suited rather to a close oligarchy than to a constitutional

state.  For  the  Cosmi  are  often  expelled  by  a  conspiracy  of  their  own

colleagues,  or  of  private  individuals;  and  they  are  allowed  also  to  resign

before their term of office has expired. Surely all matters of this kind are

better regulated by law than by the will of man, which is a very unsafe rule.

Worst of all is the suspension of the office of Cosmi, a device to which the

nobles often have recourse when they will not submit to justice. This shows

that the Cretan government, although possessing some of the characteristics

of a constitutional state, is really a close oligarchy.

The nobles have a habit, too, of setting up a chief; they get together a party

among the common people and their own friends and then quarrel and fight

with one another. What is this but the temporary destruction of the state and

dissolution of society? A city is in a dangerous condition when those who are

willing are also able to attack her. But, as I have already said, the island ofCrete  is  saved  by  her  situation;  distance  has  the  same  effect  as  the

Lacedaemonian  prohibition  of  strangers;  and  the  Cretans  have  no  foreign

dominions.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  Perioeci  are  contented  in  Crete,

whereas  the  Helots  are  perpetually  revolting.  But  when  lately  foreign

invaders  found  their  way  into  the  island,  the  weakness  of  the  Cretan

constitution was revealed. Enough of the government of Crete.


XI


The  Carthaginians  are  also  considered  to  have  an  excellent  form  of

government, which differs from that of any other state in several respects,

though it is in some very like the Lacedaemonian. Indeed, all three states—

the Lacedaemonian, the Cretan, and the Carthaginian—nearly resemble one

another, and are very different from any others. Many of the Carthaginian

institutions are excellent The superiority of their constitution is proved by the

fact  that  the  common  people  remain  loyal  to  the  constitution  the

Carthaginians  have  never  had  any  rebellion  worth  speaking  of,  and  have

never been under the rule of a tyrant.

  Among the points in which the Carthaginian constitution resembles the

Lacedaemonian are the following: The common tables of the clubs answer to

the  Spartan  phiditia,  and  their  magistracy  of  the  104  to  the  Ephors;  but,

whereas  the  Ephors  are  any  chance  persons,  the  magistrates  of  the

Carthaginians are elected according to merit—this is an improvement. They

have also their kings and their gerusia, or council of elders, who correspond

to the kings and elders of Sparta. Their kings, unlike the Spartan, are not

always of the same family, nor that an ordinary one, but if there is some

distinguished family they are selected out of it and not appointed by senority

—this is far better. Such officers have great power, and therefore, if they are

persons of little worth, do a great deal of harm, and they have already done

harm at Lacedaemon.

  Most  of  the  defects  or  deviations  from  the  perfect  state,  for  which  the

Carthaginian constitution would be censured, apply equally to all the forms

of  government  which  we  have  mentioned.  But  of  the  deflections  from

aristocracy and constitutional government, some incline more to democracy

and some to oligarchy. The kings and elders, if unanimous, may determine

whether they will or will not bring a matter before the people, but when they

are not unanimous, the people decide on such matters as well. And whateverthe  kings  and  elders  bring  before  the  people  is  not  only  heard  but  also

determined by them, and any one who likes may oppose it; now this is not

permitted in Sparta and Crete. That the magistrates of five who have under

them many important matters should be co-opted, that they should choose the

supreme council of 100, and should hold office longer than other magistrates

(for they are virtually rulers both before and after they hold office)—these are

oligarchical features; their being without salary and not elected by lot, and

any  similar  points,  such  as  the  practice  of  having  all  suits  tried  by  the

magistrates,  and  not  some  by  one  class  of  judges  or  jurors  and  some  by

another, as at Lacedaemon, are characteristic of aristocracy. The Carthaginian

constitution deviates from aristocracy and inclines to oligarchy, chiefly on a

point where popular opinion is on their side. For men in general think that

magistrates should be chosen not only for their merit, but for their wealth: a

man, they say, who is poor cannot rule well—he has not the leisure. If, then,

election of magistrates for their wealth be characteristic of oligarchy, and

election for merit of aristocracy, there will be a third form under which the

constitution of Carthage is comprehended; for the Carthaginians choose their

magistrates, and particularly the highest of them—their kings and generals—

with an eye both to merit and to wealth.

But  we  must  acknowledge  that,  in  thus  deviating  from  aristocracy,  the

legislator has committed an error. Nothing is more absolutely necessary than

to provide that the highest class, not only when in office, but when out of

office, should have leisure and not disgrace themselves in any way; and to

this his attention should be first directed. Even if you must have regard to

wealth, in order to secure leisure, yet it is surely a bad thing that the greatest

offices, such as those of kings and generals, should be bought. The law which

allows this abuse makes wealth of more account than virtue, and the whole

state becomes avaricious. For, whenever the chiefs of the state deem anything

honorable, the other citizens are sure to follow their example; and, where

virtue has not the first place, their aristocracy cannot be firmly established.

Those who have been at the expense of purchasing their places will be in the

habit of repaying themselves; and it is absurd to suppose that a poor and

honest man will be wanting to make gains, and that a lower stamp of man

who has incurred a great expense will not. Wherefore they should rule who

are able to rule best. And even if the legislator does not care to protect the

good from poverty, he should at any rate secure leisure for them when in

office.It would seem also to be a bad principle that the same person should hold

many offices, which is a favorite practice among the Carthaginians, for one

business is better done by one man. The legislator should see to this and

should not appoint the same person to be a flute-player and a shoemaker.

Hence,  where  the  state  is  large,  it  is  more  in  accordance  both  with

constitutional and with democratic principles that the offices of state should

be distributed among many persons. For, as I said, this arrangement is fairer

to  all,  and  any  action  familiarized  by  repetition  is  better  and  sooner

performed.  We  have  a  proof  in  military  and  naval  matters;  the  duties  of

command and of obedience in both these services extend to all.

The government of the Carthaginians is oligarchical, but they successfully

escape the evils of oligarchy by enriching one portion of the people after

another  by  sending  them  to  their  colonies.  This  is  their  panacea  and  the

means by which they give stability to the state. Accident favors them, but the

legislator  should  be  able  to  provide  against  revolution  without  trusting  to

accidents.  As  things  are,  if  any  misfortune  occurred,  and  the  bulk  of  the

subjects revolted, there would be no way of restoring peace by legal methods.

  Such  is  the  character  of  the  Lacedaemonian,  Cretan,  and  Carthaginian

constitutions, which are justly celebrated.


XII


Of those who have treated of governments, some have never taken any part

at all in public affairs, but have passed their lives in a private station; about

most of them, what was worth telling has been already told. Others have been

lawgivers, either in their own or in foreign cities, whose affairs they have

administered; and of these some have only made laws, others have framed

constitutions;  for  example,  Lycurgus  and  Solon  did  both.  Of  the

Lacedaemonian constitution I have already spoken. As to Solon, he is thought

by some to have been a good legislator, who put an end to the exclusiveness

of the oligarchy, emancipated the people, established the ancient Athenian

democracy, and harmonized the different elements of the state. According to

their view, the council of Areopagus was an oligarchical element, the elected

magistracy,  aristocratical,  and  the  courts  of  law,  democratical.  The  truth

seems to be that the council and the elected magistracy existed before the

time of Solon, and were retained by him, but that he formed the courts of law

out of an the citizens, thus creating the democracy, which is the very reasonwhy he is sometimes blamed. For in giving the supreme power to the law

courts, which are elected by lot, he is thought to have destroyed the non-

democratic element. When the law courts grew powerful, to please the people

who were now playing the tyrant the old constitution was changed into the

existing  democracy.  Ephialtes  and  Pericles  curtailed  the  power  of  the

Areopagus; Pericles also instituted the payment of the juries, and thus every

demagogue in turn increased the power of the democracy until it became

what we now see. All this is true; it seems, however, to be the result of

circumstances,  and  not  to  have  been  intended  by  Solon.  For  the  people,

having been instrumental in gaining the empire of the sea in the Persian War,

began to get a notion of itself, and followed worthless demagogues, whom

the better class opposed. Solon, himself, appears to have given the Athenians

only that power of electing to offices and calling to account the magistrates

which was absolutely necessary; for without it they would have been in a

state  of  slavery  and  enmity  to  the  government.  All  the  magistrates  he

appointed from the notables and the men of wealth, that is to say, from the

pentacosio-medimni, or from the class called zeugitae, or from a third class of

so-called knights or cavalry. The fourth class were laborers who had no share

in any magistracy.

  Mere  legislators  were  Zaleucus,  who  gave  laws  to  the  Epizephyrian

Locrians, and Charondas, who legislated for his own city of Catana, and for

the other Chalcidian cities in Italy and Sicily. Some people attempt to make

out  that  Onomacritus  was  the  first  person  who  had  any  special  skill  in

legislation, and that he, although a Locrian by birth, was trained in Crete,

where  he  lived  in  the  exercise  of  his  prophetic  art;  that  Thales  was  his

companion,  and  that  Lycurgus  and  Zaleucus  were  disciples  of  Thales,  as

Charondas  was  of  Zaleucus.  But  their  account  is  quite  inconsistent  with

chronology.

  There was also Philolaus, the Corinthian, who gave laws to the Thebans.

This  Philolaus  was  one  of  the  family  of  the  Bacchiadae,  and  a  lover  of

Diocles, the Olympic victor, who left Corinth in horror of the incestuous

passion which his mother Halcyone had conceived for him, and retired to

Thebes, where the two friends together ended their days. The inhabitants still

point out their tombs, which are in full view of one another, but one is visible

from the Corinthian territory, the other not. Tradition says the two friends

arranged them thus, Diocles out of horror at his misfortunes, so that the land

of Corinth might not be visible from his tomb; Philolaus that it might. This isthe reason why they settled at Thebes, and so Philolaus legislated for the

Thebans,  and,  besides  some  other  enactments,  gave  them  laws  about  the

procreation of children, which they call the ‘Laws of Adoption.’ These laws

were peculiar to him, and were intended to preserve the number of the lots.

In  the  legislation  of  Charondas  there  is  nothing  remarkable,  except  the

suits against false witnesses. He is the first who instituted denunciation for

perjury. His laws are more exact and more precisely expressed than even

those of our modern legislators.

  (Characteristic  of  Phaleas  is  the  equalization  of  property;  of  Plato,  the

community of women, children, and property, the common meals of women,

and the law about drinking, that the sober shall be masters of the feast; also

the training of soldiers to acquire by practice equal skill with both hands, so

that one should be as useful as the other.)

  Draco has left laws, but he adapted them to a constitution which already

existed, and there is no peculiarity in them which is worth mentioning, except

the greatness and severity of the punishments.

  Pittacus, too, was only a lawgiver, and not the author of a constitution; he

has a law which is peculiar to him, that, if a drunken man do something

wrong, he shall be more heavily punished than if he were sober; he looked

not  to  the  excuse  which  might  be  offered  for  the  drunkard,  but  only  to

expediency,  for  drunken  more  often  than  sober  people  commit  acts  of

violence.

  Androdamas of Rhegium gave laws to the Chalcidians of Thrace. Some of

them relate to homicide, and to heiresses; but there is nothing remarkable in

them.

And here let us conclude our inquiry into the various constitutions which

either actually exist, or have been devised by theorists.                                Politics, Book III


Translated by Benjamin Jowett


<

div id="book3" class="book">


I


He who would inquire into the essence and attributes of various kinds of

governments must first of all determine ‘What is a state?’ At present this is a

disputed question. Some say that the state has done a certain act; others, no,

not the state, but the oligarchy or the tyrant. And the legislator or statesman is

concerned  entirely  with  the  state;  a  constitution  or  government  being  an

arrangement of the inhabitants of a state. But a state is composite, like any

other whole made up of many parts; these are the citizens, who compose it. It

is evident, therefore, that we must begin by asking, Who is the citizen, and

what is the meaning of the term? For here again there may be a difference of

opinion. He who is a citizen in a democracy will often not be a citizen in an

oligarchy. Leaving out of consideration those who have been made citizens,

or who have obtained the name of citizen any other accidental manner, we

may say, first, that a citizen is not a citizen because he lives in a certain place,

for resident aliens and slaves share in the place; nor is he a citizen who has no

legal right except that of suing and being sued; for this right may be enjoyed

under the provisions of a treaty. Nay, resident aliens in many places do not

possess even such rights completely, for they are obliged to have a patron, so

that  they  do  but  imperfectly  participate  in  citizenship,  and  we  call  them

citizens only in a qualified sense, as we might apply the term to children who

are too young to be on the register, or to old men who have been relieved

from state duties. Of these we do not say quite simply that they are citizens,

but add in the one case that they are not of age, and in the other, that they are

past the age, or something of that sort; the precise expression is immaterial,

for our meaning is clear. Similar difficulties to those which I have mentioned

may be raised and answered about deprived citizens and about exiles. But the

citizen  whom  we  are  seeking  to  define  is  a  citizen  in  the  strictest  sense,against whom no such exception can be taken, and his special characteristic is

that he shares in the administration of justice, and in offices. Now of offices

some are discontinuous, and the same persons are not allowed to hold them

twice, or can only hold them after a fixed interval; others have no limit of

time—for example, the office of a dicast or ecclesiast. It may, indeed, be

argued that these are not magistrates at all, and that their functions give them

no share in the government. But surely it is ridiculous to say that those who

have the power do not govern. Let us not dwell further upon this, which is a

purely verbal question; what we want is a common term including both dicast

and ecclesiast. Let us, for the sake of distinction, call it ‘indefinite office,’

and we will assume that those who share in such office are citizens. This is

the most comprehensive definition of a citizen, and best suits all those who

are generally so called.

But we must not forget that things of which the underlying principles differ

in kind, one of them being first, another second, another third, have, when

regarded in this relation, nothing, or hardly anything, worth mentioning in

common. Now we see that governments differ in kind, and that some of them

are prior and that others are posterior; those which are faulty or perverted are

necessarily  posterior  to  those  which  are  perfect.  (What  we  mean  by

perversion will be hereafter explained.) The citizen then of necessity differs

under each form of government; and our definition is best adapted to the

citizen of a democracy; but not necessarily to other states. For in some states

the people are not acknowledged, nor have they any regular assembly, but

only  extraordinary  ones;  and  suits  are  distributed  by  sections  among  the

magistrates. At Lacedaemon, for instance, the Ephors determine suits about

contracts,  which  they  distribute  among  themselves,  while  the  elders  are

judges of homicide, and other causes are decided by other magistrates. A

similar  principle  prevails  at  Carthage;  there  certain  magistrates  decide  all

causes. We may, indeed, modify our definition of the citizen so as to include

these states. In them it is the holder of a definite, not of an indefinite office,

who legislates and judges, and to some or all such holders of definite offices

is reserved the right of deliberating or judging about some things or about all

things. The conception of the citizen now begins to clear up.

He  who  has  the  power  to  take  part  in  the  deliberative  or  judicial

administration of any state is said by us to be a citizens of that state; and,

speaking generally, a state is a body of citizens sufficing for the purposes of

life.II


But in practice a citizen is defined to be one of whom both the parents are

citizens; others insist on going further back; say to two or three or more

ancestors. This is a short and practical definition but there are some who raise

the further question: How this third or fourth ancestor came to be a citizen?

Gorgias of Leontini, partly because he was in a difficulty, partly in irony, said

—‘Mortars  are  what  is  made  by  the  mortar-makers,  and  the  citizens  of

Larissa are those who are made by the magistrates; for it is their trade to

make Larissaeans.’ Yet the question is really simple, for, if according to the

definition just given they shared in the government, they were citizens. This

is a better definition than the other. For the words, ‘born of a father or mother

who is a citizen,’ cannot possibly apply to the first inhabitants or founders of

a state.

  There  is  a  greater  difficulty  in  the  case  of  those  who  have  been  made

citizens after a revolution, as by Cleisthenes at Athens after the expulsion of

the tyrants, for he enrolled in tribes many metics, both strangers and slaves.

The doubt in these cases is, not who is, but whether he who is ought to be a

citizen; and there will still be a furthering the state, whether a certain act is or

is not an act of the state; for what ought not to be is what is false. Now, there

are  some  who  hold  office,  and  yet  ought  not  to  hold  office,  whom  we

describe as ruling, but ruling unjustly. And the citizen was defined by the fact

of  his  holding  some  kind  of  rule  or  office—he  who  holds  a  judicial  or

legislative office fulfills our definition of a citizen. It is evident, therefore,

that the citizens about whom the doubt has arisen must be called citizens.


III


  Whether they ought to be so or not is a question which is bound up with

the previous inquiry. For a parallel question is raised respecting the state,

whether a certain act is or is not an act of the state; for example, in the

transition  from  an  oligarchy  or  a  tyranny  to  a  democracy.  In  such  cases

persons refuse to fulfill their contracts or any other obligations, on the ground

that  the  tyrant,  and  not  the  state,  contracted  them;  they  argue  that  some

constitutions are established by force, and not for the sake of the common

good.  But  this  would  apply  equally  to  democracies,  for  they  too  may  be

founded on violence, and then the acts of the democracy will be neither morenor  less  acts  of  the  state  in  question  than  those  of  an  oligarchy  or  of  a

tyranny. This question runs up into another: on what principle shall we ever

say that the state is the same, or different? It would be a very superficial view

which considered only the place and the inhabitants (for the soil and the

population may be separated, and some of the inhabitants may live in one

place and some in another). This, however, is not a very serious difficulty; we

need only remark that the word ‘state’ is ambiguous.

It is further asked: When are men, living in the same place, to be regarded

as a single city—what is the limit? Certainly not the wall of the city, for you

might  surround  all  Peloponnesus  with  a  wall.  Like  this,  we  may  say,  is

Babylon, and every city that has the compass of a nation rather than a city;

Babylon, they say, had been taken for three days before some part of the

inhabitants  became  aware  of  the  fact.  This  difficulty  may,  however,  with

advantage be deferred to another occasion; the statesman has to consider the

size of the state, and whether it should consist of more than one nation or not.

  Again, shall we say that while the race of inhabitants, as well as their place

of abode, remain the same, the city is also the same, although the citizens are

always  dying  and  being  born,  as  we  call  rivers  and  fountains  the  same,

although the water is always flowing away and coming again Or shall we say

that the generations of men, like the rivers, are the same, but that the state

changes? For, since the state is a partnership, and is a partnership of citizens

in  a  constitution,  when  the  form  of  government  changes,  and  becomes

different, then it may be supposed that the state is no longer the same, just as

a tragic differs from a comic chorus, although the members of both may be

identical. And in this manner we speak of every union or composition of

elements as different when the form of their composition alters; for example,

a scale containing the same sounds is said to be different, accordingly as the

Dorian or the Phrygian mode is employed. And if this is true it is evident that

the sameness of the state consists chiefly in the sameness of the constitution,

and it may be called or not called by the same name, whether the inhabitants

are the same or entirely different. It is quite another question, whether a state

ought  or  ought  not  to  fulfill  engagements  when  the  form  of  government

changes.


IV


  There is a point nearly allied to the preceding: Whether the virtue of a goodman  and  a  good  citizen  is  the  same  or  not.  But,  before  entering  on  this

discussion, we must certainly first obtain some general notion of the virtue of

the citizen. Like the sailor, the citizen is a member of a community. Now,

sailors have different functions, for one of them is a rower, another a pilot,

and a third a look-out man, a fourth is described by some similar term; and

while the precise definition of each individual’s virtue applies exclusively to

him, there is, at the same time, a common definition applicable to them all.

For they have all of them a common object, which is safety in navigation.

Similarly,  one  citizen  differs  from  another,  but  the  salvation  of  the

community  is  the  common  business  of  them  all.  This  community  is  the

constitution;  the  virtue  of  the  citizen  must  therefore  be  relative  to  the

constitution  of  which  he  is  a  member.  If,  then,  there  are  many  forms  of

government, it is evident that there is not one single virtue of the good citizen

which is perfect virtue. But we say that the good man is he who has one

single virtue which is perfect virtue. Hence it is evident that the good citizen

need not of necessity possess the virtue which makes a good man.

The  same  question  may  also  be  approached  by  another  road,  from  a

consideration  of  the  best  constitution.  If  the  state  cannot  be  entirely

composed  of  good  men,  and  yet  each  citizen  is  expected  to  do  his  own

business  well,  and  must  therefore  have  virtue,  still  inasmuch  as  all  the

citizens cannot be alike, the virtue of the citizen and of the good man cannot

coincide. All must have the virtue of the good citizen—thus, and thus only,

can the state be perfect; but they will not have the virtue of a good man,

unless we assume that in the good state all the citizens must be good.

  Again, the state, as composed of unlikes, may be compared to the living

being: as the first elements into which a living being is resolved are soul and

body, as soul is made up of rational principle and appetite, the family of

husband and wife, property of master and slave, so of all these, as well as

other dissimilar elements, the state is composed; and, therefore, the virtue of

all the citizens cannot possibly be the same, any more than the excellence of

the leader of a chorus is the same as that of the performer who stands by his

side. I have said enough to show why the two kinds of virtue cannot be

absolutely and always the same.

But will there then be no case in which the virtue of the good citizen and

the virtue of the good man coincide? To this we answer that the good ruler is

a good and wise man, and that he who would be a statesman must be a wise

man. And some persons say that even the education of the ruler should be ofa  special  kind;  for  are  not  the  children  of  kings  instructed  in  riding  and

military exercises? As Euripides says:


No subtle arts for me, but what the state requires.


As though there were a special education needed by a ruler. If then the

virtue of a good ruler is the same as that of a good man, and we assume

further that the subject is a citizen as well as the ruler, the virtue of the good

citizen  and  the  virtue  of  the  good  man  cannot  be  absolutely  the  same,

although in some cases they may; for the virtue of a ruler differs from that of

a citizen. It was the sense of this difference which made Jason say that ‘he

felt hungry when he was not a tyrant,’ meaning that he could not endure to

live in a private station. But, on the other hand, it may be argued that men are

praised for knowing both how to rule and how to obey, and he is said to be a

citizen of approved virtue who is able to do both. Now if we suppose the

virtue of a good man to be that which rules, and the virtue of the citizen to

include ruling and obeying, it cannot be said that they are equally worthy of

praise. Since, then, it is sometimes thought that the ruler and the ruled must

learn different things and not the same, but that the citizen must know and

share in them both, the inference is obvious. There is, indeed, the rule of a

master, which is concerned with menial offices—the master need not know

how to perform these, but may employ others in the execution of them: the

other would be degrading; and by the other I mean the power actually to do

menial duties, which vary much in character and are executed by various

classes of slaves, such, for example, as handicraftsmen, who, as their name

signifies,  live  by  the  labor  of  their  hands:  under  these  the  mechanic  is

included.  Hence  in  ancient  times,  and  among  some  nations,  the  working

classes  had  no  share  in  the  government—a  privilege  which  they  only

acquired  under  the  extreme  democracy.  Certainly  the  good  man  and  the

statesman and the good citizen ought not to learn the crafts of inferiors except

for their own occasional use; if they habitually practice them, there will cease

to be a distinction between master and slave.

This is not the rule of which we are speaking; but there is a rule of another

kind, which is exercised over freemen and equals by birth -a constitutional

rule, which the ruler must learn by obeying, as he would learn the duties of a

general of cavalry by being under the orders of a general of cavalry, or the

duties of a general of infantry by being under the orders of a general ofinfantry, and by having had the command of a regiment and of a company. It

has been well said that ‘he who has never learned to obey cannot be a good

commander.’ The two are not the same, but the good citizen ought to be

capable of both; he should know how to govern like a freeman, and how to

obey like a freeman—these are the virtues of a citizen. And, although the

temperance and justice of a ruler are distinct from those of a subject, the

virtue of a good man will include both; for the virtue of the good man who is

free and also a subject, e.g., his justice, will not be one but will comprise

distinct kinds, the one qualifying him to rule, the other to obey, and differing

as the temperance and courage of men and women differ. For a man would be

thought a coward if he had no more courage than a courageous woman, and a

woman would be thought loquacious if she imposed no more restraint on her

conversation than the good man; and indeed their part in the management of

the household is different, for the duty of the one is to acquire, and of the

other to preserve. Practical wisdom only is characteristic of the ruler: it would

seem  that  all  other  virtues  must  equally  belong  to  ruler  and  subject.  The

virtue of the subject is certainly not wisdom, but only true opinion; he may be

compared to the maker of the flute, while his master is like the flute-player or

user of the flute.

  From these considerations may be gathered the answer to the question,

whether the virtue of the good man is the same as that of the good citizen, or

different, and how far the same, and how far different.


V


  There still remains one more question about the citizen: Is he only a true

citizen who has a share of office, or is the mechanic to be included? If they

who hold no office are to be deemed citizens, not every citizen can have this

virtue of ruling and obeying; for this man is a citizen And if none of the

lower class are citizens, in which part of the state are they to be placed? For

they are not resident aliens, and they are not foreigners. May we not reply,

that as far as this objection goes there is no more absurdity in excluding them

than  in  excluding  slaves  and  freedmen  from  any  of  the  above-mentioned

classes? It must be admitted that we cannot consider all those to be citizens

who are necessary to the existence of the state; for example, children are not

citizen equally with grown-up men, who are citizens absolutely, but children,

not being grown up, are only citizens on a certain assumption. Nay, in ancienttimes, and among some nations the artisan class were slaves or foreigners,

and therefore the majority of them are so now. The best form of state will not

admit them to citizenship; but if they are admitted, then our definition of the

virtue of a citizen will not apply to every citizen nor to every free man as

such, but only to those who are freed from necessary services. The necessary

people  are  either  slaves  who  minister  to  the  wants  of  individuals,  or

mechanics  and  laborers  who  are  the  servants  of  the  community.  These

reflections carried a little further will explain their position; and indeed what

has been said already is of itself, when understood, explanation enough.

  Since there are many forms of government there must be many varieties of

citizen  and  especially  of  citizens  who  are  subjects;  so  that  under  some

governments the mechanic and the laborer will be citizens, but not in others,

as, for example, in aristocracy or the so-called government of the best (if

there be such an one), in which honors are given according to virtue and

merit; for no man can practice virtue who is living the life of a mechanic or

laborer. In oligarchies the qualification for office is high, and therefore no

laborer can ever be a citizen; but a mechanic may, for an actual majority of

them are rich. At Thebes there was a law that no man could hold office who

had not retired from business for ten years. But in many states the law goes to

the length of admitting aliens; for in some democracies a man is a citizen

though his mother only be a citizen; and a similar principle is applied to

illegitimate children; the law is relaxed when there is a dearth of population.

But when the number of citizens increases, first the children of a male or a

female slave are excluded; then those whose mothers only are citizens; and at

last the right of citizenship is confined to those whose fathers and mothers are

both citizens.

  Hence, as is evident, there are different kinds of citizens; and he is a citizen

in the highest sense who shares in the honors of the state. Compare Homer’s

words, ‘like some dishonored stranger’; he who is excluded from the honors

of the state is no better than an alien. But when his exclusion is concealed,

then  the  object  is  that  the  privileged  class  may  deceive  their  fellow

inhabitants.

As to the question whether the virtue of the good man is the same as that of

the good citizen, the considerations already adduced prove that in some states

the good man and the good citizen are the same, and in others different.

When they are the same it is not every citizen who is a good man, but only

the statesman and those who have or may have, alone or in conjunction withothers, the conduct of public affairs.


VI


  Having determined these questions, we have next to consider whether there

is only one form of government or many, and if many, what they are, and

how many, and what are the differences between them.

A constitution is the arrangement of magistracies in a state, especially of

the highest of all. The government is everywhere sovereign in the state, and

the constitution is in fact the government. For example, in democracies the

people are supreme, but in oligarchies, the few; and, therefore, we say that

these two forms of government also are different: and so in other cases.

First, let us consider what is the purpose of a state, and how many forms of

government there are by which human society is regulated. We have already

said, in the first part of this treatise, when discussing household management

and  the  rule  of  a  master,  that  man  is  by  nature  a  political  animal.  And

therefore, men, even when they do not require one another’s help, desire to

live together; not but that they are also brought together by their common

interests in proportion as they severally attain to any measure of well-being.

This is certainly the chief end, both of individuals and of states. And also for

the sake of mere life (in which there is possibly some noble element so long

as the evils of existence do not greatly overbalance the good) mankind meet

together and maintain the political community. And we all see that men cling

to life even at the cost of enduring great misfortune, seeming to find in life a

natural sweetness and happiness.

  There is no difficulty in distinguishing the various kinds of authority; they

have been often defined already in discussions outside the school. The rule of

a master, although the slave by nature and the master by nature have in reality

the  same  interests,  is  nevertheless  exercised  primarily  with  a  view  to  the

interest of the master, but accidentally considers the slave, since, if the slave

perish,  the  rule  of  the  master  perishes  with  him.  On  the  other  hand,  the

government of a wife and children and of a household, which we have called

household management, is exercised in the first instance for the good of the

governed or for the common good of both parties, but essentially for the good

of the governed, as we see to be the case in medicine, gymnastic, and the arts

in general, which are only accidentally concerned with the good of the artists

themselves.  For  there  is  no  reason  why  the  trainer  may  not  sometimespractice gymnastics, and the helmsman is always one of the crew. The trainer

or the helmsman considers the good of those committed to his care. But,

when he is one of the persons taken care of, he accidentally participates in the

advantage, for the helmsman is also a sailor, and the trainer becomes one of

those  in  training.  And  so  in  politics:  when  the  state  is  framed  upon  the

principle of equality and likeness, the citizens think that they ought to hold

office by turns. Formerly, as is natural, every one would take his turn of

service; and then again, somebody else would look after his interest, just as

he, while in office, had looked after theirs. But nowadays, for the sake of the

advantage which is to be gained from the public revenues and from office,

men want to be always in office. One might imagine that the rulers, being

sickly, were only kept in health while they continued in office; in that case

we may be sure that they would be hunting after places. The conclusion is

evident: that governments which have a regard to the common interest are

constituted in accordance with strict principles of justice, and are therefore

true  forms;  but  those  which  regard  only  the  interest  of  the  rulers  are  all

defective and perverted forms, for they are despotic, whereas a state is a

community of freemen.


VII


  Having determined these points, we have next to consider how many forms

of government there are, and what they are; and in the first place what are the

true forms, for when they are determined the perversions of them will at once

be apparent. The words constitution and government have the same meaning,

and the government, which is the supreme authority in states, must be in the

hands of one, or of a few, or of the many. The true forms of government,

therefore, are those in which the one, or the few, or the many, govern with a

view to the common interest; but governments which rule with a view to the

private  interest,  whether  of  the  one  or  of  the  few,  or  of  the  many,  are

perversions. For the members of a state, if they are truly citizens, ought to

participate in its advantages. Of forms of government in which one rules, we

call that which regards the common interests, kingship or royalty; that in

which more than one, but not many, rule, aristocracy; and it is so called,

either because the rulers are the best men, or because they have at heart the

best interests of the state and of the citizens. But when the citizens at large

administer the state for the common interest, the government is called by thegeneric name—a constitution. And there is a reason for this use of language.

One  man  or  a  few  may  excel  in  virtue;  but  as  the  number  increases  it

becomes more difficult for them to attain perfection in every kind of virtue,

though they may in military virtue, for this is found in the masses. Hence in a

constitutional  government  the  fighting-men  have  the  supreme  power,  and

those who possess arms are the citizens.

Of the above-mentioned forms, the perversions are as follows: of royalty,

tyranny; of aristocracy, oligarchy; of constitutional government, democracy.

For tyranny is a kind of monarchy which has in view the interest of the

monarch only; oligarchy has in view the interest of the wealthy; democracy,

of the needy: none of them the common good of all.


VIII


But  there  are  difficulties  about  these  forms  of  government,  and  it  will

therefore be necessary to state a little more at length the nature of each of

them. For he who would make a philosophical study of the various sciences,

and does not regard practice only, ought not to overlook or omit anything, but

to  set  forth  the  truth  in  every  particular.  Tyranny,  as  I  was  saying,  is

monarchy exercising the rule of a master over the political society; oligarchy

is when men of property have the government in their hands; democracy, the

opposite, when the indigent, and not the men of property, are the rulers. And

here arises the first of our difficulties, and it relates to the distinction drawn.

For democracy is said to be the government of the many. But what if the

many are men of property and have the power in their hands? In like manner

oligarchy is said to be the government of the few; but what if the poor are

fewer  than  the  rich,  and  have  the  power  in  their  hands  because  they  are

stronger? In these cases the distinction which we have drawn between these

different forms of government would no longer hold good.

  Suppose, once more, that we add wealth to the few and poverty to the

many, and name the governments accordingly—an oligarchy is said to be that

in which the few and the wealthy, and a democracy that in which the many

and the poor are the rulers—there will still be a difficulty. For, if the only

forms of government are the ones already mentioned, how shall we describe

those other governments also just mentioned by us, in which the rich are the

more  numerous  and  the  poor  are  the  fewer,  and  both  govern  in  their

respective states?The  argument  seems  to  show  that,  whether  in  oligarchies  or  in

democracies, the number of the governing body, whether the greater number,

as in a democracy, or the smaller number, as in an oligarchy, is an accident

due to the fact that the rich everywhere are few, and the poor numerous. But

if  so,  there  is  a  misapprehension  of  the  causes  of  the  difference  between

them. For the real difference between democracy and oligarchy is poverty

and wealth. Wherever men rule by reason of their wealth, whether they be

few  or  many,  that  is  an  oligarchy,  and  where  the  poor  rule,  that  is  a

democracy. But as a fact the rich are few and the poor many; for few are

well-to-do, whereas freedom is enjoyed by an, and wealth and freedom are

the grounds on which the oligarchical and democratical parties respectively

claim power in the state.


IX


Let  us  begin  by  considering  the  common  definitions  of  oligarchy  and

democracy, and what is justice oligarchical and democratical. For all men

cling to justice of some kind, but their conceptions are imperfect and they do

not express the whole idea. For example, justice is thought by them to be, and

is,  equality,  not.  however,  for  however,  for  but  only  for  equals.  And

inequality is thought to be, and is, justice; neither is this for all, but only for

unequals. When the persons are omitted, then men judge erroneously. The

reason is that they are passing judgment on themselves, and most people are

bad  judges  in  their  own  case.  And  whereas  justice  implies  a  relation  to

persons as well as to things, and a just distribution, as I have already said in

the  Ethics,  implies  the  same  ratio  between  the  persons  and  between  the

things,  they  agree  about  the  equality  of  the  things,  but  dispute  about  the

equality  of  the  persons,  chiefly  for  the  reason  which  I  have  just  given—

because they are bad judges in their own affairs; and secondly, because both

the parties to the argument are speaking of a limited and partial justice, but

imagine themselves to be speaking of absolute justice. For the one party, if

they are unequal in one respect, for example wealth, consider themselves to

be unequal in all; and the other party, if they are equal in one respect, for

example free birth, consider themselves to be equal in all. But they leave out

the capital point. For if men met and associated out of regard to wealth only,

their  share  in  the  state  would  be  proportioned  to  their  property,  and  the

oligarchical doctrine would then seem to carry the day. It would not be justthat he who paid one mina should have the same share of a hundred minae,

whether  of  the  principal  or  of  the  profits,  as  he  who  paid  the  remaining

ninety-nine. But a state exists for the sake of a good life, and not for the sake

of life only: if life only were the object, slaves and brute animals might form

a state, but they cannot, for they have no share in happiness or in a life of free

choice.  Nor  does  a  state  exist  for  the  sake  of  alliance  and  security  from

injustice, nor yet for the sake of exchange and mutual intercourse; for then

the Tyrrhenians and the Carthaginians, and all who have commercial treaties

with  one  another,  would  be  the  citizens  of  one  state.  True,  they  have

agreements about imports, and engagements that they will do no wrong to

one another, and written articles of alliance. But there are no magistrates

common  to  the  contracting  parties  who  will  enforce  their  engagements;

different states have each their own magistracies. Nor does one state take care

that the citizens of the other are such as they ought to be, nor see that those

who come under the terms of the treaty do no wrong or wickedness at an, but

only that they do no injustice to one another. Whereas, those who care for

good government take into consideration virtue and vice in states. Whence it

may be further inferred that virtue must be the care of a state which is truly so

called, and not merely enjoys the name: for without this end the community

becomes a mere alliance which differs only in place from alliances of which

the members live apart; and law is only a convention, ‘a surety to one another

of justice,’ as the sophist Lycophron says, and has no real power to make the

citizens

This is obvious; for suppose distinct places, such as Corinth and Megara,

to be brought together so that their walls touched, still they would not be one

city, not even if the citizens had the right to intermarry, which is one of the

rights peculiarly characteristic of states. Again, if men dwelt at a distance

from one another, but not so far off as to have no intercourse, and there were

laws among them that they should not wrong each other in their exchanges,

neither would this be a state. Let us suppose that one man is a carpenter,

another a husbandman, another a shoemaker, and so on, and that their number

is ten thousand: nevertheless, if they have nothing in common but exchange,

alliance, and the like, that would not constitute a state. Why is this? Surely

not because they are at a distance from one another: for even supposing that

such a community were to meet in one place, but that each man had a house

of his own, which was in a manner his state, and that they made alliance with

one another, but only against evil-doers; still an accurate thinker would notdeem this to be a state, if their intercourse with one another was of the same

character after as before their union. It is clear then that a state is not a mere

society, having a common place, established for the prevention of mutual

crime and for the sake of exchange. These are conditions without which a

state cannot exist; but all of them together do not constitute a state, which is a

community of families and aggregations of families in well-being, for the

sake  of  a  perfect  and  self-sufficing  life.  Such  a  community  can  only  be

established among those who live in the same place and intermarry. Hence

arise  in  cities  family  connections,  brotherhoods,  common  sacrifices,

amusements which draw men together. But these are created by friendship,

for the will to live together is friendship. The end of the state is the good life,

and these are the means towards it. And the state is the union of families and

villages in a perfect and self-sufficing life, by which we mean a happy and

honorable life.

Our conclusion, then, is that political society exists for the sake of noble

actions, and not of mere companionship. Hence they who contribute most to

such a society have a greater share in it than those who have the same or a

greater freedom or nobility of birth but are inferior to them in political virtue;

or than those who exceed them in wealth but are surpassed by them in virtue.

  From what has been said it will be clearly seen that all the partisans of

different forms of government speak of a part of justice only.


X


  There is also a doubt as to what is to be the supreme power in the state: Is

it the multitude? Or the wealthy? Or the good? Or the one best man? Or a

tyrant?  Any  of  these  alternatives  seems  to  involve  disagreeable

consequences. If the poor, for example, because they are more in number,

divide among themselves the property of the rich—is not this unjust? No, by

heaven (will be the reply), for the supreme authority justly willed it. But if

this is not injustice, pray what is? Again, when in the first division all has

been taken, and the majority divide anew the property of the minority, is it

not evident, if this goes on, that they will ruin the state? Yet surely, virtue is

not the ruin of those who possess her, nor is justice destructive of a state; and

therefore this law of confiscation clearly cannot be just. If it were, all the acts

of  a  tyrant  must  of  necessity  be  just;  for  he  only  coerces  other  men  by

superior power, just as the multitude coerce the rich. But is it just then thatthe  few  and  the  wealthy  should  be  the  rulers?  And  what  if  they,  in  like

manner, rob and plunder the people—is this just? if so, the other case will

likewise be just. But there can be no doubt that all these things are wrong and

unjust.

  Then ought the good to rule and have supreme power? But in that case

everybody  else,  being  excluded  from  power,  will  be  dishonored.  For  the

offices of a state are posts of honor; and if one set of men always holds them,

the rest must be deprived of them. Then will it be well that the one best man

should rule? Nay, that is still more oligarchical, for the number of those who

are dishonored is thereby increased. Some one may say that it is bad in any

case for a man, subject as he is to all the accidents of human passion, to have

the  supreme  power,  rather  than  the  law.  But  what  if  the  law  itself  be

democratical or oligarchical, how will that help us out of our difficulties? Not

at all; the same consequences will follow.


XI


  Most  of  these  questions  may  be  reserved  for  another  occasion.  The

principle that the multitude ought to be supreme rather than the few best is

one that is maintained, and, though not free from difficulty, yet seems to

contain an element of truth. For the many, of whom each individual is but an

ordinary person, when they meet together may very likely be better than the

few  good,  if  regarded  not  individually  but  collectively,  just  as  a  feast  to

which many contribute is better than a dinner provided out of a single purse.

For each individual among the many has a share of virtue and prudence, and

when they meet together, they become in a manner one man, who has many

feet, and hands, and senses; that is a figure of their mind and disposition.

Hence the many are better judges than a single man of music and poetry; for

some  understand  one  part,  and  some  another,  and  among  them  they

understand the whole. There is a similar combination of qualities in good

men, who differ from any individual of the many, as the beautiful are said to

differ  from  those  who  are  not  beautiful,  and  works  of  art  from  realities,

because  in  them  the  scattered  elements  are  combined,  although,  if  taken

separately, the eye of one person or some other feature in another person

would be fairer than in the picture. Whether this principle can apply to every

democracy, and to all bodies of men, is not clear. Or rather, by heaven, in

some cases it is impossible of application; for the argument would equallyhold about brutes; and wherein, it will be asked, do some men differ from

brutes?  But  there  may  be  bodies  of  men  about  whom  our  statement  is

nevertheless true. And if so, the difficulty which has been already raised, and

also another which is akin to it —viz., what power should be assigned to the

mass of freemen and citizens, who are not rich and have no personal merit—

are both solved. There is still a danger in aflowing them to share the great

offices of state, for their folly will lead them into error, and their dishonesty

into crime. But there is a danger also in not letting them share, for a state in

which many poor men are excluded from office will necessarily be full of

enemies. The only way of escape is to assign to them some deliberative and

judicial functions. For this reason Solon and certain other legislators give

them  the  power  of  electing  to  offices,  and  of  calling  the  magistrates  to

account, but they do not allow them to hold office singly. When they meet

together  their  perceptions  are  quite  good  enough,  and  combined  with  the

better class they are useful to the state (just as impure food when mixed with

what is pure sometimes makes the entire mass more wholesome than a small

quantity of the pure would be), but each individual, left to himself, forms an

imperfect  judgment.  On  the  other  hand,  the  popular  form  of  government

involves certain difficulties. In the first place, it might be objected that he

who can judge of the healing of a sick man would be one who could himself

heal his disease, and make him whole—that is, in other words, the physician;

and so in all professions and arts. As, then, the physician ought to be called to

account by physicians, so ought men in general to be called to account by

their  peers.  But  physicians  are  of  three  kinds:  there  is  the  ordinary

practitioner, and there is the physician of the higher class, and thirdly the

intelligent man who has studied the art: in all arts there is such a class; and

we attribute the power of judging to them quite as much as to professors of

the art. Secondly, does not the same principle apply to elections? For a right

election can only be made by those who have knowledge; those who know

geometry, for example, will choose a geometrician rightly, and those who

know how to steer, a pilot; and, even if there be some occupations and arts in

which private persons share in the ability to choose, they certainly cannot

choose  better  than  those  who  know.  So  that,  according  to  this  argument,

neither the election of magistrates, nor the calling of them to account, should

be entrusted to the many. Yet possibly these objections are to a great extent

met by our old answer, that if the people are not utterly degraded, although

individually  they  may  be  worse  judges  than  those  who  have  specialknowledge—as a body they are as good or better. Moreover, there are some

arts  whose  products  are  not  judged  of  solely,  or  best,  by  the  artists

themselves, namely those arts whose products are recognized even by those

who do not possess the art; for example, the knowledge of the house is not

limited to the builder only; the user, or, in other words, the master, of the

house will be even a better judge than the builder, just as the pilot will judge

better of a rudder than the carpenter, and the guest will judge better of a feast

than the cook.

This difficulty seems now to be sufficiently answered, but there is another

akin to it. That inferior persons should have authority in greater matters than

the good would appear to be a strange thing, yet the election and calling to

account of the magistrates is the greatest of all. And these, as I was saying,

are  functions  which  in  some  states  are  assigned  to  the  people,  for  the

assembly is supreme in all such matters. Yet persons of any age, and having

but  a  small  property  qualification,  sit  in  the  assembly  and  deliberate  and

judge, although for the great officers of state, such as treasurers and generals,

a high qualification is required. This difficulty may be solved in the same

manner as the preceding, and the present practice of democracies may be

really defensible. For the power does not reside in the dicast, or senator, or

ecclesiast,  but  in  the  court,  and  the  senate,  and  the  assembly,  of  which

individual senators, or ecclesiasts, or dicasts, are only parts or members. And

for this reason the many may claim to have a higher authority than the few;

for the people, and the senate, and the courts consist of many persons, and

their property collectively is greater than the property of one or of a few

individuals holding great offices. But enough of this.

The discussion of the first question shows nothing so clearly as that laws,

when good, should be supreme; and that the magistrate or magistrates should

regulate  those  matters  only  on  which  the  laws  are  unable  to  speak  with

precision  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  any  general  principle  embracing  all

particulars. But what are good laws has not yet been clearly explained; the

old difficulty remains. The goodness or badness, justice or injustice, of laws

varies of necessity with the constitutions of states. This, however, is clear,

that the laws must be adapted to the constitutions. But if so, true forms of

government  will  of  necessity  have  just  laws,  and  perverted  forms  of

government will have unjust laws.


XIIIn all sciences and arts the end is a good, and the greatest good and in the

highest degree a good in the most authoritative of all—this is the political

science of which the good is justice, in other words, the common interest. All

men think justice to be a sort of equality; and to a certain extent they agree in

the philosophical distinctions which have been laid down by us about Ethics.

For they admit that justice is a thing and has a relation to persons, and that

equals ought to have equality. But there still remains a question: equality or

inequality of what? Here is a difficulty which calls for political speculation.

For  very  likely  some  persons  will  say  that  offices  of  state  ought  to  be

unequally distributed according to superior excellence, in whatever respect,

of the citizen, although there is no other difference between him and the rest

of the community; for that those who differ in any one respect have different

rights and claims. But, surely, if this is true, the complexion or height of a

man, or any other advantage, will be a reason for his obtaining a greater share

of political rights. The error here lies upon the surface, and may be illustrated

from the other arts and sciences. When a number of flute players are equal in

their art, there is no reason why those of them who are better born should

have better flutes given to them; for they will not play any better on the flute,

and the superior instrument should be reserved for him who is the superior

artist. If what I am saying is still obscure, it will be made clearer as we

proceed. For if there were a superior flute-player who was far inferior in birth

and beauty, although either of these may be a greater good than the art of

flute-playing, and may excel flute-playing in a greater ratio than he excels the

others in his art, still he ought to have the best flutes given to him, unless the

advantages  of  wealth  and  birth  contribute  to  excellence  in  flute-playing,

which they do not. Moreover, upon this principle any good may be compared

with any other. For if a given height may be measured wealth and against

freedom, height in general may be so measured. Thus if A excels in height

more than B in virtue, even if virtue in general excels height still more, all

goods will be commensurable; for if a certain amount is better than some

other, it is clear that some other will be equal. But since no such comparison

can be made, it is evident that there is good reason why in politics men do not

ground their claim to office on every sort of inequality any more than in the

arts. For if some be slow, and others swift, that is no reason why the one

should have little and the others much; it is in gymnastics contests that such

excellence is rewarded. Whereas the rival claims of candidates for office can

only be based on the possession of elements which enter into the compositionof a state. And therefore the noble, or free-born, or rich, may with good

reason claim office; for holders of offices must be freemen and taxpayers: a

state can be no more composed entirely of poor men than entirely of slaves.

But  if  wealth  and  freedom  are  necessary  elements,  justice  and  valor  are

equally so; for without the former qualities a state cannot exist at all, without

the latter not well.


XIII


If the existence of the state is alone to be considered, then it would seem

that all, or some at least, of these claims are just; but, if we take into account

a good life, then, as I have already said, education and virtue have superior

claims. As, however, those who are equal in one thing ought not to have an

equal share in all, nor those who are unequal in one thing to have an unequal

share in all, it is certain that all forms of government which rest on either of

these principles are perversions. All men have a claim in a certain sense, as I

have already admitted, but all have not an absolute claim. The rich claim

because  they  have  a  greater  share  in  the  land,  and  land  is  the  common

element of the state; also they are generally more trustworthy in contracts.

The free claim under the same tide as the noble; for they are nearly akin. For

the noble are citizens in a truer sense than the ignoble, and good birth is

always valued in a man’s own home and country. Another reason is, that

those who are sprung from better ancestors are likely to be better men, for

nobility is excellence of race. Virtue, too, may be truly said to have a claim,

for justice has been acknowledged by us to be a social virtue, and it implies

all others. Again, the many may urge their claim against the few; for, when

taken collectively, and compared with the few, they are stronger and richer

and better. But, what if the good, the rich, the noble, and the other classes

who make up a state, are all living together in the same city, Will there, or

will there not, be any doubt who shall rule? No doubt at all in determining

who ought to rule in each of the above-mentioned forms of government. For

states are characterized by differences in their governing bodies-one of them

has  a  government  of  the  rich,  another  of  the  virtuous,  and  so  on.  But  a

difficulty arises when all these elements co-exist. How are we to decide?

Suppose  the  virtuous  to  be  very  few  in  number:  may  we  consider  their

numbers  in  relation  to  their  duties,  and  ask  whether  they  are  enough  to

administer the state, or so many as will make up a state? Objections may beurged against all the aspirants to political power. For those who found their

claims on wealth or family might be thought to have no basis of justice; on

this principle, if any one person were richer than all the rest, it is clear that he

ought to be ruler of them. In like manner he who is very distinguished by his

birth ought to have the superiority over all those who claim on the ground

that they are freeborn. In an aristocracy, or government of the best, a like

difficulty  occurs  about  virtue;  for  if  one  citizen  be  better  than  the  other

members of the government, however good they may be, he too, upon the

same principle of justice, should rule over them. And if the people are to be

supreme because they are stronger than the few, then if one man, or more

than one, but not a majority, is stronger than the many, they ought to rule, and

not the many.

All  these  considerations  appear  to  show  that  none  of  the  principles  on

which men claim to rule and to hold all other men in subjection to them are

strictly right. To those who claim to be masters of the government on the

ground of their virtue or their wealth, the many might fairly answer that they

themselves  are  often  better  and  richer  than  the  few—I  do  not  say

individually,  but  collectively.  And  another  ingenious  objection  which  is

sometimes put forward may be met in a similar manner. Some persons doubt

whether the legislator who desires to make the justest laws ought to legislate

with a view to the good of the higher classes or of the many, when the case

which  we  have  mentioned  occurs.  Now  what  is  just  or  right  is  to  be

interpreted in the sense of ‘what is equal’; and that which is right in the sense

of being equal is to be considered with reference to the advantage of the state,

and the common good of the citizens. And a citizen is one who shares in

governing  and  being  governed.  He  differs  under  different  forms  of

government, but in the best state he is one who is able and willing to be

governed and to govern with a view to the life of virtue.

If, however, there be some one person, or more than one, although not

enough to make up the full complement of a state, whose virtue is so pre-

eminent that the virtues or the political capacity of all the rest admit of no

comparison with his or theirs, he or they can be no longer regarded as part of

a state; for justice will not be done to the superior, if he is reckoned only as

the equal of those who are so far inferior to him in virtue and in political

capacity. Such an one may truly be deemed a God among men. Hence we see

that legislation is necessarily concerned only with those who are equal in

birth and in capacity; and that for men of pre-eminent virtue there is no law—they are themselves a law. Any would be ridiculous who attempted to make

laws for them: they would probably retort what, in the fable of Antisthenes,

the lions said to the hares, when in the council of the beasts the latter began

haranguing  and  claiming  equality  for  all.  And  for  this  reason  democratic

states have instituted ostracism; equality is above all things their aim, and

therefore they ostracized and banished from the city for a time those who

seemed to predominate too much through their wealth, or the number of their

friends, or through any other political influence. Mythology tells us that the

Argonauts left Heracles behind for a similar reason; the ship Argo would not

take him because she feared that he would have been too much for the rest of

the  crew.  Wherefore  those  who  denounce  tyranny  and  blame  the  counsel

which Periander gave to Thrasybulus cannot be held altogether just in their

censure. The story is that Periander, when the herald was sent to ask counsel

of  him,  said  nothing,  but  only  cut  off  the  tallest  ears  of  corn  till  he  had

brought the field to a level. The herald did not know the meaning of the

action,  but  came  and  reported  what  he  had  seen  to  Thrasybulus,  who

understood that he was to cut off the principal men in the state; and this is a

policy not only expedient for tyrants or in practice confined to them, but

equally necessary in oligarchies and democracies. Ostracism is a measure of

the same kind, which acts by disabling and banishing the most prominent

citizens.  Great  powers  do  the  same  to  whole  cities  and  nations,  as  the

Athenians  did  to  the  Samians,  Chians,  and  Lesbians;  no  sooner  had  they

obtained a firm grasp of the empire, than they humbled their allies contrary to

treaty; and the Persian king has repeatedly crushed the Medes, Babylonians,

and other nations, when their spirit has been stirred by the recollection of

their former greatness.

The  problem  is  a  universal  one,  and  equally  concerns  all  forms  of

government, true as well as false; for, although perverted forms with a view

to their own interests may adopt this policy, those which seek the common

interest  do  so  likewise.  The  same  thing  may  be  observed  in  the  arts  and

sciences;  for  the  painter  will  not  allow  the  figure  to  have  a  foot  which,

however beautiful, is not in proportion, nor will the shipbuilder allow the

stem or any other part of the vessel to be unduly large, any more than the

chorus-master will allow any one who sings louder or better than all the rest

to sing in the choir. Monarchs, too, may practice compulsion and still live in

harmony with their cities, if their own government is for the interest of the

state.  Hence  where  there  is  an  acknowledged  superiority  the  argument  infavor of ostracism is based upon a kind of political justice. It would certainly

be better that the legislator should from the first so order his state as to have

no need of such a remedy. But if the need arises, the next best thing is that he

should endeavor to correct the evil by this or some similar measure. The

principle,  however,  has  not  been  fairly  applied  in  states;  for,  instead  of

looking to the good of their own constitution, they have used ostracism for

factious purposes. It is true that under perverted forms of government, and

from their special point of view, such a measure is just and expedient, but it is

also clear that it is not absolutely just. In the perfect state there would be great

doubts about the use of it, not when applied to excess in strength, wealth,

popularity, or the like, but when used against some one who is pre-eminent in

virtue—what is to be done with him? Mankind will not say that such an one

is to be expelled and exiled; on the other hand, he ought not to be a subject—

that would be as if mankind should claim to rule over Zeus, dividing his

offices among them. The only alternative is that all should joyfully obey such

a ruler, according to what seems to be the order of nature, and that men like

him should be kings in their state for life.


XIV


The preceding discussion, by a natural transition, leads to the consideration

of royalty, which we admit to be one of the true forms of government. Let us

see whether in order to be well governed a state or country should be under

the rule of a king or under some other form of government; and whether

monarchy, although good for some, may not be bad for others. But first we

must determine whether there is one species of royalty or many. It is easy to

see that there are many, and that the manner of government is not the same in

all of them.

Of royalties according to law, (1) the Lacedaemonian is thought to answer

best to the true pattern; but there the royal power is not absolute, except when

the kings go on an expedition, and then they take the command. Matters of

religion are likewise committed to them. The kingly office is in truth a kind

of generalship, irresponsible and perpetual. The king has not the power of life

and death, except in a specified case, as for instance, in ancient times, he had

it  when  upon  a  campaign,  by  right  of  force.  This  custom  is  described  in

Homer. For Agamemnon is patient when he is attacked in the assembly, but

when the army goes out to battle he has the power even of life and death.Does he not say—‘When I find a man skulking apart from the battle, nothing

shall save him from the dogs and vultures, for in my hands is death’?

This,  then,  is  one  form  of  royalty-a  generalship  for  life:  and  of  such

royalties some are hereditary and others elective.

(2)  There  is  another  sort  of  monarchy  not  uncommon  among  the

barbarians,  which  nearly  resembles  tyranny.  But  this  is  both  legal  and

hereditary. For barbarians, being more servile in character than Hellenes, and

Asiadics than Europeans, do not rebel against a despotic government. Such

royalties have the nature of tyrannies because the people are by nature slaves;

but there is no danger of their being overthrown, for they are hereditary and

legal. Wherefore also their guards are such as a king and not such as a tyrant

would employ, that is to say, they are composed of citizens, whereas the

guards  of  tyrants  are  mercenaries.  For  kings  rule  according  to  law  over

voluntary subjects, but tyrants over involuntary; and the one are guarded by

their fellow-citizens the others are guarded against them.

  These are two forms of monarchy, and there was a third (3) which existed

in ancient Hellas, called an Aesymnetia or dictatorship. This may be defined

generally as an elective tyranny, which, like the barbarian monarchy, is legal,

but differs from it in not being hereditary. Sometimes the office was held for

life,  sometimes  for  a  term  of  years,  or  until  certain  duties  had  been

performed. For example, the Mytilenaeans elected Pittacus leader against the

exiles, who were headed by Antimenides and Alcaeus the poet. And Alcaeus

himself shows in one of his banquet odes that they chose Pittacus tyrant, for

he  reproaches  his  fellow-citizens  for  ‘having  made  the  low-born  Pittacus

tyrant of the spiritless and ill-fated city, with one voice shouting his praises.’

  These forms of government have always had the character of tyrannies,

because they possess despotic power; but inasmuch as they are elective and

acquiesced in by their subjects, they are kingly.

(4) There is a fourth species of kingly rule—that of the heroic times—

which was hereditary and legal, and was exercised over willing subjects. For

the first chiefs were benefactors of the people in arts or arms; they either

gathered them into a community, or procured land for them; and thus they

became kings of voluntary subjects, and their power was inherited by their

descendants. They took the command in war and presided over the sacrifices,

except those which required a priest. They also decided causes either with or

without an oath; and when they swore, the form of the oath was the stretching

out of their sceptre. In ancient times their power extended continuously to allthings whatsoever, in city and country, as well as in foreign parts; but at a

later date they relinquished several of these privileges, and others the people

took  from  them,  until  in  some  states  nothing  was  left  to  them  but  the

sacrifices; and where they retained more of the reality they had only the right

of leadership in war beyond the border.

These, then, are the four kinds of royalty. First the monarchy of the heroic

ages;  this  was  exercised  over  voluntary  subjects,  but  limited  to  certain

functions; the king was a general and a judge, and had the control of religion

The  second  is  that  of  the  barbarians,  which  is  a  hereditary  despotic

government in accordance with law. A third is the power of the so-called

Aesynmete  or  Dictator;  this  is  an  elective  tyranny.  The  fourth  is  the

Lacedaemonian,  which  is  in  fact  a  generalship,  hereditary  and  perpetual.

These  four  forms  differ  from  one  another  in  the  manner  which  I  have

described.

(5) There is a fifth form of kingly rule in which one has the disposal of all,

just as each nation or each state has the disposal of public matters; this form

corresponds to the control of a household. For as household management is

the kingly rule of a house, so kingly rule is the household management of a

city, or of a nation, or of many nations.


XV


Of these forms we need only consider two, the Lacedaemonian and the

absolute royalty; for most of the others he in a region between them, having

less power than the last, and more than the first. Thus the inquiry is reduced

to two points: first, is it advantageous to the state that there should be a

perpetual general, and if so, should the office be confined to one family, or

open to the citizens in turn? Secondly, is it well that a single man should have

the supreme power in all things? The first question falls under the head of

laws  rather  than  of  constitutions;  for  perpetual  generalship  might  equally

exist under any form of government, so that this matter may be dismissed for

the present. The other kind of royalty is a sort of constitution; this we have

now to consider, and briefly to run over the difficulties involved in it. We

will begin by inquiring whether it is more advantageous to be ruled by the

best man or by the best laws.

The  advocates  of  royalty  maintain  that  the  laws  speak  only  in  general

terms, and cannot provide for circumstances; and that for any science to abideby  written  rules  is  absurd.  In  Egypt  the  physician  is  allowed  to  alter  his

treatment after the fourth day, but if sooner, he takes the risk. Hence it is clear

that a government acting according to written laws is plainly not the best. Yet

surely the ruler cannot dispense with the general principle which exists in

law; and this is a better ruler which is free from passion than that in which it

is innate. Whereas the law is passionless, passion must ever sway the heart of

man. Yes, it may be replied, but then on the other hand an individual will be

better able to deliberate in particular cases.

The best man, then, must legislate, and laws must be passed, but these laws

will have no authority when they miss the mark, though in all other cases

retaining their authority. But when the law cannot determine a point at all, or

not well, should the one best man or should all decide? According to our

present practice assemblies meet, sit in judgment, deliberate, and decide, and

their  judgments  an  relate  to  individual  cases.  Now  any  member  of  the

assembly, taken separately, is certainly inferior to the wise man. But the state

is  made  up  of  many  individuals.  And  as  a  feast  to  which  all  the  guests

contribute is better than a banquet furnished by a single man, so a multitude

is a better judge of many things than any individual.

  Again, the many are more incorruptible than the few; they are like the

greater  quantity  of  water  which  is  less  easily  corrupted  than  a  little.  The

individual is liable to be overcome by anger or by some other passion, and

then his judgment is necessarily perverted; but it is hardly to be supposed that

a great number of persons would all get into a passion and go wrong at the

same moment. Let us assume that they are the freemen, and that they never

act in violation of the law, but fill up the gaps which the law is obliged to

leave. Or, if such virtue is scarcely attainable by the multitude, we need only

suppose that the majority are good men and good citizens, and ask which will

be the more incorruptible, the one good ruler, or the many who are all good?

Will not the many? But, you will say, there may be parties among them,

whereas  the  one  man  is  not  divided  against  himself.  To  which  we  may

answer that their character is as good as his. If we call the rule of many men,

who are all of them good, aristocracy, and the rule of one man royalty, then

aristocracy will be better for states than royalty, whether the government is

supported by force or not, provided only that a number of men equal in virtue

can be found.

The first governments were kingships, probably for this reason, because of

old, when cities were small, men of eminent virtue were few. Further, theywere made kings because they were benefactors, and benefits can only be

bestowed by good men. But when many persons equal in merit arose, no

longer  enduring  the  pre-eminence  of  one,  they  desired  to  have  a

commonwealth, and set up a constitution. The ruling class soon deteriorated

and enriched themselves out of the public treasury; riches became the path to

honor, and so oligarchies naturally grew up. These passed into tyrannies and

tyrannies into democracies; for love of gain in the ruling classes was always

tending to diminish their number, and so to strengthen the masses, who in the

end set upon their masters and established democracies. Since cities have

increased in size, no other form of government appears to be any longer even

easy to establish.

  Even supposing the principle to be maintained that kingly power is the best

thing for states, how about the family of the king? Are his children to succeed

him? If they are no better than anybody else, that will be mischievous. But,

says the lover of royalty, the king, though he might, will not hand on his

power to his children. That, however, is hardly to be expected, and is too

much to ask of human nature. There is also a difficulty about the force which

he is to employ; should a king have guards about him by whose aid he may

be able to coerce the refractory? If not, how will he administer his kingdom?

Even if he be the lawful sovereign who does nothing arbitrarily or contrary to

law, still he must have some force wherewith to maintain the law. In the case

of a limited monarchy there is not much difficulty in answering this question;

the king must have such force as will be more than a match for one or more

individuals, but not so great as that of the people. The ancients observe this

principle when they have guards to any one whom they appointed dictator or

tyrant.  Thus,  when  Dionysius  asked  the  Syracusans  to  allow  him  guards,

somebody advised that they should give him only such a number.


XVI


At this place in the discussion there impends the inquiry respecting the

king who acts solely according to his own will he has now to be considered.

The  so-called  limited  monarchy,  or  kingship  according  to  law,  as  I  have

already  remarked,  is  not  a  distinct  form  of  government,  for  under  all

governments, as, for example, in a democracy or aristocracy, there may be a

general holding office for life, and one person is often made supreme over the

administration of a state. A magistracy of this kind exists at Epidamnus, andalso at Opus, but in the latter city has a more limited power. Now, absolute

monarchy, or the arbitrary rule of a sovereign over an the citizens, in a city

which consists of equals, is thought by some to be quite contrary to nature; it

is argued that those who are by nature equals must have the same natural

right and worth, and that for unequals to have an equal share, or for equals to

have an uneven share, in the offices of state, is as bad as for different bodily

constitutions to have the same food and clothing. Wherefore it is thought to

be just that among equals every one be ruled as well as rule, and therefore

that  an  should  have  their  turn.  We  thus  arrive  at  law;  for  an  order  of

succession implies law. And the rule of the law, it is argued, is preferable to

that of any individual. On the same principle, even if it be better for certain

individuals to govern, they should be made only guardians and ministers of

the law. For magistrates there must be—this is admitted; but then men say

that to give authority to any one man when all are equal is unjust. Nay, there

may indeed be cases which the law seems unable to determine, but in such

cases  can  a  man?  Nay,  it  will  be  replied,  the  law  trains  officers  for  this

express  purpose,  and  appoints  them  to  determine  matters  which  are  left

undecided by it, to the best of their judgment. Further, it permits them to

make  any  amendment  of  the  existing  laws  which  experience  suggests.

Therefore he who bids the law rule may be deemed to bid God and Reason

alone rule, but he who bids man rule adds an element of the beast; for desire

is a wild beast, and passion perverts the minds of rulers, even when they are

the best of men. The law is reason unaffected by desire. We are told that a

patient should call in a physician; he will not get better if he is doctored out

of a book. But the parallel of the arts is clearly not in point; for the physician

does nothing contrary to rule from motives of friendship; he only cures a

patient and takes a fee; whereas magistrates do many things from spite and

partiality. And, indeed, if a man suspected the physician of being in league

with his enemies to destroy him for a bribe, he would rather have recourse to

the  book.  But  certainly  physicians,  when  they  are  sick,  call  in  other

physicians, and training-masters, when they are in training, other training-

masters, as if they could not judge judge truly about their own case and might

be influenced by their feelings. Hence it is evident that in seeking for justice

men seek for the mean or neutral, for the law is the mean. Again, customary

laws have more weight, and relate to more important matters, than written

laws, and a man may be a safer ruler than the written law, but not safer than

the customary law.  Again, it is by no means easy for one man to superintend many things; he

will have to appoint a number of subordinates, and what difference does it

make whether these subordinates always existed or were appointed by him

because he needed theme If, as I said before, the good man has a right to rule

because he is better, still two good men are better than one: this is the old

saying, two going together, and the prayer of Agamemnon,


Would that I had ten such councillors!


And  at  this  day  there  are  magistrates,  for  example  judges,  who  have

authority to decide some matters which the law is unable to determine, since

no one doubts that the law would command and decide in the best manner

whatever  it  could.  But  some  things  can,  and  other  things  cannot,  be

comprehended under the law, and this is the origin of the nexted question

whether the best law or the best man should rule. For matters of detail about

which men deliberate cannot be included in legislation. Nor does any one

deny that the decision of such matters must be left to man, but it is argued

that there should be many judges, and not one only. For every ruler who has

been trained by the law judges well; and it would surely seem strange that a

person should see better with two eyes, or hear better with two ears, or act

better with two hands or feet, than many with many; indeed, it is already the

practice of kings to make to themselves many eyes and ears and hands and

feet. For they make colleagues of those who are the friends of themselves and

their  governments.  They  must  be  friends  of  the  monarch  and  of  his

government; if not his friends, they will not do what he wants; but friendship

implies  likeness  and  equality;  and,  therefore,  if  he  thinks  that  his  friends

ought to rule, he must think that those who are equal to himself and like

himself  ought  to  rule  equally  with  himself.  These  are  the  principal

controversies relating to monarchy.


XVII


But may not all this be true in some cases and not in others? for there is by

nature both a justice and an advantage appropriate to the rule of a master,

another  to  kingly  rule,  another  to  constitutional  rule;  but  there  is  none

naturally  appropriate  to  tyranny,  or  to  any  other  perverted  form  of

government; for these come into being contrary to nature. Now, to judge atleast from what has been said, it is manifest that, where men are alike and

equal, it is neither expedient nor just that one man should be lord of all,

whether there are laws, or whether there are no laws, but he himself is in the

place of law. Neither should a good man be lord over good men, nor a bad

man over bad; nor, even if he excels in virtue, should he have a right to rule,

unless in a particular case, at which I have already hinted, and to which I will

once more recur. But first of all, I must determine what natures are suited for

government  by  a  king,  and  what  for  an  aristocracy,  and  what  for  a

constitutional government.

A people who are by nature capable of producing a race superior in the

virtue needed for political rule are fitted for kingly government; and a people

submitting to be ruled as freemen by men whose virtue renders them capable

of political command are adapted for an aristocracy; while the people who are

suited  for  constitutional  freedom  are  those  among  whom  there  naturally

exists a warlike multitude able to rule and to obey in turn by a law which

gives office to the well-to-do according to their desert. But when a whole

family  or  some  individual,  happens  to  be  so  pre-eminent  in  virtue  as  to

surpass all others, then it is just that they should be the royal family and

supreme over all, or that this one citizen should be king of the whole nation.

For, as I said before, to give them authority is not only agreeable to that

ground of right which the founders of all states, whether aristocratical, or

oligarchical, or again democratical, are accustomed to put forward (for these

all recognize the claim of excellence, although not the same excellence), but

accords with the principle already laid down. For surely it would not be right

to kill, or ostracize, or exile such a person, or require that he should take his

turn in being governed. The whole is naturally superior to the part, and he

who has this pre-eminence is in the relation of a whole to a part. But if so, the

only alternative is that he should have the supreme power, and that mankind

should obey him, not in turn, but always. These are the conclusions at which

we arrive respecting royalty and its various forms, and this is the answer to

the question, whether it is or is not advantageous to states, and to which, and

how.


XVIII


We maintain that the true forms of government are three, and that the best

must be that which is administered by the best, and in which there is oneman, or a whole family, or many persons, excelling all the others together in

virtue, and both rulers and subjects are fitted, the one to rule, the others to be

ruled, in such a manner as to attain the most eligible life. We showed at the

commencement of our inquiry that the virtue of the good man is necessarily

the same as the virtue of the citizen of the perfect state. Clearly then in the

same manner, and by the same means through which a man becomes truly

good, he will frame a state that is to be ruled by an aristocracy or by a king,

and the same education and the same habits will be found to make a good

man and a man fit to be a statesman or a king.

  Having  arrived  at  these  conclusions,  we  must  proceed  to  speak  of  the

perfect state, and describe how it comes into being and is established.                                Politics, Book IV


Translated by Benjamin Jowett


<

div id="book4" class="book">


I


In all arts and sciences which embrace the whole of any subject, and do not

come into being in a fragmentary way, it is the province of a single art or

science to consider all that appertains to a single subject. For example, the art

of  gymnastic  considers  not  only  the  suitableness  of  different  modes  of

training to different bodies (2), but what sort is absolutely the best (1); (for

the absolutely best must suit that which is by nature best and best furnished

with the means of life), and also what common form of training is adapted to

the great majority of men (4). And if a man does not desire the best habit of

body, or the greatest skill in gymnastics, which might be attained by him, still

the trainer or the teacher of gymnastic should be able to impart any lower

degree  of  either  (3).  The  same  principle  equally  holds  in  medicine  and

shipbuilding, and the making of clothes, and in the arts generally.

  Hence it is obvious that government too is the subject of a single science,

which has to consider what government is best and of what sort it must be, to

be  most  in  accordance  with  our  aspirations,  if  there  were  no  external

impediment, and also what kind of government is adapted to particular states.

For  the  best  is  often  unattainable,  and  therefore  the  true  legislator  and

statesman ought to be acquainted, not only with (1) that which is best in the

abstract, but also with (2) that which is best relatively to circumstances. We

should be able further to say how a state may be constituted under any given

conditions (3); both how it is originally formed and, when formed, how it

may be longest preserved; the supposed state being so far from having the

best constitution that it is unprovided even with the conditions necessary for

the best; neither is it the best under the circumstances, but of an inferior type.

He ought, moreover, to know (4) the form of government which is best

suited to states in general; for political writers, although they have excellentideas,  are  often  unpractical.  We  should  consider,  not  only  what  form  of

government is best, but also what is possible and what is easily attainable by

all. There are some who would have none but the most perfect; for this many

natural advantages are required. Others, again, speak of a more attainable

form, and, although they reject the constitution under which they are living,

they  extol  some  one  in  particular,  for  example  the  Lacedaemonian.  Any

change of government which has to be introduced should be one which men,

starting from their existing constitutions, will be both willing and able to

adopt,  since  there  is  quite  as  much  trouble  in  the  reformation  of  an  old

constitution as in the establishment of a new one, just as to unlearn is as hard

as to learn. And therefore, in addition to the qualifications of the statesman

already  mentioned,  he  should  be  able  to  find  remedies  for  the  defects  of

existing constitutions, as has been said before. This he cannot do unless he

knows how many forms of government there are. It is often supposed that

there  is  only  one  kind  of  democracy  and  one  of  oligarchy.  But  this  is  a

mistake;  and,  in  order  to  avoid  such  mistakes,  we  must  ascertain  what

differences there are in the constitutions of states, and in how many ways

they are combined. The same political insight will enable a man to know

which laws are the best, and which are suited to different constitutions; for

the  laws  are,  and  ought  to  be,  relative  to  the  constitution,  and  not  the

constitution to the laws. A constitution is the organization of offices in a

state, and determines what is to be the governing body, and what is the end of

each community. But laws are not to be confounded with the principles of the

constitution; they are the rules according to which the magistrates should

administer the state, and proceed against offenders. So that we must know the

varieties, and the number of varieties, of each form of government, if only

with a view to making laws. For the same laws cannot be equally suited to all

oligarchies or to all democracies, since there is certainly more than one form

both of democracy and of oligarchy.


II


In our original discussion about governments we divided them into three

true forms: kingly rule, aristocracy, and constitutional government, and three

corresponding  perversions—tyranny,  oligarchy,  and  democracy.  Of  kingly

rule  and  of  aristocracy,  we  have  already  spoken,  for  the  inquiry  into  the

perfect state is the same thing with the discussion of the two forms thusnamed, since both imply a principle of virtue provided with external means.

We have already determined in what aristocracy and kingly rule differ from

one another, and when the latter should be established. In what follows we

have  to  describe  the  so-called  constitutional  government,  which  bears  the

common name of all constitutions, and the other forms, tyranny, oligarchy,

and democracy.

It is obvious which of the three perversions is the worst, and which is the

next in badness. That which is the perversion of the first and most divine is

necessarily the worst. And just as a royal rule, if not a mere name, must exist

by virtue of some great personal superiority in the king, so tyranny, which is

the worst of governments, is necessarily the farthest removed from a well-

constituted  form;  oligarchy  is  little  better,  for  it  is  a  long  way  from

aristocracy, and democracy is the most tolerable of the three.

A writer who preceded me has already made these distinctions, but his

point of view is not the same as mine. For he lays down the principle that

when  all  the  constitutions  are  good  (the  oligarchy  and  the  rest  being

virtuous), democracy is the worst, but the best when all are bad. Whereas we

maintain that they are in any case defective, and that one oligarchy is not to

be accounted better than another, but only less bad.

  Not to pursue this question further at present, let us begin by determining

(1) how many varieties of constitution there are (since of democracy and

oligarchy  there  are  several):  (2)  what  constitution  is  the  most  generally

acceptable, and what is eligible in the next degree after the perfect state; and

besides this what other there is which is aristocratical and well-constituted,

and at the same time adapted to states in general; (3) of the other forms of

government to whom each is suited. For democracy may meet the needs of

some better than oligarchy, and conversely. In the next place (4) we have to

consider in what manner a man ought to proceed who desires to establish

some one among these various forms, whether of democracy or of oligarchy;

and  lastly,  (5)  having  briefly  discussed  these  subjects  to  the  best  of  our

power, we will endeavor to ascertain the modes of ruin and preservation both

of constitutions generally and of each separately, and to what causes they are

to be attributed.


III


The reason why there are many forms of government is that every statecontains many elements. In the first place we see that all states are made up

of families, and in the multitude of citizen there must be some rich and some

poor, and some in a middle condition; the rich are heavy-armed, and the poor

not. Of the common people, some are husbandmen, and some traders, and

some artisans. There are also among the notables differences of wealth and

property—for example, in the number of horses which they keep, for they

cannot afford to keep them unless they are rich. And therefore in old times

the cities whose strength lay in their cavalry were oligarchies, and they used

cavalry in wars against their neighbors; as was the practice of the Eretrians

and Chalcidians, and also of the Magnesians on the river Maeander, and of

other peoples in Asia. Besides differences of wealth there are differences of

rank and merit, and there are some other elements which were mentioned by

us when in treating of aristocracy we enumerated the essentials of a state. Of

these  elements,  sometimes  all,  sometimes  the  lesser  and  sometimes  the

greater number, have a share in the government. It is evident then that there

must  be  many  forms  of  government,  differing  in  kind,  since  the  parts  of

which they are composed differ from each other in kind. For a constitution is

an organization of offices, which all the citizens distribute among themselves,

according to the power which different classes possess, for example the rich

or the poor, or according to some principle of equality which includes both.

There must therefore be as many forms of government as there are modes of

arranging the offices, according to the superiorities and differences of the

parts of the state.

  There are generally thought to be two principal forms: as men say of the

winds that there are but two—north and south, and that the rest of them are

only variations of these, so of governments there are said to be only two

forms—democracy and oligarchy. For aristocracy is considered to be a kind

of  oligarchy,  as  being  the  rule  of  a  few,  and  the  so-called  constitutional

government to be really a democracy, just as among the winds we make the

west a variation of the north, and the east of the south wind. Similarly of

musical modes there are said to be two kinds, the Dorian and the Phrygian;

the other arrangements of the scale are comprehended under one or other of

these two. About forms of government this is a very favorite notion. But in

either case the better and more exact way is to distinguish, as I have done, the

one or two which are true forms, and to regard the others as perversions,

whether  of  the  most  perfectly  attempered  mode  or  of  the  best  form  of

government: we may compare the severer and more overpowering modes tothe  oligarchical  forms,  and  the  more  relaxed  and  gentler  ones  to  the

democratic.


IV


It must not be assumed, as some are fond of saying, that democracy is

simply that form of government in which the greater number are sovereign,

for in oligarchies, and indeed in every government, the majority rules; nor

again is oligarchy that form of government in which a few are sovereign.

Suppose the whole population of a city to be 1300, and that of these 1000 are

rich, and do not allow the remaining 300 who are poor, but free, and in an

other respects their equals, a share of the government—no one will say that

this is a democracy. In like manner, if the poor were few and the masters of

the rich who outnumber them, no one would ever call such a government, in

which the rich majority have no share of office, an oligarchy. Therefore we

should rather say that democracy is the form of government in which the free

are rulers, and oligarchy in which the rich; it is only an accident that the free

are the many and the rich are the few. Otherwise a government in which the

offices were given according to stature, as is said to be the case in Ethiopia,

or according to beauty, would be an oligarchy; for the number of tall or good-

looking men is small. And yet oligarchy and democracy are not sufficiently

distinguished  merely  by  these  two  characteristics  of  wealth  and  freedom.

Both of them contain many other elements, and therefore we must carry our

analysis further, and say that the government is not a democracy in which the

freemen, being few in number, rule over the many who are not free, as at

Apollonia, on the Ionian Gulf, and at Thera; (for in each of these states the

nobles, who were also the earliest settlers, were held in chief honor, although

they were but a few out of many). Neither is it a democracy when the rich

have  the  government  because  they  exceed  in  number;  as  was  the  case

formerly at Colophon, where the bulk of the inhabitants were possessed of

large  property  before  the  Lydian  War.  But  the  form  of  government  is  a

democracy when the free, who are also poor and the majority, govern, and an

oligarchy when the rich and the noble govern, they being at the same time

few in number.

I have said that there are many forms of government, and have explained

to what causes the variety is due. Why there are more than those already

mentioned, and what they are, and whence they arise, I will now proceed toconsider, starting from the principle already admitted, which is that every

state consists, not of one, but of many parts. If we were going to speak of the

different species of animals, we should first of all determine the organs which

are indispensable to every animal, as for example some organs of sense and

the instruments of receiving and digesting food, such as the mouth and the

stomach, besides organs of locomotion. Assuming now that there are only so

many kinds of organs, but that there may be differences in them—I mean

different  kinds  of  mouths,  and  stomachs,  and  perceptive  and  locomotive

organs—the  possible  combinations  of  these  differences  will  necessarily

furnish many variedes of animals. (For animals cannot be the same which

have different kinds of mouths or of ears.) And when all the combinations are

exhausted, there will be as many sorts of animals as there are combinations of

the necessary organs. The same, then, is true of the forms of government

which have been described; states, as I have repeatedly said, are composed,

not of one, but of many elements. One element is the food-producing class,

who are called husbandmen; a second, the class of mechanics who practice

the arts without which a city cannot exist; of these arts some are absolutely

necessary, others contribute to luxury or to the grace of life. The third class is

that of traders, and by traders I mean those who are engaged in buying and

selling, whether in commerce or in retail trade. A fourth class is that of the

serfs  or  laborers.  The  warriors  make  up  the  fifth  class,  and  they  are  as

necessary as any of the others, if the country is not to be the slave of every

invader. For how can a state which has any title to the name be of a slavish

nature? The state is independent and self-sufficing, but a slave is the reverse

of independent. Hence we see that this subject, though ingeniously, has not

been satisfactorily treated in the Republic. Socrates says that a state is made

up of four sorts of people who are absolutely necessary; these are a weaver, a

husbandman, a shoemaker, and a builder; afterwards, finding that they are not

enough, he adds a smith, and again a herdsman, to look after the necessary

animals; then a merchant, and then a retail trader. All these together form the

complement of the first state, as if a state were established merely to supply

the necessaries of life, rather than for the sake of the good, or stood equally in

need of shoemakers and of husbandmen. But he does not admit into the state

a military class until the country has increased in size, and is beginning to

encroach  on  its  neighbor’s  land,  whereupon  they  go  to  war.  Yet  even

amongst his four original citizens, or whatever be the number of those whom

he associates in the state, there must be some one who will dispense justiceand determine what is just. And as the soul may be said to be more truly part

of an animal than the body, so the higher parts of states, that is to say, the

warrior  class,  the  class  engaged  in  the  administration  of  justice,  and  that

engaged in deliberation, which is the special business of political common

sense-these are more essential to the state than the parts which minister to the

necessaries  of  life.  Whether  their  several  functions  are  the  functions  of

different citizens, or of the same—for it may often happen that the same

persons are both warriors and husbandmen—is immaterial to the argument.

The higher as well as the lower elements are to be equally considered parts of

the state, and if so, the military element at any rate must be included. There

are also the wealthy who minister to the state with their property; these form

the seventh class. The eighth class is that of magistrates and of officers; for

the state cannot exist without rulers. And therefore some must be able to take

office and to serve the state, either always or in turn. There only remains the

class of those who deliberate and who judge between disputants; we were just

now distinguishing them. If presence of all these elements, and their fair and

equitable organization, is necessary to states, then there must also be persons

who have the ability of statesmen. Different functions appear to be often

combined in the same individual; for example, the warrior may also be a

husbandman, or an artisan; or, again, the councillor a judge. And all claim to

possess political ability, and think that they are quite competent to fill most

offices. But the same persons cannot be rich and poor at the same time. For

this reason the rich and the poor are regarded in an especial sense as parts of

a state. Again, because the rich are generally few in number, while the poor

are many, they appear to be antagonistic, and as the one or the other prevails

they form the government. Hence arises the common opinion that there are

two kinds of government—democracy and oligarchy.

I have already explained that there are many forms of constitution, and to

what causes the variety is due. Let me now show that there are different

forms both of democracy and oligarchy, as will indeed be evident from what

has preceded. For both in the common people and in the notables various

classes  are  included;  of  the  common  people,  one  class  are  husbandmen,

another artisans; another traders, who are employed in buying and selling;

another  are  the  seafaring  class,  whether  engaged  in  war  or  in  trade,  as

ferrymen or as fishermen. (In many places any one of these classes forms

quite a large population; for example, fishermen at Tarentum and Byzantium,

crews of triremes at Athens, merchant seamen at Aegina and Chios, ferrymenat Tenedos.) To the classes already mentioned may be added day-laborers,

and those who, owing to their needy circumstances, have no leisure, or those

who are not of free birth on both sides; and there may be other classes as

well. The notables again may be divided according to their wealth, birth,

virtue, education, and similar differences.

Of forms of democracy first comes that which is said to be based strictly

on equality. In such a democracy the law says that it is just for the poor to

have no more advantage than the rich; and that neither should be masters, but

both equal. For if liberty and equality, as is thought by some, are chiefly to be

found in democracy, they will be best attained when all persons alike share in

the government to the utmost. And since the people are the majority, and the

opinion of the majority is decisive, such a government must necessarily be a

democracy. Here then is one sort of democracy. There is another, in which

the magistrates are elected according to a certain property qualification, but a

low one; he who has the required amount of property has a share in the

government, but he who loses his property loses his rights. Another kind is

that in which all the citizens who are under no disqualification share in the

government, but still the law is supreme. In another, everybody, if he be only

a citizen, is admitted to the government, but the law is supreme as before. A

fifth form of democracy, in other respects the same, is that in which, not the

law, but the multitude, have the supreme power, and supersede the law by

their decrees. This is a state of affairs brought about by the demagogues. For

in democracies which are subject to the law the best citizens hold the first

place, and there are no demagogues; but where the laws are not supreme,

there demagogues spring up. For the people becomes a monarch, and is many

in one; and the many have the power in their hands, not as individuals, but

collectively. Homer says that ‘it is not good to have a rule of many,’ but

whether he means this corporate rule, or the rule of many individuals, is

uncertain. At all events this sort of democracy, which is now a monarch, and

no longer under the control of law, seeks to exercise monarchical sway, and

grows into a despot; the flatterer is held in honor; this sort of democracy

being  relatively  to  other  democracies  what  tyranny  is  to  other  forms  of

monarchy. The spirit of both is the same, and they alike exercise a despotic

rule over the better citizens. The decrees of the demos correspond to the

edicts of the tyrant; and the demagogue is to the one what the flatterer is to

the other. Both have great power; the flatterer with the tyrant, the demagogue

with  democracies  of  the  kind  which  we  are  describing.  The  demagoguesmake the decrees of the people override the laws, by referring all things to the

popular assembly. And therefore they grow great, because the people have an

things in their hands, and they hold in their hands the votes of the people,

who are too ready to listen to them. Further, those who have any complaint to

bring against the magistrates say, ‘Let the people be judges’; the people are

too happy to accept the invitation; and so the authority of every office is

undermined. Such a democracy is fairly open to the objection that it is not a

constitution  at  all;  for  where  the  laws  have  no  authority,  there  is  no

constitution.  The  law  ought  to  be  supreme  over  all,  and  the  magistracies

should judge of particulars, and only this should be considered a constitution.

So that if democracy be a real form of government, the sort of system in

which all things are regulated by decrees is clearly not even a democracy in

the true sense of the word, for decrees relate only to particulars.

  These then are the different kinds of democracy.


V


Of  oligarchies,  too,  there  are  different  kinds:  one  where  the  property

qualification for office is such that the poor, although they form the majority,

have no share in the government, yet he who acquires a qualification may

obtain a share. Another sort is when there is a qualification for office, but a

high one, and the vacancies in the governing body are fired by co-optation. If

the election is made out of all the qualified persons, a constitution of this kind

inclines to an aristocracy, if out of a privileged class, to an oligarchy. Another

sort of oligarchy is when the son succeeds the father. There is a fourth form,

likewise hereditary, in which the magistrates are supreme and not the law.

Among oligarchies this is what tyranny is among monarchies, and the last-

mentioned form of democracy among democracies; and in fact this sort of

oligarchy receives the name of a dynasty (or rule of powerful families).

  These  are  the  different  sorts  of  oligarchies  and  democracies.  It  should,

however,  be  remembered  that  in  many  states  the  constitution  which  is

established  by  law,  although  not  democratic,  owing  to  the  education  and

habits of the people may be administered democratically, and conversely in

other states the established constitution may incline to democracy, but may

be  administered  in  an  oligarchical  spirit.  This  most  often  happens  after  a

revolution: for governments do not change at once; at first the dominant party

are content with encroaching a little upon their opponents. The laws whichexisted previously continue in force, but the authors of the revolution have

the power in their hands.


VI


  From what has been already said we may safely infer that there are so

many different kinds of democracies and of oligarchies. For it is evident that

either all the classes whom we mentioned must share in the government, or

some only and not others. When the class of husbandmen and of those who

possess  moderate  fortunes  have  the  supreme  power,  the  government  is

administered according to law. For the citizens being compelled to live by

their labor have no leisure; and so they set up the authority of the law, and

attend  assemblies  only  when  necessary.  They  all  obtain  a  share  in  the

government when they have acquired the qualification which is fixed by the

law—the absolute exclusion of any class would be a step towards oligarchy;

hence all who have acquired the property qualification are admitted to a share

in the constitution. But leisure cannot be provided for them unless there are

revenues to support them. This is one sort of democracy, and these are the

causes which give birth to it. Another kind is based on the distinction which

naturally comes next in order; in this, every one to whose birth there is no

objection is eligible, but actually shares in the government only if he can find

leisure. Hence in such a democracy the supreme power is vested in the laws,

because the state has no means of paying the citizens. A third kind is when all

freemen have a right to share in the government, but do not actually share, for

the reason which has been already given; so that in this form again the law

must  rule.  A  fourth  kind  of  democracy  is  that  which  comes  latest  in  the

history of states. In our own day, when cities have far outgrown their original

size, and their revenues have increased, all the citizens have a place in the

government, through the great preponderance of the multitude; and they all,

including the poor who receive pay, and therefore have leisure to exercise

their  rights,  share  in  the  administration.  Indeed,  when  they  are  paid,  the

common people have the most leisure, for they are not hindered by the care

of their property, which often fetters the rich, who are thereby prevented from

taking part in the assembly or in the courts, and so the state is governed by

the poor, who are a majority, and not by the laws.

So  many  kinds  of  democracies  there  are,  and  they  grow  out  of  these

necessary causes.Of oligarchies, one form is that in which the majority of the citizens have

some property, but not very much; and this is the first form, which allows to

any  one  who  obtains  the  required  amount  the  right  of  sharing  in  the

government.  The  sharers  in  the  government  being  a  numerous  body,  it

follows that the law must govern, and not individuals. For in proportion as

they are further removed from a monarchical form of government, and in

respect  of  property  have  neither  so  much  as  to  be  able  to  live  without

attending to business, nor so little as to need state support, they must admit

the rule of law and not claim to rule themselves. But if the men of property in

the state are fewer than in the former case, and own more property, there

arises a second form of oligarchy. For the stronger they are, the more power

they claim, and having this object in view, they themselves select those of the

other classes who are to be admitted to the government; but, not being as yet

strong enough to rule without the law, they make the law represent their

wishes.  When  this  power  is  intensified  by  a  further  diminution  of  their

numbers and increase of their property, there arises a third and further stage

of  oligarchy,  in  which  the  governing  class  keep  the  offices  in  their  own

hands, and the law ordains that the son shall succeed the father. When, again,

the  rulers  have  great  wealth  and  numerous  friends,  this  sort  of  family

despotism approaches a monarchy; individuals rule and not the law. This is

the fourth sort of oligarchy, and is analogous to the last sort of democracy.


VII


  There are still two forms besides democracy and oligarchy; one of them is

universally  recognized  and  included  among  the  four  principal  forms  of

government, which are said to be (1) monarchy, (2) oligarchy, (3) democracy,

and (4) the so-called aristocracy or government of the best. But there is also a

fifth, which retains the generic name of polity or constitutional government;

this  is  not  common,  and  therefore  has  not  been  noticed  by  writers  who

attempt to enumerate the different kinds of government; like Plato, in their

books about the state, they recognize four only. The term ‘aristocracy’ is

rightly applied to the form of government which is described in the first part

of  our  treatise;  for  that  only  can  be  rightly  called  aristocracy  which  is  a

government formed of the best men absolutely, and not merely of men who

are good when tried by any given standard. In the perfect state the good man

is absolutely the same as the good citizen; whereas in other states the goodcitizen is only good relatively to his own form of government. But there are

some states differing from oligarchies and also differing from the so-called

polity or constitutional government; these are termed aristocracies, and in

them the magistrates are certainly chosen, both according to their wealth and

according to their merit. Such a form of government differs from each of the

two just now mentioned, and is termed an aristocracy. For indeed in states

which  do  not  make  virtue  the  aim  of  the  community,  men  of  merit  and

reputation for virtue may be found. And so where a government has regard to

wealth,  virtue,  and  numbers,  as  at  Carthage,  that  is  aristocracy;  and  also

where it has regard only to two out of the three, as at Lacedaemon, to virtue

and numbers, and the two principles of democracy and virtue temper each

other. There are these two forms of aristocracy in addition to the first and

perfect state, and there is a third form, viz., the constitutions which incline

more than the so-called polity towards oligarchy.


VIII


I have yet to speak of the so-called polity and of tyranny. I put them in this

order, not because a polity or constitutional government is to be regarded as a

perversion any more than the above mentioned aristocracies. The truth is, that

they an fall short of the most perfect form of government, and so they are

reckoned among perversions, and the really perverted forms are perversions

of  these,  as  I  said  in  the  original  discussion.  Last  of  all  I  will  speak  of

tyranny,  which  I  place  last  in  the  series  because  I  am  inquiring  into  the

constitutions of states, and this is the very reverse of a constitution

  Having explained why I have adopted this order, I will proceed to consider

constitutional  government;  of  which  the  nature  will  be  clearer  now  that

oligarchy  and  democracy  have  been  defined.  For  polity  or  constitutional

government  may  be  described  generally  as  a  fusion  of  oligarchy  and

democracy; but the term is usually applied to those forms of government

which incline towards democracy, and the term aristocracy to those which

incline  towards  oligarchy,  because  birth  and  education  are  commonly  the

accompaniments of wealth. Moreover, the rich already possess the external

advantages the want of which is a temptation to crime, and hence they are

called noblemen and gentlemen. And inasmuch as aristocracy seeks to give

predominance to the best of the citizens, people say also of oligarchies that

they are composed of noblemen and gentlemen. Now it appears to be animpossible thing that the state which is governed not by the best citizens but

by the worst should be well-governed, and equally impossible that the state

which is ill-governed should be governed by the best. But we must remember

that good laws, if they are not obeyed, do not constitute good government.

Hence there are two parts of good government; one is the actual obedience of

citizens to the laws, the other part is the goodness of the laws which they

obey; they may obey bad laws as well as good. And there may be a further

subdivision; they may obey either the best laws which are attainable to them,

or the best absolutely.

The distribution of offices according to merit is a special characteristic of

aristocracy, for the principle of an aristocracy is virtue, as wealth is of an

oligarchy, and freedom of a democracy. In all of them there of course exists

the right of the majority, and whatever seems good to the majority of those

who share in the government has authority. Now in most states the form

called polity exists, for the fusion goes no further than the attempt to unite the

freedom of the poor and the wealth of the rich, who commonly take the place

of the noble. But as there are three grounds on which men claim an equal

share in the government, freedom, wealth, and virtue (for the fourth or good

birth is the result of the two last, being only ancient wealth and virtue), it is

clear that the admixture of the two elements, that is to say, of the rich and

poor, is to be called a polity or constitutional government; and the union of

the three is to be called aristocracy or the government of the best, and more

than any other form of government, except the true and ideal, has a right to

this name.

  Thus  far  I  have  shown  the  existence  of  forms  of  states  other  than

monarchy,  democracy,  and  oligarchy,  and  what  they  are,  and  in  what

aristocracies differ from one another, and polities from aristocracies—that the

two latter are not very unlike is obvious.


IX


Next we have to consider how by the side of oligarchy and democracy the

so-called polity or constitutional government springs up, and how it should

be organized. The nature of it will be at once understood from a comparison

of oligarchy and democracy; we must ascertain their different characteristics,

and taking a portion from each, put the two together, like the parts of an

indenture. Now there are three modes in which fusions of government may beaffected.  In  the  first  mode  we  must  combine  the  laws  made  by  both

governments, say concerning the administration of justice. In oligarchies they

impose a fine on the rich if they do not serve as judges, and to the poor they

give no pay; but in democracies they give pay to the poor and do not fine the

rich. Now (1) the union of these two modes is a common or middle term

between them, and is therefore characteristic of a constitutional government,

for it is a combination of both. This is one mode of uniting the two elements.

Or  (2)  a  mean  may  be  taken  between  the  enactments  of  the  two:  thus

democracies  require  no  property  qualification,  or  only  a  small  one,  from

members of the assembly, oligarchies a high one; here neither of these is the

common term, but a mean between them. (3) There is a third mode, in which

something  is  borrowed  from  the  oligarchical  and  something  from  the

democratical principle. For example, the appointment of magistrates by lot is

thought  to  be  democratical,  and  the  election  of  them  oligarchical;

democratical again when there is no property qualification, oligarchical when

there is. In the aristocratical or constitutional state, one element will be taken

from  each—from  oligarchy  the  principle  of  electing  to  offices,  from

democracy  the  disregard  of  qualification.  Such  are  the  various  modes  of

combination.

  There is a true union of oligarchy and democracy when the same state may

be termed either a democracy or an oligarchy; those who use both names

evidently feel that the fusion is complete. Such a fusion there is also in the

mean; for both extremes appear in it. The Lacedaemonian constitution, for

example,  is  often  described  as  a  democracy,  because  it  has  many

democratical  features.  In  the  first  place  the  youth  receive  a  democratical

education. For the sons of the poor are brought up with with the sons of the

rich, who are educated in such a manner as to make it possible for the sons of

the poor to be educated by them. A similar equality prevails in the following

period of life, and when the citizens are grown up to manhood the same rule

is observed; there is no distinction between the rich and poor. In like manner

they all have the same food at their public tables, and the rich wear only such

clothing as any poor man can afford. Again, the people elect to one of the two

greatest  offices  of  state,  and  in  the  other  they  share;  for  they  elect  the

Senators and share in the Ephoralty. By others the Spartan constitution is said

to be an oligarchy, because it has many oligarchical elements. That all offices

are  filled  by  election  and  none  by  lot,  is  one  of  these  oligarchical

characteristics; that the power of inflicting death or banishment rests with afew persons is another; and there are others. In a well attempted polity there

should  appear  to  be  both  elements  and  yet  neither;  also  the  government

should rely on itself, and not on foreign aid, and on itself not through the

good will of a majority—they might be equally well-disposed when there is a

vicious  form  of  government—but  through  the  general  willingness  of  all

classes in the state to maintain the constitution.

  Enough of the manner in which a constitutional government, and in which

the so-called aristocracies ought to be framed.


X


Of the nature of tyranny I have still to speak, in order that it may have its

place in our inquiry (since even tyranny is reckoned by us to be a form of

government), although there is not much to be said about it. I have already in

the former part of this treatise discussed royalty or kingship according to the

most  usual  meaning  of  the  term,  and  considered  whether  it  is  or  is  not

advantageous to states, and what kind of royalty should be established, and

from what source, and how.

  When speaking of royalty we also spoke of two forms of tyranny, which

are  both  according  to  law,  and  therefore  easily  pass  into  royalty.  Among

barbarians  there  are  elected  monarchs  who  exercise  a  despotic  power;

despotic  rulers  were  also  elected  in  ancient  Hellas,  called  Aesymnetes  or

Dictators.  These  monarchies,  when  compared  with  one  another,  exhibit

certain differences. And they are, as I said before, royal, in so far as the

monarch rules according to law over willing subjects; but they are tyrannical

in so far as he is despotic and rules according to his own fancy. There is also

a third kind of tyranny, which is the most typical form, and is the counterpart

of  the  perfect  monarchy.  This  tyranny  is  just  that  arbitrary  power  of  an

individual which is responsible to no one, and governs all alike, whether

equals or better, with a view to its own advantage, not to that of its subjects,

and therefore against their will. No freeman, if he can escape from it, will

endure such a government.

The kinds of tyranny are such and so many, and for the reasons which I

have given.


XIWe have now to inquire what is the best constitution for most states, and

the best life for most men, neither assuming a standard of virtue which is

above ordinary persons, nor an education which is exceptionally favored by

nature and circumstances, nor yet an ideal state which is an aspiration only,

but having regard to the life in which the majority are able to share, and to the

form  of  government  which  states  in  general  can  attain.  As  to  those

aristocracies, as they are called, of which we were just now speaking, they

either lie beyond the possibilities of the greater number of states, or they

approximate to the so-called constitutional government, and therefore need

no  separate  discussion.  And  in  fact  the  conclusion  at  which  we  arrive

respecting all these forms rests upon the same grounds. For if what was said

in the Ethics is true, that the happy life is the life according to virtue lived

without impediment, and that virtue is a mean, then the life which is in a

mean, and in a mean attainable by every one, must be the best. And the same

the  same  principles  of  virtue  and  vice  are  characteristic  of  cities  and  of

constitutions; for the constitution is in a figure the life of the city.

Now in all states there are three elements: one class is very rich, another

very poor, and a third in a mean. It is admitted that moderation and the mean

are best, and therefore it will clearly be best to possess the gifts of fortune in

moderation; for in that condition of life men are most ready to follow rational

principle. But he who greatly excels in beauty, strength, birth, or wealth, or

on the other hand who is very poor, or very weak, or very much disgraced,

finds it difficult to follow rational principle. Of these two the one sort grow

into violent and great criminals, the others into rogues and petty rascals. And

two sorts of offenses correspond to them, the one committed from violence,

the other from roguery. Again, the middle class is least likely to shrink from

rule, or to be over-ambitious for it; both of which are injuries to the state.

Again, those who have too much of the goods of fortune, strength, wealth,

friends, and the like, are neither willing nor able to submit to authority. The

evil begins at home; for when they are boys, by reason of the luxury in which

they are brought up, they never learn, even at school, the habit of obedience.

On the other hand, the very poor, who are in the opposite extreme, are too

degraded. So that the one class cannot obey, and can only rule despotically;

the other knows not how to command and must be ruled like slaves. Thus

arises a city, not of freemen, but of masters and slaves, the one despising, the

other  envying;  and  nothing  can  be  more  fatal  to  friendship  and  good

fellowship in states than this: for good fellowship springs from friendship;when men are at enmity with one another, they would rather not even share

the same path. But a city ought to be composed, as far as possible, of equals

and similars; and these are generally the middle classes. Wherefore the city

which is composed of middle-class citizens is necessarily best constituted in

respect  of  the  elements  of  which  we  say  the  fabric  of  the  state  naturally

consists. And this is the class of citizens which is most secure in a state, for

they do not, like the poor, covet their neighbors’ goods; nor do others covet

theirs, as the poor covet the goods of the rich; and as they neither plot against

others,  nor  are  themselves  plotted  against,  they  pass  through  life  safely.

Wisely then did Phocylides pray—‘Many things are best in the mean; I desire

to be of a middle condition in my city.’

  Thus it is manifest that the best political community is formed by citizens

of the middle class, and that those states are likely to be well-administered in

which the middle class is large, and stronger if possible than both the other

classes, or at any rate than either singly; for the addition of the middle class

turns the scale, and prevents either of the extremes from being dominant.

Great then is the good fortune of a state in which the citizens have a moderate

and  sufficient  property;  for  where  some  possess  much,  and  the  others

nothing, there may arise an extreme democracy, or a pure oligarchy; or a

tyranny may grow out of either extreme—either out of the most rampant

democracy, or out of an oligarchy; but it is not so likely to arise out of the

middle constitutions and those akin to them. I will explain the reason of this

hereafter, when I speak of the revolutions of states. The mean condition of

states is clearly best, for no other is free from faction; and where the middle

class  is  large,  there  are  least  likely  to  be  factions  and  dissensions.  For  a

similar reason large states are less liable to faction than small ones, because

in them the middle class is large; whereas in small states it is easy to divide

all the citizens into two classes who are either rich or poor, and to leave

nothing in the middle. And democracies are safer and more permanent than

oligarchies, because they have a middle class which is more numerous and

has a greater share in the government; for when there is no middle class, and

the poor greatly exceed in number, troubles arise, and the state soon comes to

an  end.  A  proof  of  the  superiority  of  the  middle  dass  is  that  the  best

legislators have been of a middle condition; for example, Solon, as his own

verses  testify;  and  Lycurgus,  for  he  was  not  a  king;  and  Charondas,  and

almost all legislators.

  These considerations will help us to understand why most governments areeither  democratical  or  oligarchical.  The  reason  is  that  the  middle  class  is

seldom  numerous  in  them,  and  whichever  party,  whether  the  rich  or  the

common  people,  transgresses  the  mean  and  predominates,  draws  the

constitution  its  own  way,  and  thus  arises  either  oligarchy  or  democracy.

There is another reason—the poor and the rich quarrel with one another, and

whichever  side  gets  the  better,  instead  of  establishing  a  just  or  popular

government, regards political supremacy as the prize of victory, and the one

party sets up a democracy and the other an oligarchy. Further, both the parties

which had the supremacy in Hellas looked only to the interest of their own

form of government, and established in states, the one, democracies, and the

other, oligarchies; they thought of their own advantage, of the public not at

all.  For  these  reasons  the  middle  form  of  government  has  rarely,  if  ever,

existed, and among a very few only. One man alone of all who ever ruled in

Hellas was induced to give this middle constitution to states. But it has now

become a habit among the citizens of states, not even to care about equality;

all men are seeking for dominion, or, if conquered, are willing to submit.

  What then is the best form of government, and what makes it the best, is

evident; and of other constitutions, since we say that there are many kinds of

democracy and many of oligarchy, it is not difficult to see which has the first

and which the second or any other place in the order of excellence, now that

we have determined which is the best. For that which is nearest to the best

must of necessity be better, and that which is furthest from it worse, if we are

judging absolutely and not relatively to given conditions: I say ‘relatively to

given  conditions,’  since  a  particular  government  may  be  preferable,  but

another form may be better for some people.


XII


We have now to consider what and what kind of government is suitable to

what and what kind of men. I may begin by assuming, as a general principle

common to all governments, that the portion of the state which desires the

permanence of the constitution ought to be stronger than that which desires

the reverse. Now every city is composed of quality and quantity. By quality I

mean freedom, wealth, education, good birth, and by quantity, superiority of

numbers. Quality may exist in one of the classes which make up the state,

and quantity in the other. For example, the meanly-born may be more in

number than the well-born, or the poor than the rich, yet they may not somuch exceed in quantity as they fall short in quality; and therefore there must

be a comparison of quantity and quality. Where the number of the poor is

more than proportioned to the wealth of the rich, there will naturally be a

democracy, varying in form with the sort of people who compose it in each

case. If, for example, the husbandmen exceed in number, the first form of

democracy will then arise; if the artisans and laboring class, the last; and so

with the intermediate forms. But where the rich and the notables exceed in

quality more than they fall short in quantity, there oligarchy arises, similarly

assuming various forms according to the kind of superiority possessed by the

oligarchs.

The legislator should always include the middle class in his government; if

he makes his laws oligarchical, to the middle class let him look; if he makes

them democratical, he should equally by his laws try to attach this class to the

state. There only can the government ever be stable where the middle class

exceeds one or both of the others, and in that case there will be no fear that

the rich will unite with the poor against the rulers. For neither of them will

ever  be  willing  to  serve  the  other,  and  if  they  look  for  some  form  of

government more suitable to both, they will find none better than this, for the

rich and the poor will never consent to rule in turn, because they mistrust one

another. The arbiter is always the one trusted, and he who is in the middle is

an arbiter. The more perfect the admixture of the political elements, the more

lasting  will  be  the  constitution.  Many  even  of  those  who  desire  to  form

aristocratical  governments  make  a  mistake,  not  only  in  giving  too  much

power to the rich, but in attempting to overreach the people. There comes a

time when out of a false good there arises a true evil, since the encroachments

of the rich are more destructive to the constitution than those of the people.


XIII


The devices by which oligarchies deceive the people are five in number;

they relate to (1) the assembly; (2) the magistracies; (3) the courts of law; (4)

the use of arms; (5) gymnastic exercises. (1) The assemblies are thrown open

to all, but either the rich only are fined for non-attendance, or a much larger

fine is inflicted upon them. (2) to the magistracies, those who are qualified by

property cannot decline office upon oath, but the poor may. (3) In the law

courts the rich, and the rich only, are fined if they do not serve, the poor are

let off with impunity, or, as in the laws of Charondas, a larger fine is inflictedon the rich, and a smaller one on the poor. In some states all citizen who have

registered themselves are allowed to attend the assembly and to try causes;

but if after registration they do not attend either in the assembly or at the

courts, heavy fines are imposed upon them. The intention is that through fear

of the fines they may avoid registering themselves, and then they cannot sit in

the law-courts or in the assembly. concerning (4) the possession of arms, and

(5) gymnastic exercises, they legislate in a similar spirit. For the poor are not

obliged to have arms, but the rich are fined for not having them; and in like

manner  no  penalty  is  inflicted  on  the  poor  for  non-attendance  at  the

gymnasium, and consequently, having nothing to fear, they do not attend,

whereas the rich are liable to a fine, and therefore they take care to attend.

  These are the devices of oligarchical legislators, and in democracies they

have counter devices. They pay the poor for attending the assemblies and the

law-courts, and they inflict no penalty on the rich for non-attendance. It is

obvious that he who would duly mix the two principles should combine the

practice of both, and provide that the poor should be paid to attend, and the

rich fined if they do not attend, for then all will take part; if there is no such

combination, power will be in the hands of one party only. The government

should be confined to those who carry arms. As to the property qualification,

no  absolute  rule  can  be  laid  down,  but  we  must  see  what  is  the  highest

qualification sufficiently comprehensive to secure that the number of those

who have the rights of citizens exceeds the number of those excluded. Even if

they  have  no  share  in  office,  the  poor,  provided  only  that  they  are  not

outraged or deprived of their property, will be quiet enough.

But to secure gentle treatment for the poor is not an easy thing, since a

ruling class is not always humane. And in time of war the poor are apt to

hesitate unless they are fed; when fed, they are willing enough to fight. In

some states the government is vested, not only in those who are actually

serving, but also in those who have served; among the Malians, for example,

the governing body consisted of the latter, while the magistrates were chosen

from those actually on service. And the earliest government which existed

among the Hellenes, after the overthrow of the kingly power, grew up out of

the warrior class, and was originally taken from the knights (for strength and

superiority  in  war  at  that  time  depended  on  cavalry;  indeed,  without

discipline, infantry are useless, and in ancient times there was no military

knowledge  or  tactics,  and  therefore  the  strength  of  armies  lay  in  their

cavalry). But when cities increased and the heavy armed grew in strength,more had a share in the government; and this is the reason why the states

which  we  call  constitutional  governments  have  been  hitherto  called

democracies. Ancient constitutions, as might be expected, were oligarchical

and  royal;  their  population  being  small  they  had  no  considerable  middle

class; the people were weak in numbers and organization, and were therefore

more contented to be governed.

I have explained why there are various forms of government, and why

there are more than is generally supposed; for democracy, as well as other

constitutions, has more than one form: also what their differences are, and

whence  they  arise,  and  what  is  the  best  form  of  government,  speaking

generally and to whom the various forms of government are best suited; all

this has now been explained.


XIV


  Having thus gained an appropriate basis of discussion, we will proceed to

speak of the points which follow next in order. We will consider the subject

not  only  in  general  but  with  reference  to  particular  constitutions.  All

constitutions have three elements, concerning which the good lawgiver has to

regard what is expedient for each constitution. When they are well-ordered,

the  constitution  is  well-ordered,  and  as  they  differ  from  one  another,

constitutions differ. There is (1) one element which deliberates about public

affairs; secondly (2) that concerned with the magistrates—the question being,

what  they  should  be,  over  what  they  should  exercise  authority,  and  what

should be the mode of electing to them; and thirdly (3) that which has judicial

power.

The  deliberative  element  has  authority  in  matters  of  war  and  peace,  in

making  and  unmaking  alliances;  it  passes  laws,  inflicts  death,  exile,

confiscation, elects magistrates and audits their accounts. These powers must

be assigned either all to all the citizens or an to some of them (for example, to

one or more magistracies, or different causes to different magistracies), or

some of them to all, and others of them only to some. That all things should

be decided by all is characteristic of democracy; this is the sort of equality

which the people desire. But there are various ways in which all may share in

the government; they may deliberate, not all in one body, but by turns, as in

the  constitution  of  Telecles  the  Milesian.  There  are  other  constitutions  in

which the boards of magistrates meet and deliberate, but come into office byturns, and are elected out of the tribes and the very smallest divisions of the

state, until every one has obtained office in his turn. The citizens, on the other

hand, are assembled only for the purposes of legislation, and to consult about

the constitution, and to hear the edicts of the magistrates. In another variety

of  democracy  the  citizen  form  one  assembly,  but  meet  only  to  elect

magistrates,  to  pass  laws,  to  advise  about  war  and  peace,  and  to  make

scrutinies. Other matters are referred severally to special magistrates, who are

elected by vote or by lot out of all the citizens Or again, the citizens meet

about election to offices and about scrutinies, and deliberate concerning war

or alliances while other matters are administered by the magistrates, who, as

far as is possible, are elected by vote. I am speaking of those magistracies in

which special knowledge is required. A fourth form of democracy is when all

the citizens meet to deliberate about everything, and the magistrates decide

nothing, but only make the preliminary inquiries; and that is the way in which

the last and worst form of democracy, corresponding, as we maintain, to the

close family oligarchy and to tyranny, is at present administered. All these

modes are democratical.

On the other hand, that some should deliberate about all is oligarchical.

This again is a mode which, like the democratical has many forms. When the

deliberative  class  being  elected  out  of  those  who  have  a  moderate

qualification are numerous and they respect and obey the prohibitions of the

law without altering it, and any one who has the required qualification shares

in  the  government,  then,  just  because  of  this  moderation,  the  oligarchy

inclines towards polity. But when only selected individuals and not the whole

people share in the deliberations of the state, then, although, as in the former

case, they observe the law, the government is a pure oligarchy. Or, again,

when  those  who  have  the  power  of  deliberation  are  self-elected,  and  son

succeeds father, and they and not the laws are supreme—the government is of

necessity  oligarchical.  Where,  again,  particular  persons  have  authority  in

particular matters—for example, when the whole people decide about peace

and war and hold scrutinies, but the magistrates regulate everything else, and

they are elected by vote—there the government is an aristocracy. And if some

questions  are  decided  by  magistrates  elected  by  vote,  and  others  by

magistrates elected by lot, either absolutely or out of select candidates, or

elected partly by vote, partly by lot—these practices are partly characteristic

of  an  aristocratical  government,  and  party  of  a  pure  constitutional

government.  These are the various forms of the deliberative body; they correspond to

the  various  forms  of  government.  And  the  government  of  each  state  is

administered according to one or other of the principles which have been laid

down.  Now  it  is  for  the  interest  of  democracy,  according  to  the  most

prevalent notion of it (I am speaking of that extreme form of democracy in

which the people are supreme even over the laws), with a view to better

deliberation to adopt the custom of oligarchies respecting courts of law. For

in oligarchies the rich who are wanted to be judges are compelled to attend

under pain of a fine, whereas in deinocracies the poor are paid to attend. And

this practice of oligarchies should be adopted by democracies in their public

assemblies,  for  they  will  advise  better  if  they  all  deliberate  together—the

people with the notables and the notables with the people. It is also a good

plan that those who deliberate should be elected by vote or by lot in equal

numbers out of the different classes; and that if the people greatly exceed in

number those who have political training, pay should not be given to all, but

only to as many as would balance the number of the notables, or that the

number in excess should be eliminated by lot. But in oligarchies either certain

persons should be co-opted from the mass, or a class of officers should be

appointed such as exist in some states who are termed probuli and guardians

of  the  law;  and  the  citizens  should  occupy  themselves  exclusively  with

matters on which these have previously deliberated; for so the people will

have a share in the deliberations of the state, but will not be able to disturb

the  principles  of  the  constitution.  Again,  in  oligarchies  either  the  people

ought  to  accept  the  measures  of  the  government,  or  not  to  pass  anything

contrary to them; or, if all are allowed to share in counsel, the decision should

rest  with  the  magistrates.  The  opposite  of  what  is  done  in  constitutional

governments should be the rule in oligarchies; the veto of the majority should

be final, their assent not final, but the proposal should be referred back to the

magistrates. Whereas in constitutional governments they take the contrary

course; the few have the negative, not the affirmative power; the affirmation

of everything rests with the multitude.

These, then, are our conclusions respecting the deliberative, that is, the

supreme element in states.


XV


Next we will proceed to consider the distribution of offices; this too, beinga part of politics concerning which many questions arise: What shall their

number be? Over what shall they preside, and what shall be their duration?

Sometimes they last for six months, sometimes for less; sometimes they are

annual, while in other cases offices are held for still longer periods. Shall they

be for life or for a long term of years; or, if for a short term only, shall the

same persons hold them over and over again, or once only? Also about the

appointment  to  them—from  whom  are  they  to  be  chosen,  by  whom,  and

how? We should first be in a position to say what are the possible varieties of

them, and then we may proceed to determine which are suited to different

forms of government. But what are to be included under the term ‘offices’?

That is a question not quite so easily answered. For a political community

requires many officers; and not every one who is chosen by vote or by lot is

to be regarded as a ruler. In the first place there are the priests, who must be

distinguished from political officers; masters of choruses and heralds, even

ambassadors, are elected by vote. Some duties of superintendence again are

political, extending either to all the citizens in a single sphere of action, like

the office of the general who superintends them when they are in the field, or

to a section of them only, like the inspectorships of women or of youth. Other

offices  are  concerned  with  household  management,  like  that  of  the  corn

measurers who exist in many states and are elected officers. There are also

menial  offices  which  the  rich  have  executed  by  their  slaves.  Speaking

generally, those are to be called offices to which the duties are assigned of

deliberating  about  certain  measures  and  ofjudging  and  commanding,

especially the last; for to command is the especial duty of a magistrate. But

the question is not of any importance in practice; no one has ever brought

into  court  the  meaning  of  the  word,  although  such  problems  have  a

speculative interest.

  What kinds of offices, and how many, are necessary to the existence of a

state, and which, if not necessary, yet conduce to its well being are much

more important considerations, affecting all constitutions, but more especially

small states. For in great states it is possible, and indeed necessary, that every

office should have a special function; where the citizens are numerous, many

may hold office. And so it happens that some offices a man holds a second

time only after a long interval, and others he holds once only; and certainly

every  work  is  better  done  which  receives  the  sole,  and  not  the  divided

attention of the worker. But in small states it is necessary to combine many

offices in a few hands, since the small number of citizens does not admit ofmany holding office: for who will there be to succeed them? And yet small

states at times require the same offices and laws as large ones; the difference

is that the one want them often, the others only after long intervals. Hence

there is no reason why the care of many offices should not be imposed on the

same person, for they will not interfere with each other. When the population

is small, offices should be like the spits which also serve to hold a lamp. We

must first ascertain how many magistrates are necessary in every state, and

also how many are not exactly necessary, but are nevertheless useful, and

then there will be no difficulty in seeing what offices can be combined in one.

We should also know over which matters several local tribunals are to have

jurisdiction,  and  in  which  authority  should  be  centralized:  for  example,

should one person keep order in the market and another in some other place,

or should the same person be responsible everywhere? Again, should offices

be divided according to the subjects with which they deal, or according to the

persons with whom they deal: I mean to say, should one person see to good

order in general, or one look after the boys, another after the women, and so

on? Further, under different constitutions, should the magistrates be the same

or different? For example, in democracy, oligarchy, aristocracy, monarchy,

should there be the same magistrates, although they are elected, not out of

equal or similar classes of citizen but differently under different constitutions

—in  aristocracies,  for  example,  they  are  chosen  from  the  educated,  in

oligarchies from the wealthy, and in democracies from the free—or are there

certain differences in the offices answering to them as well, and may the

same be suitable to some, but different offices to others? For in some states it

may be convenient that the same office should have a more extensive, in

other states a narrower sphere. Special offices are peculiar to certain forms of

government: for example that of probuli, which is not a democratic office,

although a bule or council is. There must be some body of men whose duty is

to prepare measures for the people in order that they may not be diverted

from their business; when these are few in number, the state inclines to an

oligarchy: or rather the probuli must always be few, and are therefore an

oligarchical element. But when both institutions exist in a state, the probuli

are a check on the council; for the counselors is a democratic element, but the

probuli  are  oligarchical.  Even  the  power  of  the  council  disappears  when

democracy has taken that extreme form in which the people themselves are

always meeting and deliberating about everything. This is the case when the

members of the assembly receive abundant pay; for they have nothing to doand are always holding assemblies and deciding everything for themselves. A

magistracy which controls the boys or the women, or any similar office, is

suited  to  an  aristocracy  rather  than  to  a  democracy;  for  how  can  the

magistrates prevent the wives of the poor from going out of doors? Neither is

it an oligarchical office; for the wives of the oligarchs are too fine to be

controlled.

  Enough of these matters. I will now inquire into appointments to offices.

The varieties depend on three terms, and the combinations of these give all

possible  modes:  first,  who  appoints?  secondly,  from  whom?  and  thirdly,

how? Each of these three admits of three varieties: (A) All the citizens, or (B)

only some, appoint. Either (1) the magistrates are chosen out of all or (2) out

of some who are distinguished either by a property qualification, or by birth,

or merit, or for some special reason, as at Megara only those were eligible

who  had  returned  from  exile  and  fought  together  against  the  democracy.

They may be appointed either (a) by vote or (b) by lot. Again, these several

varieties may be coupled, I mean that (C) some officers may be elected by

some, others by all, and (3) some again out of some, and others out of all, and

(c) some by vote and others by lot. Each variety of these terms admits of four

modes.

For either (A 1 a) all may appoint from all by vote, or (A 1 b) all from all

by lot, or (A 2 a) all from some by vote, or (A 2 b) all from some by lot (and

from  all,  either  by  sections,  as,  for  example,  by  tribes,  and  wards,  and

phratries, until all the citizens have been gone through; or the citizens may be

in all cases eligible indiscriminately); or again (A 1 c, A 2 c) to some offices

in the one way, to some in the other. Again, if it is only some that appoint,

they may do so either (B 1 a) from all by vote, or (B 1 b) from all by lot, or

(B 2 a) from some by vote, or (B 2 b) from some by lot, or to some offices in

the one way, to others in the other, i.e., (B 1 c) from all, to some offices by

vote, to some by lot, and (B 2 C) from some, to some offices by vote, to some

by lot. Thus the modes that arise, apart from two (C, 3) out of the three

couplings, number twelve. Of these systems two are popular, that all should

appoint from all (A 1 a) by vote or (A 1 b) by lot—or (A 1 c) by both. That

all should not appoint at once, but should appoint from all or from some

either by lot or by vote or by both, or appoint to some offices from all and to

others from some (’by both’ meaning to some offices by lot, to others by

vote), is characteristic of a polity. And (B 1 c) that some should appoint from

all, to some offices by vote, to others by lot, is also characteristic of a polity,but more oligarchical than the former method. And (A 3 a, b, c, B 3 a, b, c) to

appoint  from  both,  to  some  offices  from  all,  to  others  from  some,  is

characteristic of a polity with a leaning towards aristocracy. That (B 2) some

should appoint from some is oligarchical—even (B 2 b) that some should

appoint from some by lot (and if this does not actually occur, it is none the

less oligarchical in character), or (B 2 C) that some should appoint from some

by both. (B 1 a) that some should appoint from all, and (A 2 a) that all should

appoint from some, by vote, is aristocratic.

  These  are  the  different  modes  of  constituting  magistrates,  and  these

correspond to different forms of government: which are proper to which, or

how they ought to be established, will be evident when we determine the

nature  of  their  powers.  By  powers  I  mean  such  powers  as  a  magistrate

exercises over the revenue or in defense of the country; for there are various

kinds of power: the power of the general, for example, is not the same with

that which regulates contracts in the market.


XVI


Of the three parts of government, the judicial remains to be considered,

and this we shall divide on the same principle. There are three points on

which the variedes of law-courts depend: The persons from whom they are

appointed, the matters with which they are concerned, and the manner of their

appointment. I mean, (1) are the judges taken from all, or from some only?

(2) how many kinds of law-courts are there? (3) are the judges chosen by

vote or by lot?

First, let me determine how many kinds of law-courts there are. There are

eight  in  number:  One  is  the  court  of  audits  or  scrutinies;  a  second  takes

cognizance of ordinary offenses against the state; a third is concerned with

treason  against  the  constitution;  the  fourth  determines  disputes  respecting

penalties,  whether  raised  by  magistrates  or  by  private  persons;  the  fifth

decides  the  more  important  civil  cases;  the  sixth  tries  cases  of  homicide,

which are of various kinds, (a) premeditated, (b) involuntary, (c) cases in

which the guilt is confessed but the justice is disputed; and there may be a

fourth court (d) in which murderers who have fled from justice are tried after

their return; such as the Court of Phreatto is said to be at Athens. But cases of

this  sort  rarely  happen  at  all  even  in  large  cities.  The  different  kinds  of

homicide may be tried either by the same or by different courts. (7) There arecourts for strangers: of these there are two subdivisions, (a) for the settlement

of their disputes with one another, (b) for the settlement of disputes between

them and the citizens. And besides all these there must be (8) courts for small

suits about sums of a drachma up to five drachmas, or a little more, which

have to be determined, but they do not require many judges.

  Nothing  more  need  be  said  of  these  small  suits,  nor  of  the  courts  for

homicide and for strangers: I would rather speak of political cases, which,

when mismanaged, create division and disturbances in constitutions.

Now  if  all  the  citizens  judge,  in  all  the  different  cases  which  I  have

distinguished, they may be appointed by vote or by lot, or sometimes by lot

and sometimes by vote. Or when a single class of causes are tried, the judges

who decide them may be appointed, some by vote, and some by lot. These

then are the four modes of appointing judges from the whole people, and

there will be likewise four modes, if they are elected from a part only; for

they may be appointed from some by vote and judge in all causes; or they

may be appointed from some by lot and judge in all causes; or they may be

elected in some cases by vote, and in some cases taken by lot, or some courts,

even when judging the same causes, may be composed of members some

appointed by vote and some by lot. These modes, then, as was said, answer to

those previously mentioned.

  Once more, the modes of appointment may be combined; I mean, that

some may be chosen out of the whole people, others out of some, some out of

both; for example, the same tribunal may be composed of some who were

elected out of all, and of others who were elected out of some, either by vote

or by lot or by both.

In  how  many  forms  law-courts  can  be  established  has  now  been

considered. The first form, viz., that in which the judges are taken from all

the citizens, and in which all causes are tried, is democratical; the second,

which is composed of a few only who try all causes, oligarchical; the third, in

which some courts are taken from all classes, and some from certain classes

only, aristocratical and constitutional.                                  Politics, Book V


Translated by Benjamin Jowett


<

div id="book5" class="book">


I


The design which we proposed to ourselves is now nearly completed. Next

in order follow the causes of revolution in states, how many, and of what

nature they are; what modes of destruction apply to particular states, and out

of  what,  and  into  what  they  mostly  change;  also  what  are  the  modes  of

preservation in states generally, or in a particular state, and by what means

each state may be best preserved: these questions remain to be considered.

In the first place we must assume as our starting-point that in the many

forms  of  government  which  have  sprung  up  there  has  always  been  an

acknowledgment of justice and proportionate equality, although mankind fail

attaining them, as I have already explained. Democracy, for example, arises

out of the notion that those who are equal in any respect are equal in all

respects; because men are equally free, they claim to be absolutely equal.

Oligarchy is based on the notion that those who are unequal in one respect

are in all respects unequal; being unequal, that is, in property, they suppose

themselves to be unequal absolutely. The democrats think that as they are

equal they ought to be equal in all things; while the oligarchs, under the idea

that they are unequal, claim too much, which is one form of inequality. All

these forms of government have a kind of justice, but, tried by an absolute

standard, they are faulty; and, therefore, both parties, whenever their share in

the  government  does  not  accord  with  their  preconceived  ideas,  stir  up

revolution. Those who excel in virtue have the best right of all to rebel (for

they alone can with reason be deemed absolutely unequal), but then they are

of all men the least inclined to do so. There is also a superiority which is

claimed by men of rank; for they are thought noble because they spring from

wealthy and virtuous ancestors. Here then, so to speak, are opened the very

springs and fountains of revolution; and hence arise two sorts of changes ingovernments; the one affecting the constitution, when men seek to change

from an existing form into some other, for example, from democracy into

oligarchy, and from oligarchy into democracy, or from either of them into

constitutional  government  or  aristocracy,  and  conversely;  the  other  not

affecting the constitution, when, without disturbing the form of government,

whether  oligarchy,  or  monarchy,  or  any  other,  they  try  to  get  the

administration into their own hands. Further, there is a question of degree; an

oligarchy,  for  example,  may  become  more  or  less  oligarchical,  and  a

democracy more or less democratical; and in like manner the characteristics

of the other forms of government may be more or less strictly maintained. Or

the revolution may be directed against a portion of the constitution only, e.g.,

the establishment or overthrow of a particular office: as at Sparta it is said

that Lysander attempted to overthrow the monarchy, and King Pausanias, the

Ephoralty.  At  Epidamnus,  too,  the  change  was  partial.  For  instead  of

phylarchs or heads of tribes, a council was appointed; but to this day the

magistrates are the only members of the ruling class who are compelled to go

to  the  Heliaea  when  an  election  takes  place,  and  the  office  of  the  single

archon was another oligarchical feature. Everywhere inequality is a cause of

revolution, but an inequality in which there is no proportion—for instance, a

perpetual monarchy among equals; and always it is the desire of equality

which rises in rebellion.

Now equality is of two kinds, numerical and proportional; by the first I

mean sameness or equality in number or size;  by the second, equality of

ratios. For example, the excess of three over two is numerically equal to the

excess of two over one; whereas four exceeds two in the same ratio in which

two exceeds one, for two is the same part of four that one is of two, namely,

the half. As I was saying before, men agree that justice in the abstract is

proportion, but they differ in that some think that if they are equal in any

respect  they  are  equal  absolutely,  others  that  if  they  are  unequal  in  any

respect they should be unequal in all. Hence there are two principal forms of

government, democracy and oligarchy; for good birth and virtue are rare, but

wealth and numbers are more common. In what city shall we find a hundred

persons of good birth and of virtue? whereas the rich everywhere abound.

That a state should be ordered, simply and wholly, according to either kind of

equality,  is  not  a  good  thing;  the  proof  is  the  fact  that  such  forms  of

government never last. They are originally based on a mistake, and, as they

begin badly, cannot fall to end badly. The inference is that both kinds ofequality should be employed; numerical in some cases, and proportionate in

others.

  Still  democracy  appears  to  be  safer  and  less  liable  to  revolution  than

oligarchy.  For  in  oligarchies  there  is  the  double  danger  of  the  oligarchs

falling out among themselves and also with the people; but in democracies

there is only the danger of a quarrel with the oligarchs. No dissension worth

mentioning arises among the people themselves. And we may further remark

that  a  government  which  is  composed  of  the  middle  class  more  nearly

approximates  to  democracy  than  to  oligarchy,  and  is  the  safest  of  the

imperfect forms of government.


II


In considering how dissensions and poltical revolutions arise, we must first

of all ascertain the beginnings and causes of them which affect constitutions

generally. They may be said to be three in number; and we have now to give

an outline of each. We want to know (1) what is the feeling? (2) what are the

motives of those who make them? (3) whence arise political disturbances and

quarrels? The universal and chief cause of this revolutionary feeling has been

already mentioned; viz., the desire of equality, when men think that they are

equal  to  others  who  have  more  than  themselves;  or,  again,  the  desire  of

inequality and superiority, when conceiving themselves to be superior they

think  that  they  have  not  more  but  the  same  or  less  than  their  inferiors;

pretensions which may and may not be just. Inferiors revolt in order that they

may be equal, and equals that they may be superior. Such is the state of mind

which creates revolutions. The motives for making them are the desire of

gain and honor, or the fear of dishonor and loss; the authors of them want to

divert punishment or dishonor from themselves or their friends. The causes

and reasons of revolutions, whereby men are themselves affected in the way

described, and about the things which I have mentioned, viewed in one way

may be regarded as seven, and in another as more than seven. Two of them

have been already noticed; but they act in a different manner, for men are

excited against one another by the love of gain and honor—not, as in the case

which I have just supposed, in order to obtain them for themselves, but at

seeing others, justly or unjustly, engrossing them. Other causes are insolence,

fear, excessive predominance, contempt, disproportionate increase in some

part of the state; causes of another sort are election intrigues, carelessness,neglect about trifles, dissimilarity of elements.


III


  What share insolence and avarice have in creating revolutions, and how

they work, is plain enough. When the magistrates are insolent and grasping

they  conspire  against  one  another  and  also  against  the  constitution  from

which they derive their power, making their gains either at the expense of

individuals or of the public. It is evident, again, what an influence honor

exerts  and  how  it  is  a  cause  of  revolution.  Men  who  are  themselves

dishonored and who see others obtaining honors rise in rebellion; the honor

or dishonor when undeserved is unjust; and just when awarded according to

merit.

  Again, superiority is a cause of revolution when one or more persons have

a power which is too much for the state and the power of the government;

this is a condition of affairs out of which there arises a monarchy, or a family

oligarchy. And therefore, in some places, as at Athens and Argos, they have

recourse to ostracism. But how much better to provide from the first that

there should be no such pre-eminent individuals instead of letting them come

into existence and then finding a remedy.

  Another cause of revolution is fear. Either men have committed wrong,

and are afraid of punishment, or they are expecting to suffer wrong and are

desirous of anticipating their enemy. Thus at Rhodes the notables conspired

against the people through fear of the suits that were brought against them.

Contempt  is  also  a  cause  of  insurrection  and  revolution;  for  example,  in

oligarchies—when those who have no share in the state are the majority, they

revolt,  because  they  think  that  they  are  the  stronger.  Or,  again,  in

democracies, the rich despise the disorder and anarchy of the state; at Thebes,

for example, where, after the battle of Oenophyta, the bad administration of

the democracy led to its ruin. At Megara the fall of the democracy was due to

a defeat occasioned by disorder and anarchy. And at Syracuse the democracy

aroused contempt before the tyranny of Gelo arose; at Rhodes, before the

insurrection.

  Political revolutions also spring from a disproportionate increase in any

part of the state. For as a body is made up of many members, and every

member ought to grow in proportion, that symmetry may be preserved; but

loses its nature if the foot be four cubits long and the rest of the body twospans; and, should the abnormal increase be one of quality as well as of

quantity, may even take the form of another animal: even so a state has many

parts, of which some one may often grow imperceptibly; for example, the

number  of  poor  in  democracies  and  in  constitutional  states.  And  this

disproportion may sometimes happen by an accident, as at Tarentum, from a

defeat in which many of the notables were slain in a battle with the Iapygians

just  after  the  Persian  War,  the  constitutional  government  in  consequence

becoming a democracy; or as was the case at Argos, where the Argives, after

their  army  had  been  cut  to  pieces  on  the  seventh  day  of  the  month  by

Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian, were compelled to admit to citizen some of

their Perioeci; and at Athens, when, after frequent defeats of their infantry at

the time of the Peloponnesian War, the notables were reduced in number,

because the soldiers had to be taken from the roll of citizens. Revolutions

arise from this cause as well, in democracies as in other forms of government,

but not to so great an extent. When the rich grow numerous or properties

increase, the form of government changes into an oligarchy or a government

of  families.  Forms  of  government  also  change—sometimes  even  without

revolution,  owing  to  election  contests,  as  at  Heraea  (where,  instead  of

electing their magistrates, they took them by lot, because the electors were in

the habit of choosing their own partisans); or owing to carelessness, when

disloyal persons are allowed to find their way into the highest offices, as at

Oreum, where, upon the accession of Heracleodorus to office, the oligarchy

was overthrown, and changed by him into a constitutional and democratical

government.

  Again, the revolution may be facilitated by the slightness of the change; I

mean that a great change may sometimes slip into the constitution through

neglect  of  a  small  matter;  at  Ambracia,  for  instance,  the  qualification  for

office, small at first, was eventually reduced to nothing. For the Ambraciots

thought that a small qualification was much the same as none at all.

  Another cause of revolution is difference of races which do not at once

acquire a common spirit; for a state is not the growth of a day, any more than

it grows out of a multitude brought together by accident. Hence the reception

of strangers in colonies, either at the time of their foundation or afterwards,

has generally produced revolution; for example, the Achaeans who joined the

Troezenians in the foundation of Sybaris, becoming later the more numerous,

expelled them; hence the curse fell upon Sybaris. At Thurii the Sybarites

quarrelled  with  their  fellow-colonists;  thinking  that  the  land  belonged  tothem, they wanted too much of it and were driven out. At Byzantium the new

colonists were detected in a conspiracy, and were expelled by force of arms;

the people of Antissa, who had received the Chian exiles, fought with them,

and drove them out; and the Zancleans, after having received the Samians,

were driven by them out of their own city. The citizens of Apollonia on the

Euxine, after the introduction of a fresh body of colonists, had a revolution;

the Syracusans, after the expulsion of their tyrants, having admitted strangers

and mercenaries to the rights of citizenship, quarrelled and came to blows;

the people of Amphipolis, having received Chalcidian colonists, were nearly

all expelled by them.

Now, in oligarchies the masses make revolution under the idea that they

are unjustly treated, because, as I said before, they are equals, and have not

an equal share, and in democracies the notables revolt, because they are not

equals, and yet have only an equal share.

  Again, the situation of cities is a cause of revolution when the country is

not naturally adapted to preserve the unity of the state. For example, the

Chytians at Clazomenae did not agree with the people of the island; and the

people  of  Colophon  quarrelled  with  the  Notians;  at  Athens  too,  the

inhabitants of the Piraeus are more democratic than those who live in the city.

For just as in war the impediment of a ditch, though ever so small, may break

a regiment, so every cause of difference, however slight, makes a breach in a

city.  The  greatest  opposition  is  confessedly  that  of  virtue  and  vice;  next

comes that of wealth and poverty; and there are other antagonistic elements,

greater or less, of which one is this difference of place.


IV


In revolutions the occasions may be trifling, but great interests are at stake.

Even trifles are most important when they concern the rulers, as was the case

of old at Syracuse; for the Syracusan constitution was once changed by a

love-quarrel of two young men, who were in the government. The story is

that while one of them was away from home his beloved was gained over by

his companion, and he to revenge himself seduced the other’s wife. They

then drew the members of the ruling class into their quarrel and so split all

the people into portions. We learn from this story that we should be on our

guard  against  the  beginnings  of  such  evils,  and  should  put  an  end  to  the

quarrels of chiefs and mighty men. The mistake lies in the beginning—as theproverb says—‘Well begun is half done’; so an error at the beginning, though

quite small, bears the same ratio to the errors in the other parts. In general,

when  the  notables  quarrel,  the  whole  city  is  involved,  as  happened  in

Hesdaea  after  the  Persian  War.  The  occasion  was  the  division  of  an

inheritance; one of two brothers refused to give an account of their father’s

property  and  the  treasure  which  he  had  found:  so  the  poorer  of  the  two

quarrelled with him and enlisted in his cause the popular party, the other, who

was very rich, the wealthy classes.

At Delphi, again, a quarrel about a marriage was the beginning of all the

troubles  which  followed.  In  this  case  the  bridegroom,  fancying  some

occurrence to be of evil omen, came to the bride, and went away without

taking her. Whereupon her relations, thinking that they were insulted by him,

put some of the sacred treasure among his offerings while he was sacrificing,

and  then  slew  him,  pretending  that  he  had  been  robbing  the  temple.  At

Mytilene,  too,  a  dispute  about  heiresses  was  the  beginning  of  many

misfortunes, and led to the war with the Athenians in which Paches took their

city. A wealthy citizen, named Timophanes, left two daughters; Dexander,

another citizen, wanted to obtain them for his sons; but he was rejected in his

suit, whereupon he stirred up a revolution, and instigated the Athenians (of

whom he was proxenus) to interfere. A similar quarrel about an heiress arose

at Phocis between Mnaseas the father of Mnason, and Euthycrates the father

of  Onomarchus;  this  was  the  beginning  of  the  Sacred  War.  A  marriage-

quarrel was also the cause of a change in the government of Epidamnus. A

certain man betrothed his daughter to a person whose father, having been

made a magistrate, fined the father of the girl, and the latter, stung by the

insult, conspired with the unenfranchised classes to overthrow the state.

  Governments  also  change  into  oligarchy  or  into  democracy  or  into  a

constitutional government because the magistrates, or some other section of

the state, increase in power or renown. Thus at Athens the reputation gained

by the court of the Areopagus, in the Persian War, seemed to tighten the reins

of government. On the other hand, the victory of Salamis, which was gained

by the common people who served in the fleet, and won for the Athenians the

empire due to command of the sea, strengthened the democracy. At Argos,

the notables, having distinguished themselves against the Lacedaemonians in

the battle of Mantinea, attempted to put down the democracy. At Syracuse,

the people, having been the chief authors of the victory in the war with the

Athenians,  changed  the  constitutional  government  into  democracy.  AtChalcis, the people, uniting with the notables, killed Phoxus the tyrant, and

then seized the government. At Ambracia, the people, in like manner, having

joined with the conspirators in expelling the tyrant Periander, transferred the

government to themselves. And generally it should be remembered that those

who have secured power to the state, whether private citizens, or magistrates,

or tribes, or any other part or section of the state, are apt to cause revolutions.

For  either  envy  of  their  greatness  draws  others  into  rebellion,  or  they

themselves, in their pride of superiority, are unwilling to remain on a level

with others.

  Revolutions also break out when opposite parties, e.g., the rich and the

people, are equally balanced, and there is little or no middle class; for, if

either party were manifestly superior, the other would not risk an attack upon

them. And, for this reason, those who are eminent in virtue usually do not stir

up insurrections, always being a minority. Such are the beginnings and causes

of the disturbances and revolutions to which every form of government is

liable.

  Revolutions are effected in two ways, by force and by fraud. Force may be

applied  either  at  the  time  of  making  the  revolution  or  afterwards.  Fraud,

again,  is  of  two  kinds;  for  (1)  sometimes  the  citizens  are  deceived  into

acquiescing  in  a  change  of  government,  and  afterwards  they  are  held  in

subjection against their will. This was what happened in the case of the Four

Hundred,  who  deceived  the  people  by  telling  them  that  the  king  would

provide money for the war against the Lacedaemonians, and, having cheated

the people, still endeavored to retain the government. (2) In other cases the

people  are  persuaded  at  first,  and  afterwards,  by  a  repetition  of  the

persuasion, their goodwill and allegiance are retained. The revolutions which

effect constitutions generally spring from the above-mentioned causes.


V


And now, taking each constitution separately, we must see what follows

from the principles already laid down.

  Revolutions in democracies are generally caused by the intemperance of

demagogues, who either in their private capacity lay information against rich

men until they compel them to combine (for a common danger unites even

the bitterest enemies), or coming forward in public stir up the people against

them. The truth of this remark is proved by a variety of examples. At Cos thedemocracy  was  overthrown  because  wicked  demagogues  arose,  and  the

notables combined. At Rhodes the demagogues not only provided pay for the

multitude, but prevented them from making good to the trierarchs the sums

which had been expended by them; and they, in consequence of the suits

which were brought against them, were compelled to combine and put down

the democracy. The democracy at Heraclea was overthrown shortly after the

foundation of the colony by the injustice of the demagogues, which drove out

the notables, who came back in a body and put an end to the democracy.

Much in the same manner the democracy at Megara was overturned; there the

demagogues drove out many of the notables in order that they might be able

to  confiscate  their  property.  At  length  the  exiles,  becoming  numerous,

returned, and, engaging and defeating the people, established the oligarchy.

The  same  thing  happened  with  the  democracy  of  Cyme,  which  was

overthrown by Thrasymachus. And we may observe that in most states the

changes have been of this character. For sometimes the demagogues, in order

to  curry  favor  with  the  people,  wrong  the  notables  and  so  force  them  to

combine;  either  they  make  a  division  of  their  property,  or  diminish  their

incomes  by  the  imposition  of  public  services,  and  sometimes  they  bring

accusations against the rich that they may have their wealth to confiscate.

Of old, the demagogue was also a general, and then democracies changed

into tyrannies. Most of the ancient tyrants were originally demagogues. They

are not so now, but they were then; and the reason is that they were generals

and not orators, for oratory had not yet come into fashion. Whereas in our

day, when the art of rhetoric has made such progress, the orators lead the

people, but their ignorance of military matters prevents them from usurping

power; at any rate instances to the contrary are few and slight. Tyrannies

were more common formerly than now, for this reason also, that great power

was placed in the hands of individuals; thus a tyranny arose at Miletus out of

the  office  of  the  Prytanis,  who  had  supreme  authority  in  many  important

matters.  Moreover,  in  those  days,  when  cities  were  not  large,  the  people

dwelt in the fields, busy at their work; and their chiefs, if they possessed any

military  talent,  seized  the  opportunity,  and  winning  the  confidence  of  the

masses by professing their hatred of the wealthy, they succeeded in obtaining

the tyranny. Thus at Athens Peisistratus led a faction against the men of the

plain, and Theagenes at Megara slaughtered the cattle of the wealthy, which

he found by the river side, where they had put them to graze in land not their

own.  Dionysius,  again,  was  thought  worthy  of  the  tyranny  because  hedenounced Daphnaeus and the rich; his enmity to the notables won for him

the confidence of the people. Changes also take place from the ancient to the

latest  form  of  democracy;  for  where  there  is  a  popular  election  of  the

magistrates and no property qualification, the aspirants for office get hold of

the people, and contrive at last even to set them above the laws. A more or

less complete cure for this state of things is for the separate tribes, and not the

whole people, to elect the magistrates.

  These are the principal causes of revolutions in democracies.


VI


  There are two patent causes of revolutions in oligarchies: (1) First, when

the oligarchs oppress the people, for then anybody is good enough to be their

champion,  especially  if  he  be  himself  a  member  of  the  oligarchy,  as

Lygdamis at Naxos, who afterwards came to be tyrant. But revolutions which

commence  outside  the  governing  class  may  be  further  subdivided.

Sometimes, when the government is very exclusive, the revolution is brought

about  by  persons  of  the  wealthy  class  who  are  excluded,  as  happened  at

Massalia and Istros and Heraclea, and other cities. Those who had no share in

the government created a disturbance, until first the elder brothers, and then

the younger, were admitted; for in some places father and son, in others elder

and younger brothers, do not hold office together. At Massalia the oligarchy

became  more  like  a  constitutional  government,  but  at  Istros  ended  in  a

democracy,  and  at  Heraclea  was  enlarged  to  600.  At  Cnidos,  again,  the

oligarchy underwent a considerable change. For the notables fell out among

themselves,  because  only  a  few  shared  in  the  government;  there  existed

among them the rule already mentioned, that father and son not hold office

together, and, if there were several brothers, only the eldest was admitted.

The people took advantage of the quarrel, and choosing one of the notables to

be their leader, attacked and conquered the oligarchs, who were divided, and

division is always a source of weakness. The city of Erythrae, too, in old

times was ruled, and ruled well, by the Basilidae, but the people took offense

at the narrowness of the oligarchy and changed the constitution.

(2)  Of  internal  causes  of  revolutions  in  oligarchies  one  is  the  personal

rivalry of the oligarchs, which leads them to play the demagogue. Now, the

oligarchical  demagogue  is  of  two  sorts:  either  (a)  he  practices  upon  the

oligarchs themselves (for, although the oligarchy are quite a small number,there may be a demagogue among them, as at Athens Charicles’ party won

power  by  courting  the  Thirty,  that  of  Phrynichus  by  courting  the  Four

Hundred); or (b) the oligarchs may play the demagogue with the people. This

was the case at Larissa, where the guardians of the citizens endeavored to

gain over the people because they were elected by them; and such is the fate

of all oligarchies in which the magistrates are elected, as at Abydos, not by

the class to which they belong, but by the heavy-armed or by the people,

although they may be required to have a high qualification, or to be members

of a political club; or, again, where the law-courts are composed of persons

outside the government, the oligarchs flatter the people in order to obtain a

decision  in  their  own  favor,  and  so  they  change  the  constitution;  this

happened  at  Heraclea  in  Pontus.  Again,  oligarchies  change  whenever  any

attempt is made to narrow them; for then those who desire equal rights are

compelled to call in the people. Changes in the oligarchy also occur when the

oligarchs waste their private property by extravagant living; for then they

want to innovate, and either try to make themselves tyrants, or install some

one else in the tyranny, as Hipparinus did Dionysius at Syracuse, and as at

Amphipolis  a  man  named  Cleotimus  introduced  Chalcidian  colonists,  and

when  they  arrived,  stirred  them  up  against  the  rich.  For  a  like  reason  in

Aegina the person who carried on the negotiation with Chares endeavored to

revolutionize the state. Sometimes a party among the oligarchs try directly to

create a political change; sometimes they rob the treasury, and then either the

thieves or, as happened at Apollonia in Pontus, those who resist them in their

thieving quarrel with the rulers. But an oligarchy which is at unity with itself

is  not  easily  destroyed  from  within;  of  this  we  may  see  an  example  at

Pharsalus, for there, although the rulers are few in number, they govern a

large city, because they have a good understanding among themselves.

  Oligarchies,  again,  are  overthrown  when  another  oligarchy  is  created

within the original one, that is to say, when the whole governing body is

small and yet they do not all share in the highest offices. Thus at Elis the

governing body was a small senate; and very few ever found their way into it,

because the senators were only ninety in number, and were elected for life

and out of certain families in a manner similar to the Lacedaemonian elders.

Oligarchy is liable to revolutions alike in war and in peace; in war because,

not  being  able  to  trust  the  people,  the  oligarchs  are  compelled  to  hire

mercenaries,  and  the  general  who  is  in  command  of  them  often  ends  in

becoming  a  tyrant,  as  Timophanes  did  at  Corinth;  or  if  there  are  moregenerals  than  one  they  make  themselves  into  a  company  of  tyrants.

Sometimes the oligarchs, fearing this danger, give the people a share in the

government because their services are necessary to them. And in time of

peace, from mutual distrust, the two parties hand over the defense of the state

to the army and to an arbiter between the two factions, who often ends the

master of both. This happened at Larissa when Simos the Aleuad had the

government, and at Abydos in the days of Iphiades and the political clubs.

Revolutions  also  arise  out  of  marriages  or  lawsuits  which  lead  to  the

overthrow of one party among the oligarchs by another. Of quarrels about

marriages  I  have  already  mentioned  some  instances;  another  occurred  at

Eretria, where Diagoras overturned the oligarchy of the knights because he

had been wronged about a marriage. A revolution at Heraclea, and another at

Thebes, both arose out of decisions of law-courts upon a charge of adultery;

in both cases the punishment was just, but executed in the spirit of party, at

Heraclea upon Eurytion, and at Thebes upon Archias; for their enemies were

jealous of them and so had them pilloried in the agora. Many oligarchies have

been destroyed by some members of the ruling class taking offense at their

excessive despotism; for example, the oligarchy at Cnidus and at Chios.

  Changes of constitutional governments, and also of oligarchies which limit

the office of counselor, judge, or other magistrate to persons having a certain

money  qualification,  often  occur  by  accident.  The  qualification  may  have

been originally fixed according to the circumstances of the time, in such a

manner  as  to  include  in  an  oligarchy  a  few  only,  or  in  a  constitutional

government the middle class. But after a time of prosperity, whether arising

from peace or some other good fortune, the same property becomes many

times  as  valuable,  and  then  everybody  participates  in  every  office;  this

happens sometimes gradually and insensibly, and sometimes quickly. These

are the causes of changes and revolutions in oligarchies.

We must remark generally both of democracies and oligarchies, that they

sometimes change, not into the opposite forms of government, but only into

another  variety  of  the  same  class;  I  mean  to  say,  from  those  forms  of

democracy and oligarchy which are regulated by law into those which are

arbitrary, and conversely.


VII


In aristocracies revolutions are stirred up when a few only share in thehonors  of  the  state;  a  cause  which  has  been  already  shown  to  affect

oligarchies; for an aristocracy is a sort of oligarchy, and, like an oligarchy, is

the government of a few, although few not for the same reason; hence the two

are often confounded. And revolutions will be most likely to happen, and

must happen, when the mass of the people are of the high-spirited kind, and

have a notion that they are as good as their rulers. Thus at Lacedaemon the

so-called Partheniae, who were the [illegitimate] sons of the Spartan peers,

attempted  a  revolution,  and,  being  detected,  were  sent  away  to  colonize

Tarentum. Again, revolutions occur when great men who are at least of equal

merit are dishonored by those higher in office, as Lysander was by the kings

of Sparta; or, when a brave man is excluded from the honors of the state, like

Cinadon, who conspired against the Spartans in the reign of Agesilaus; or,

again, when some are very poor and others very rich, a state of society which

is  most  often  the  result  of  war,  as  at  Lacedaemon  in  the  days  of  the

Messenian War; this is proved from the poem of Tyrtaeus, entitled ‘Good

Order’; for he speaks of certain citizens who were ruined by the war and

wanted to have a redistribution of the land. Again, revolutions arise when an

individual who is great, and might be greater, wants to rule alone, as, at

Lacedaemon, Pausanias, who was general in the Persian War, or like Hanno

at Carthage.

  Constitutional  governments  and  aristocracies  are  commonly  overthrown

owing to some deviation from justice in the constitution itself; the cause of

the  downfall  is,  in  the  former,  the  ill-mingling  of  the  two  elements,

democracy and oligarchy; in the latter, of the three elements, democracy,

oligarchy,  and  virtue,  but  especially  democracy  and  oligarchy.  For  to

combine these is the endeavor of constitutional governments; and most of the

so-called aristocracies have a like aim, but differ from polities in the mode of

combination; hence some of them are more and some less permanent. Those

which  incline  more  to  oligarchy  are  called  aristocracies,  and  those  which

incline to democracy constitutional governments. And therefore the latter are

the safer of the two; for the greater the number, the greater the strength, and

when men are equal they are contented. But the rich, if the constitution gives

them power, are apt to be insolent and avaricious; and, in general, whichever

way the constitution inclines, in that direction it changes as either party gains

strength, a constitutional government becoming a democracy, an aristocracy

an oligarchy. But the process may be reversed, and aristocracy may change

into democracy. This happens when the poor, under the idea that they arebeing  wronged,  force  the  constitution  to  take  an  opposite  form.  In  like

manner constitutional governments change into oligarchies. The only stable

principle of government is equality according to proportion, and for every

man to enjoy his own.

  What  I  have  just  mentioned  actually  happened  at  Thurii,  where  the

qualification  for  office,  at  first  high,  was  therefore  reduced,  and  the

magistrates increased in number. The notables had previously acquired the

whole of the land contrary to law; for the government tended to oligarchy,

and they were able to encroach… . But the people, who had been trained by

war, soon got the better of the guards kept by the oligarchs, until those who

had too much gave up their land.

  Again,  since  all  aristocratical  governments  incline  to  oligarchy,  the

notables are apt to be grasping; thus at Lacedaemon, where property tends to

pass  into  few  hands,  the  notables  can  do  too  much  as  they  like,  and  are

allowed  to  marry  whom  they  please.  The  city  of  Locri  was  ruined  by  a

marriage  connection  with  Dionysius,  but  such  a  thing  could  never  have

happened in a democracy, or in a wellbalanced aristocracy.

I have already remarked that in all states revolutions are occasioned by

trifles. In aristocracies, above all, they are of a gradual and imperceptible

nature. The citizens begin by giving up some part of the constitution, and so

with greater ease the government change something else which is a little

more important, until they have undermined the whole fabric of the state. At

Thurii there was a law that generals should only be re-elected after an interval

of five years, and some young men who were popular with the soldiers of the

guard for their military prowess, despising the magistrates and thinking that

they would easily gain their purpose, wanted to abolish this law and allow

their  generals  to  hold  perpetual  commands;  for  they  well  knew  that  the

people would be glad enough to elect them. Whereupon the magistrates who

had  charge  of  these  matters,  and  who  are  called  councillors,  at  first

determined to resist, but they afterwards consented, thinking that, if only this

one law was changed, no further inroad would be made on the constitution.

But other changes soon followed which they in vain attempted to oppose; and

the  state  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  revolutionists,  who  established  a

dynastic oligarchy.

All constitutions are overthrown either from within or from without; the

latter,  when  there  is  some  government  close  at  hand  having  an  opposite

interest, or at a distance, but powerful. This was exemplified in the old timesof  the  Athenians  and  the  Lacedaemonians;  the  Athenians  everywhere  put

down the oligarchies, and the Lacedaemonians the democracies.

I  have  now  explained  what  are  the  chief  causes  of  revolutions  and

dissensions in states.


VIII


We have next to consider what means there are of preserving constitutions

in general, and in particular cases. In the first place it is evident that if we

know the causes which destroy constitutions, we also know the causes which

preserve  them;  for  opposites  produce  opposites,  and  destruction  is  the

opposite of preservation.

In all well-attempered governments there is nothing which should be more

jealously maintained than the spirit of obedience to law, more especially in

small matters; for transgression creeps in unperceived and at last ruins the

state,  just  as  the  constant  recurrence  of  small  expenses  in  time  eats  up  a

fortune.  The  expense  does  not  take  place  at  once,  and  therefore  is  not

observed; the mind is deceived, as in the fallacy which says that ‘if each part

is little, then the whole is little.’ this is true in one way, but not in another, for

the whole and the all are not little, although they are made up of littles.

In the first place, then, men should guard against the beginning of change,

and in the second place they should not rely upon the political devices of

which I have already spoken invented only to deceive the people, for they are

proved by experience to be useless. Further, we note that oligarchies as well

as aristocracies may last, not from any inherent stability in such forms of

government,  but  because  the  rulers  are  on  good  terms  both  with  the

unenfranchised and with the governing classes, not maltreating any who are

excluded  from  the  government,  but  introducing  into  it  the  leading  spirits

among them. They should never wrong the ambitious in a matter of honor, or

the common people in a matter of money; and they should treat one another

and their fellow citizen in a spirit of equality. The equality which the friends

of democracy seek to establish for the multitude is not only just but likewise

expedient among equals. Hence, if the governing class are numerous, many

democratic institutions are useful; for example, the restriction of the tenure of

offices to six months, that all those who are of equal rank may share in them.

Indeed,  equals  or  peers  when  they  are  numerous  become  a  kind  of

democracy, and therefore demagogues are very likely to arise among them, asI have already remarked. The short tenure of office prevents oligarchies and

aristocracies from falling into the hands of families; it is not easy for a person

to  do  any  great  harm  when  his  tenure  of  office  is  short,  whereas  long

possession begets tyranny in oligarchies and democracies. For the aspirants to

tyranny are either the principal men of the state, who in democracies are

demagogues and in oligarchies members of ruling houses, or those who hold

great offices, and have a long tenure of them.

  Constitutions are preserved when their destroyers are at a distance, and

sometimes  also  because  they  are  near,  for  the  fear  of  them  makes  the

government keep in hand the constitution. Wherefore the ruler who has a care

of the constitution should invent terrors, and bring distant dangers near, in

order that the citizens may be on their guard, and, like sentinels in a night

watch, never relax their attention. He should endeavor too by help of the laws

to control the contentions and quarrels of the notables, and to prevent those

who  have  not  hitherto  taken  part  in  them  from  catching  the  spirit  of

contention. No ordinary man can discern the beginning of evil, but only the

true statesman.

As to the change produced in oligarchies and constitutional governments

by the alteration of the qualification, when this arises, not out of any variation

in  the  qualification  but  only  out  of  the  increase  of  money,  it  is  well  to

compare the general valuation of property with that of past years, annually in

those cities in which the census is taken annually and in larger cities every

third or fifth year. If the whole is many times greater or many times less than

when the ratings recognized by the constitution were fixed, there should be

power given by law to raise or lower the qualification as the amount is greater

or less. Where this is not done a constitutional government passes into an

oligarchy,  and  an  oligarchy  is  narrowed  to  a  rule  of  families;  or  in  the

opposite case constitutional government becomes democracy, and oligarchy

either constitutional government or democracy.

It is a principle common to democracy, oligarchy, and every other form of

government not to allow the disproportionate increase of any citizen but to

give moderate honor for a long time rather than great honor for a short time.

For men are easily spoilt; not every one can bear prosperity. But if this rule is

not observed, at any rate the honors which are given all at once should be

taken away by degrees and not all at once. Especially should the laws provide

against any one having too much power, whether derived from friends or

money;  if  he  has,  he  should  be  sent  clean  out  of  the  country.  And  sinceinnovations creep in through the private life of individuals also, there ought

to  be  a  magistracy  which  will  have  an  eye  to  those  whose  life  is  not  in

harmony with the government, whether oligarchy or democracy or any other.

And for a like reason an increase of prosperity in any part of the state should

be carefully watched. The proper remedy for this evil is always to give the

management  of  affairs  and  offices  of  state  to  opposite  elements;  such

opposites are the virtuous and the many, or the rich and the poor. Another

way is to combine the poor and the rich in one body, or to increase the middle

class: thus an end will be put to the revolutions which arise from inequality.

But above all every state should be so administered and so regulated by

law that its magistrates cannot possibly make money. In oligarchies special

precautions should be used against this evil. For the people do not take any

great offense at being kept out of the government—indeed they are rather

pleased than otherwise at having leisure for their private business—but what

irritates them is to think that their rulers are stealing the public money; then

they  are  doubly  annoyed;  for  they  lose  both  honor  and  profit.  If  office

brought no profit, then and then only could democracy and aristocracy be

combined; for both notables and people might have their wishes gratified. All

would be able to hold office, which is the aim of democracy, and the notables

would be magistrates, which is the aim of aristocracy. And this result may be

accomplished  when  there  is  no  possibility  of  making  money  out  of  the

offices; for the poor will not want to have them when there is nothing to be

gained from them—they would rather be attending to their own concerns; and

the rich, who do not want money from the public treasury, will be able to take

them; and so the poor will keep to their work and grow rich, and the notables

will not be governed by the lower class. In order to avoid peculation of the

public  money,  the  transfer  of  the  revenue  should  be  made  at  a  general

assembly of the citizens, and duplicates of the accounts deposited with the

different brotherhoods, companies, and tribes. And honors should be given by

law  to  magistrates  who  have  the  reputation  of  being  incorruptible.  In

democracies the rich should be spared; not only should their property not be

divided, but their incomes also, which in some states are taken from them

imperceptibly, should be protected. It is a good thing to prevent the wealthy

citizens,  even  if  they  are  willing  from  undertaking  expensive  and  useless

public services, such as the giving of choruses, torch-races, and the like. In an

oligarchy, on the other hand, great care should be taken of the poor, and

lucrative offices should go to them; if any of the wealthy classes insult them,the offender should be punished more severely than if he had wronged one of

his own class. Provision should be made that estates pass by inheritance and

not by gift, and no person should have more than one inheritance; for in this

way properties will be equalized, and more of the poor rise to competency. It

is also expedient both in a democracy and in an oligarchy to assign to those

who have less share in the government (i.e., to the rich in a democracy and to

the poor in an oligarchy) an equality or preference in all but the principal

offices of state. The latter should be entrusted chiefly or only to members of

the governing class.


IX


  There are three qualifications required in those who have to fill the highest

offices—(1) first of all, loyalty to the established constitution; (2) the greatest

administrative capacity; (3) virtue and justice of the kind proper to each form

of government; for, if what is just is not the same in all governments, the

quality of justice must also differ. There may be a doubt, however, when all

these qualities do not meet in the same person, how the selection is to be

made; suppose, for example, a good general is a bad man and not a friend to

the constitution, and another man is loyal and just, which should we choose?

In making the election ought we not to consider two points? what qualities

are common, and what are rare. Thus in the choice of a general, we should

regard his skill rather than his virtue; for few have military skill, but many

have  virtue.  In  any  office  of  trust  or  stewardship,  on  the  other  hand,  the

opposite rule should be observed; for more virtue than ordinary is required in

the holder of such an office, but the necessary knowledge is of a sort which

all men possess.

It  may,  however,  be  asked  what  a  man  wants  with  virtue  if  he  have

political ability and is loyal, since these two qualities alone will make him do

what is for the public interest. But may not men have both of them and yet be

deficient in self-control? If, knowing and loving their own interests, they do

not always attend to them, may they not be equally negligent of the interests

of the public?

  Speaking generally, we may say that whatever legal enactments are held to

be for the interest of various constitutions, all these preserve them. And the

great preserving principle is the one which has been repeatedly mentioned—

to have a care that the loyal citizen should be stronger than the disloyal.Neither should we forget the mean, which at the present day is lost sight of in

perverted  forms  of  government;  for  many  practices  which  appear  to  be

democratical  are  the  ruin  of  democracies,  and  many  which  appear  to  be

oligarchical are the ruin of oligarchies. Those who think that all virtue is to be

found in their own party principles push matters to extremes; they do not

consider that disproportion destroys a state. A nose which varies from the

ideal  of  straightness  to  a  hook  or  snub  may  still  be  of  good  shape  and

agreeable to the eye; but if the excess be very great, all symmetry is lost, and

the nose at last ceases to be a nose at all on account of some excess in one

direction or defect in the other; and this is true of every other part of the

human body. The same law of proportion equally holds in states. Oligarchy

or democracy, although a departure from the most perfect form, may yet be a

good enough government, but if any one attempts to push the principles of

either to an extreme, he will begin by spoiling the government and end by

having none at all. Wherefore the legislator and the statesman ought to know

what democratical measures save and what destroy a democracy, and what

oligarchical measures save or destroy an oligarchy. For neither the one nor

the other can exist or continue to exist unless both rich and poor are included

in it. If equality of property is introduced, the state must of necessity take

another form; for when by laws carried to excess one or other element in the

state is ruined, the constitution is ruined.

  There is an error common both to oligarchies and to democracies: in the

latter the demagogues, when the multitude are above the law, are always

cutting the city in two by quarrels with the rich, whereas they should always

profess  to  be  maintaining  their  cause;  just  as  in  oligarchies  the  oligarchs

should profess to maintaining the cause of the people, and should take oaths

the opposite of those which they now take. For there are cities in which they

swear—‘I will be an enemy to the people, and will devise all the harm against

them  which  I  can’;  but  they  ought  to  exhibit  and  to  entertain  the  very

opposite  feeling;  in  the  form  of  their  oath  there  should  be  an  express

declaration—‘I will do no wrong to the people.’

But of all the things which I have mentioned that which most contributes to

the permanence of constitutions is the adaptation of education to the form of

government, and yet in our own day this principle is universally neglected.

The best laws, though sanctioned by every citizen of the state, will be of no

avail unless the young are trained by habit and education in the spirit of the

constitution, if the laws are democratical, democratically or oligarchically, ifthe laws are oligarchical. For there may be a want of self-discipline in states

as well as in individuals. Now, to have been educated in the spirit of the

constitution is not to perform the actions in which oligarchs or democrats

delight, but those by which the existence of an oligarchy or of a democracy is

made possible. Whereas among ourselves the sons of the ruling class in an

oligarchy live in luxury, but the sons of the poor are hardened by exercise and

toil,  and  hence  they  are  both  more  inclined  and  better  able  to  make  a

revolution. And in democracies of the more extreme type there has arisen a

false idea of freedom which is contradictory to the true interests of the state.

For two principles are characteristic of democracy, the government of the

majority and freedom. Men think that what is just is equal; and that equality

is the supremacy of the popular will; and that freedom means the doing what

a man likes. In such democracies every one lives as he pleases, or in the

words  of  Euripides,  ‘according  to  his  fancy.’  But  this  is  all  wrong;  men

should not think it slavery to live according to the rule of the constitution; for

it is their salvation.

I have now discussed generally the causes of the revolution and destruction

of states, and the means of their preservation and continuance.


X


I have still to speak of monarchy, and the causes of its destruction and

preservation.  What  I  have  said  already  respecting  forms  of  constitutional

government applies almost equally to royal and to tyrannical rule. For royal

rule  is  of  the  nature  of  an  aristocracy,  and  a  tyranny  is  a  compound  of

oligarchy and democracy in their most extreme forms; it is therefore most

injurious to its subjects, being made up of two evil forms of government, and

having the perversions and errors of both. These two forms of monarchy are

contrary in their very origin. The appointment of a king is the resource of the

better classes against the people, and he is elected by them out of their own

number, because either he himself or his family excel in virtue and virtuous

actions;  whereas  a  tyrant  is  chosen  from  the  people  to  be  their  protector

against the notables, and in order to prevent them from being injured. History

shows that almost all tyrants have been demagogues who gained the favor of

the  people  by  their  accusation  of  the  notables.  At  any  rate  this  was  the

manner in which the tyrannies arose in the days when cities had increased in

power. Others which were older originated in the ambition of kings wantingto overstep the limits of their hereditary power and become despots. Others

again grew out of the class which were chosen to be chief magistrates; for in

ancient times the people who elected them gave the magistrates, whether civil

or religious, a long tenure. Others arose out of the custom which oligarchies

had of making some individual supreme over the highest offices. In any of

these ways an ambitious man had no difficulty, if he desired, in creating a

tyranny, since he had the power in his hands already, either as king or as one

of  the  officers  of  state.  Thus  Pheidon  at  Argos  and  several  others  were

originally kings, and ended by becoming tyrants; Phalaris, on the other hand,

and the Ionian tyrants, acquired the tyranny by holding great offices. Whereas

Panaetius at Leontini, Cypselus at Corinth, Peisistratus at Athens, Dionysius

at Syracuse, and several others who afterwards became tyrants, were at first

demagogues.

And so, as I was saying, royalty ranks with aristocracy, for it is based upon

merit, whether of the individual or of his family, or on benefits conferred, or

on these claims with power added to them. For all who have obtained this

honor have benefited, or had in their power to benefit, states and nations;

some,  like  Codrus,  have  prevented  the  state  from  being  enslaved  in  war;

others,  like  Cyrus,  have  given  their  country  freedom,  or  have  settled  or

gained  a  territory,  like  the  Lacedaemonian,  Macedonian,  and  Molossian

kings.  The  idea  of  a  king  is  to  be  a  protector  of  the  rich  against  unjust

treatment, of the people against insult and oppression. Whereas a tyrant, as

has  often  been  repeated,  has  no  regard  to  any  public  interest,  except  as

conducive to his private ends; his aim is pleasure, the aim of a king, honor.

Wherefore also in their desires they differ; the tyrant is desirous of riches, the

king, of what brings honor. And the guards of a king are citizens, but of a

tyrant mercenaries.

That tyranny has all the vices both of democracy and oligarchy is evident.

As of oligarchy so of tyranny, the end is wealth; (for by wealth only can the

tyrant maintain either his guard or his luxury). Both mistrust the people, and

therefore deprive them of their arms. Both agree too in injuring the people

and  driving  them  out  of  the  city  and  dispersing  them.  From  democracy

tyrants  have  borrowed  the  art  of  making  war  upon  the  notables  and

destroying them secretly or openly, or of exiling them because they are rivals

and stand in the way of their power; and also because plots against them are

contrived by men of this dass, who either want to rule or to escape subjection.

Hence Periander advised Thrasybulus by cutting off the tops of the tallestears of corn, meaning that he must always put out of the way the citizens who

overtop  the  rest.  And  so,  as  I  have  already  intimated,  the  beginnings  of

change are the same in monarchies as in forms of constitutional government;

subjects attack their sovereigns out of fear or contempt, or because they have

been unjustly treated by them. And of injustice, the most common form is

insult, another is confiscation of property.

The ends sought by conspiracies against monarchies, whether tyrannies or

royalties, are the same as the ends sought by conspiracies against other forms

of government. Monarchs have great wealth and honor, which are objects of

desire to all mankind. The attacks are made sometimes against their lives,

sometimes against the office; where the sense of insult is the motive, against

their lives. Any sort of insult (and there are many) may stir up anger, and

when  men  are  angry,  they  commonly  act  out  of  revenge,  and  not  from

ambition. For example, the attempt made upon the Peisistratidae arose out of

the  public  dishonor  offered  to  the  sister  of  Harmodius  and  the  insult  to

himself. He attacked the tyrant for his sister’s sake, and Aristogeiton joined

in  the  attack  for  the  sake  of  Harmodius.  A  conspiracy  was  also  formed

against Periander, the tyrant of Ambracia, because, when drinking with a

favorite youth, he asked him whether by this time he was not with child by

him. Philip, too, was attacked by Pausanias because he permitted him to be

insulted  by  Attalus  and  his  friends,  and  Amyntas  the  little,  by  Derdas,

because he boasted of having enjoyed his youth. Evagoras of Cyprus, again,

was slain by the eunuch to revenge an insult; for his wife had been carried off

by Evagoras’s son. Many conspiracies have originated in shameful attempts

made by sovereigns on the persons of their subjects. Such was the attack of

Crataeas upon Archelaus; he had always hated the connection with him, and

so,  when  Archelaus,  having  promised  him  one  of  his  two  daughters  in

marriage, did not give him either of them, but broke his word and married the

elder to the king of Elymeia, when he was hard pressed in a war against

Sirrhas and Arrhabaeus, and the younger to his own son Amyntas, under the

idea  that  Amyntas  would  then  be  less  likely  to  quarrel  with  his  son  by

Cleopatra—Crataeas  made  this  slight  a  pretext  for  attacking  Archelaus,

though  even  a  less  reason  would  have  sufficed,  for  the  real  cause  of  the

estrangement was the disgust which he felt at his connection with the king.

And from a like motive Hellonocrates of Larissa conspired with him; for

when Archelaus, who was his lover, did not fulfill his promise of restoring

him  to  his  country,  he  thought  that  the  connection  between  them  hadoriginated, not in affection, but in the wantonness of power. Pytho, too, and

Heracleides of Aenos, slew Cotys in order to avenge their father, and Adamas

revolted  from  Cotys  in  revenge  for  the  wanton  outrage  which  he  had

committed in mutilating him when a child.

  Many, too, irritated at blows inflicted on the person which they deemed an

insult, have either killed or attempted to kill officers of state and royal princes

by whom they have been injured. Thus, at Mytilene, Megacles and his friends

attacked  and  slew  the  Penthilidae,  as  they  were  going  about  and  striking

people with clubs. At a later date Smerdis, who had been beaten and torn

away  from  his  wife  by  Penthilus,  slew  him.  In  the  conspiracy  against

Archelaus,  Decamnichus  stimulated  the  fury  of  the  assassins  and  led  the

attack; he was enraged because Archelaus had delivered him to Euripides to

be  scourged;  for  the  poet  had  been  irritated  at  some  remark  made  by

Decamnichus on the foulness of his breath. Many other examples might be

cited of murders and conspiracies which have arisen from similar causes.

Fear is another motive which, as we have said, has caused conspiracies as

well in monarchies as in more popular forms of government. Thus Artapanes

conspired against Xerxes and slew him, fearing that he would be accused of

hanging Darius against his orders-he having been under the impression that

Xerxes would forget what he had said in the middle of a meal, and that the

offense would be forgiven.

  Another motive is contempt, as in the case of Sardanapalus, whom some

one saw carding wool with his women, if the storytellers say truly; and the

tale may be true, if not of him, of some one else. Dion attacked the younger

Dionysius because he despised him, and saw that he was equally despised by

his own subjects, and that he was always drunk. Even the friends of a tyrant

will  sometimes  attack  him  out  of  contempt;  for  the  confidence  which  he

reposes in them breeds contempt, and they think that they will not be found

out. The expectation of success is likewise a sort of contempt; the assailants

are ready to strike, and think nothing of the danger, because they seem to

have the power in their hands. Thus generals of armies attack monarchs; as,

for example, Cyrus attacked Astyages, despising the effeminacy of his life,

and believing that his power was worn out. Thus again, Seuthes the Thracian

conspired against Amadocus, whose general he was.

And  sometimes  men  are  actuated  by  more  than  one  motive,  like

Mithridates, who conspired against Ariobarzanes, partly out of contempt and

partly from the love of gain.Bold natures, placed by their sovereigns in a high military position, are

most likely to make the attempt in the expectation of success; for courage is

emboldened by power, and the union of the two inspires them with the hope

of an easy victory.

  Attempts of which the motive is ambition arise in a different way as well

as in those already mentioned. There are men who will not risk their lives in

the hope of gains and honors however great, but who nevertheless regard the

killing of a tyrant simply as an extraordinary action which will make them

famous and honorable in the world; they wish to acquire, not a kingdom, but

a name. It is rare, however, to find such men; he who would kill a tyrant must

be prepared to lose his life if he fail. He must have the resolution of Dion,

who, when he made war upon Dionysius, took with him very few troops,

saying ‘that whatever measure of success he might attain would be enough

for him, even if he were to die the moment he landed; such a death would be

welcome to him.’ this is a temper to which few can attain.

  Once  more,  tyrannies,  like  all  other  governments,  are  destroyed  from

without by some opposite and more powerful form of government. That such

a  government  will  have  the  will  to  attack  them  is  clear;  for  the  two  are

opposed in principle; and all men, if they can, do what they will. Democracy

is antagonistic to tyranny, on the principle of Hesiod, ‘Potter hates Potter,’

because they are nearly akin, for the extreme form of democracy is tyranny;

and royalty and aristocracy are both alike opposed to tyranny, because they

are constitutions of a different type. And therefore the Lacedaemonians put

down most of the tyrannies, and so did the Syracusans during the time when

they were well governed.

  Again, tyrannies are destroyed from within, when the reigning family are

divided among themselves, as that of Gelo was, and more recently that of

Dionysius; in the case of Gelo because Thrasybulus, the brother of Hiero,

flattered the son of Gelo and led him into excesses in order that he might rule

in  his  name.  Whereupon  the  family  got  together  a  party  to  get  rid  of

Thrasybulus and save the tyranny; but those of the people who conspired

with  them  seized  the  opportunity  and  drove  them  all  out.  In  the  case  of

Dionysius,  Dion,  his  own  relative,  attacked  and  expelled  him  with  the

assistance of the people; he afterwards perished himself.

  There are two chief motives which induce men to attack tyrannies—hatred

and contempt. Hatred of tyrants is inevitable, and contempt is also a frequent

cause of their destruction. Thus we see that most of those who have acquired,have retained their power, but those who have inherited, have lost it, almost

at once; for, living in luxurious ease, they have become contemptible, and

offer many opportunities to their assailants. Anger, too, must be included

under hatred, and produces the same effects. It is often times even more ready

to strike—the angry are more impetuous in making an attack, for they do not

follow rational principle. And men are very apt to give way to their passions

when  they  are  insulted.  To  this  cause  is  to  be  attributed  the  fall  of  the

Peisistratidae and of many others. Hatred is more reasonable, for anger is

accompanied by pain, which is an impediment to reason, whereas hatred is

painless.

In a word, all the causes which I have mentioned as destroying the last and

most unmixed form of oligarchy, and the extreme form of democracy, may

be assumed to affect tyranny; indeed the extreme forms of both are only

tyrannies distributed among several persons. Kingly rule is little affected by

external causes, and is therefore lasting; it is generally destroyed from within.

And there are two ways in which the destruction may come about; (1) when

the members of the royal family quarrel among themselves, and (2) when the

kings attempt to administer the state too much after the fashion of a tyranny,

and to extend their authority contrary to the law. Royalties do not now come

into  existence;  where  such  forms  of  government  arise,  they  are  rather

monarchies or tyrannies. For the rule of a king is over voluntary subjects, and

he is supreme in all important matters; but in our own day men are more upon

an equality, and no one is so immeasurably superior to others as to represent

adequately the greatness and dignity of the office. Hence mankind will not, if

they can help, endure it, and any one who obtains power by force or fraud is

at once thought to be a tyrant. In hereditary monarchies a further cause of

destruction  is  the  fact  that  kings  often  fall  into  contempt,  and,  although

possessing not tyrannical power, but only royal dignity, are apt to outrage

others. Their overthrow is then readily effected; for there is an end to the king

when his subjects do not want to have him, but the tyrant lasts, whether they

like him or not.

The  destruction  of  monarchies  is  to  be  attributed  to  these  and  the  like

causes.


XI


And they are preserved, to speak generally, by the opposite causes; or, ifwe consider them separately, (1) royalty is preserved by the limitation of its

powers. The more restricted the functions of kings, the longer their power

will last unimpaired; for then they are more moderate and not so despotic in

their ways; and they are less envied by their subjects. This is the reason why

the kingly office has lasted so long among the Molossians. And for a similar

reason  it  has  continued  among  the  Lacedaemonians,  because  there  it  was

always divided between two, and afterwards further limited by Theopompus

in various respects, more particularly by the establishment of the Ephoralty.

He diminished the power of the kings, but established on a more lasting basis

the kingly office, which was thus made in a certain sense not less, but greater.

There  is  a  story  that  when  his  wife  once  asked  him  whether  he  was  not

ashamed  to  leave  to  his  sons  a  royal  power  which  was  less  than  he  had

inherited from his father, ‘No indeed,’ he replied, ‘for the power which I

leave to them will be more lasting.’

As to (2) tyrannies, they are preserved in two most opposite ways. One of

them is the old traditional method in which most tyrants administer their

government. Of such arts Periander of Corinth is said to have been the great

master, and many similar devices may be gathered from the Persians in the

administration  of  their  government.  There  are  firstly  the  prescriptions

mentioned some distance back, for the preservation of a tyranny, in so far as

this is possible; viz., that the tyrant should lop off those who are too high; he

must put to death men of spirit; he must not allow common meals, clubs,

education, and the like; he must be upon his guard against anything which is

likely to inspire either courage or confidence among his subjects; he must

prohibit literary assemblies or other meetings for discussion, and he must

take  every  means  to  prevent  people  from  knowing  one  another  (for

acquaintance begets mutual confidence). Further, he must compel all persons

staying in the city to appear in public and live at his gates; then he will know

what they are doing: if they are always kept under, they will learn to be

humble. In short, he should practice these and the like Persian and barbaric

arts, which all have the same object. A tyrant should also endeavor to know

what each of his subjects says or does, and should employ spies, like the

‘female detectives’ at Syracuse, and the eavesdroppers whom Hiero was in

the  habit  of  sending  to  any  place  of  resort  or  meeting;  for  the  fear  of

informers prevents people from speaking their minds, and if they do, they are

more easily found out. Another art of the tyrant is to sow quarrels among the

citizens;  friends  should  be  embroiled  with  friends,  the  people  with  thenotables,  and  the  rich  with  one  another.  Also  he  should  impoverish  his

subjects; he thus provides against the maintenance of a guard by the citizen

and the people, having to keep hard at work, are prevented from conspiring.

The Pyramids of Egypt afford an example of this policy; also the offerings of

the family of Cypselus, and the building of the temple of Olympian Zeus by

the Peisistratidae, and the great Polycratean monuments at Samos; all these

works were alike intended to occupy the people and keep them poor. Another

practice  of  tyrants  is  to  multiply  taxes,  after  the  manner  of  Dionysius  at

Syracuse, who contrived that within five years his subjects should bring into

the treasury their whole property. The tyrant is also fond of making war in

order that his subjects may have something to do and be always in want of a

leader. And whereas the power of a king is preserved by his friends, the

characteristic of a tyrant is to distrust his friends, because he knows that all

men want to overthrow him, and they above all have the power.

  Again, the evil practices of the last and worst form of democracy are all

found in tyrannies. Such are the power given to women in their families in

the hope that they will inform against their husbands, and the license which is

allowed to slaves in order that they may betray their masters; for slaves and

women do not conspire against tyrants; and they are of course friendly to

tyrannies and also to democracies, since under them they have a good time.

For the people too would fain be a monarch, and therefore by them, as well as

by  the  tyrant,  the  flatterer  is  held  in  honor;  in  democracies  he  is  the

demagogue; and the tyrant also has those who associate with him in a humble

spirit, which is a work of flattery.

  Hence  tyrants  are  always  fond  of  bad  men,  because  they  love  to  be

flattered,  but  no  man  who  has  the  spirit  of  a  freeman  in  him  will  lower

himself by flattery; good men love others, or at any rate do not flatter them.

Moreover, the bad are useful for bad purposes; ‘nail knocks out nail,’ as the

proverb says. It is characteristic of a tyrant to dislike every one who has

dignity or independence; he wants to be alone in his glory, but any one who

claims  a  like  dignity  or  asserts  his  independence  encroaches  upon  his

prerogative, and is hated by him as an enemy to his power. Another mark of a

tyrant is that he likes foreigners better than citizens, and lives with them and

invites them to his table; for the one are enemies, but the Others enter into no

rivalry with him.

  Such are the notes of the tyrant and the arts by which he preserves his

power; there is no wickedness too great for him. All that we have said may besummed up under three heads, which answer to the three aims of the tyrant.

These are, (1) the humiliation of his subjects; he knows that a mean-spirited

man will not conspire against anybody; (2) the creation of mistrust among

them; for a tyrant is not overthrown until men begin to have confidence in

one another; and this is the reason why tyrants are at war with the good; they

are under the idea that their power is endangered by them, not only because

they would not be ruled despotically but also because they are loyal to one

another, and to other men, and do not inform against one another or against

other men; (3) the tyrant desires that his subjects shall be incapable of action,

for  no  one  attempts  what  is  impossible,  and  they  will  not  attempt  to

overthrow a tyranny, if they are powerless. Under these three heads the whole

policy of a tyrant may be summed up, and to one or other of them all his

ideas may be referred: (1) he sows distrust among his subjects; (2) he takes

away their power; (3) he humbles them.

This then is one of the two methods by which tyrannies are preserved; and

there is another which proceeds upon an almost opposite principle of action.

The nature of this latter method may be gathered from a comparison of the

causes which destroy kingdoms, for as one mode of destroying kingly power

is to make the office of king more tyrannical, so the salvation of a tyranny is

to make it more like the rule of a king. But of one thing the tyrant must be

careful; he must keep power enough to rule over his subjects, whether they

like him or not, for if he once gives this up he gives up his tyranny. But

though power must be retained as the foundation, in all else the tyrant should

act or appear to act in the character of a king. In the first place he should

pretend  a  care  of  the  public  revenues,  and  not  waste  money  in  making

presents of a sort at which the common people get excited when they see

their hard-won earnings snatched from them and lavished on courtesans and

strangers and artists. He should give an account of what he receives and of

what he spends (a practice which has been adopted by some tyrants); for then

he will seem to be a steward of the public rather than a tyrant; nor need he

fear that, while he is the lord of the city, he will ever be in want of money.

Such a policy is at all events much more advantageous for the tyrant when he

goes from home, than to leave behind him a hoard, for then the garrison who

remain in the city will be less likely to attack his power; and a tyrant, when

he is absent from home, has more reason to fear the guardians of his treasure

than the citizens, for the one accompany him, but the others remain behind.

In the second place, he should be seen to collect taxes and to require publicservices only for state purposes, and that he may form a fund in case of war,

and generally he ought to make himself the guardian and treasurer of them, as

if they belonged, not to him, but to the public. He should appear, not harsh,

but  dignified,  and  when  men  meet  him  they  should  look  upon  him  with

reverence, and not with fear. Yet it is hard for him to be respected if he

inspires no respect, and therefore whatever virtues he may neglect, at least he

should maintain the character of a great soldier, and produce the impression

that he is one. Neither he nor any of his associates should ever be guilty of

the least offense against modesty towards the young of either sex who are his

subjects,  and  the  women  of  his  family  should  observe  a  like  self-control

towards other women; the insolence of women has ruined many tyrannies. In

the indulgence of pleasures he should be the opposite of our modern tyrants,

who not only begin at dawn and pass whole days in sensuality, but want other

men to see them, that they may admire their happy and blessed lot. In these

things  a  tyrant  should  if  possible  be  moderate,  or  at  any  rate  should  not

parade  his  vices  to  the  world;  for  a  drunken  and  drowsy  tyrant  is  soon

despised  and  attacked;  not  so  he  who  is  temperate  and  wide  awake.  His

conduct should be the very reverse of nearly everything which has been said

before about tyrants. He ought to adorn and improve his city, as though he

were not a tyrant, but the guardian of the state. Also he should appear to be

particularly earnest in the service of the Gods; for if men think that a ruler is

religious and has a reverence for the Gods, they are less afraid of suffering

injustice at his hands, and they are less disposed to conspire against him,

because they believe him to have the very Gods fighting on his side. At the

same time his religion must not be thought foolish. And he should honor men

of merit, and make them think that they would not be held in more honor by

the citizens if they had a free government. The honor he should distribute

himself, but the punishment should be inflicted by officers and courts of law.

It is a precaution which is taken by all monarchs not to make one person

great; but if one, then two or more should be raised, that they may look

sharply after one another. If after all some one has to be made great, he

should  not  be  a  man  of  bold  spirit;  for  such  dispositions  are  ever  most

inclined to strike. And if any one is to be deprived of his power, let it be

diminished  gradually,  not  taken  from  him  all  at  once.  The  tyrant  should

abstain  from  all  outrage;  in  particular  from  personal  violence  and  from

wanton conduct towards the young. He should be especially careful of his

behavior to men who are lovers of honor; for as the lovers of money areoffended when their property is touched, so are the lovers of honor and the

virtuous when their honor is affected. Therefore a tyrant ought either not to

commit such acts at all; or he should be thought only to employ fatherly

correction, and not to trample upon others—and his acquaintance with youth

should be supposed to arise from affection, and not from the insolence of

power, and in general he should compensate the appearance of dishonor by

the increase of honor.

Of  those  who  attempt  assassination  they  are  the  most  dangerous,  and

require to be most carefully watched, who do not care to survive, if they

effect their purpose. Therefore special precaution should be taken about any

who think that either they or those for whom they care have been insulted; for

when men are led away by passion to assault others they are regardless of

themselves. As Heracleitus says, ‘It is difficult to fight against anger; for a

man will buy revenge with his soul.’

And whereas states consist of two classes, of poor men and of rich, the

tyrant should lead both to imagine that they are preserved and prevented from

harming one another by his rule, and whichever of the two is stronger he

should attach to his government; for, having this advantage, he has no need

either to emancipate slaves or to disarm the citizens; either party added to the

force which he already has, will make him stronger than his assailants.

But enough of these details; what should be the general policy of the tyrant

is obvious. He ought to show himself to his subjects in the light, not of a

tyrant, but of a steward and a king. He should not appropriate what is theirs,

but should be their guardian; he should be moderate, not extravagant in his

way of life; he should win the notables by companionship, and the multitude

by flattery. For then his rule will of necessity be nobler and happier, because

he will rule over better men whose spirits are not crushed, over men to whom

he himself is not an object of hatred, and of whom he is not afraid. His power

too will be more lasting. His disposition will be virtuous, or at least half

virtuous; and he will not be wicked, but half wicked only.


XII


Yet no forms of government are so short-lived as oligarchy and tyranny.

The  tyranny  which  lasted  longest  was  that  of  Orthagoras  and  his  sons  at

Sicyon; this continued for a hundred years. The reason was that they treated

their subjects with moderation, and to a great extent observed the laws; and invarious ways gained the favor of the people by the care which they took of

them.  Cleisthenes,  in  particular,  was  respected  for  his  military  ability.  If

report may be believed, he crowned the judge who decided against him in the

games; and, as some say, the sitting statue in the Agora of Sicyon is the

likeness of this person. (A similar story is told of Peisistratus, who is said on

one occasion to have allowed himself to be summoned and tried before the

Areopagus.)

Next in duration to the tyranny of Orthagoras was that of the Cypselidae at

Corinth, which lasted seventy-three years and six months: Cypselus reigned

thirty years, Periander forty and a half, and Psammetichus the son of Gorgus

three. Their continuance was due to similar causes: Cypselus was a popular

man, who during the whole time of his rule never had a bodyguard; and

Periander, although he was a tyrant, was a great soldier. Third in duration

was  the  rule  of  the  Peisistratidae  at  Athens,  but  it  was  interrupted;  for

Peisistratus was twice driven out, so that during three and thirty years he

reigned only seventeen; and his sons reigned eighteen-altogether thirty-five

years. Of other tyrannies, that of Hiero and Gelo at Syracuse was the most

lasting. Even this, however, was short, not more than eighteen years in all; for

Gelo continued tyrant for seven years, and died in the eighth; Hiero reigned

for ten years, and Thrasybulus was driven out in the eleventh month. In fact,

tyrannies generally have been of quite short duration.

I have now gone through almost all the causes by which constitutional

governments and monarchies are either destroyed or preserved.

In the Republic of Plato, Socrates treats of revolutions, but not well, for he

mentions no cause of change which peculiarly affects the first, or perfect

state. He only says that the cause is that nothing is abiding, but all things

change in a certain cycle; and that the origin of the change consists in those

numbers  ‘of  which  4  and  3,  married  with  5,  furnish  two  harmonies’  (he

means  when  the  number  of  this  figure  becomes  solid);  he  conceives  that

nature at certain times produces bad men who will not submit to education; in

which latter particular he may very likely be not far wrong, for there may

well be some men who cannot be educated and made virtuous. But why is

such a cause of change peculiar to his ideal state, and not rather common to

all states, nay, to everything which comes into being at all? And is it by the

agency of time, which, as he declares, makes all things change, that things

which did not begin together, change together? For example, if something has

come into being the day before the completion of the cycle, will it changewith things that came into being before? Further, why should the perfect state

change into the Spartan? For governments more often take an opposite form

than one akin to them. The same remark is applicable to the other changes; he

says that the Spartan constitution changes into an oligarchy, and this into a

democracy, and this again into a tyranny. And yet the contrary happens quite

as often; for a democracy is even more likely to change into an oligarchy than

into a monarchy. Further, he never says whether tyranny is, or is not, liable to

revolutions,  and  if  it  is,  what  is  the  cause  of  them,  or  into  what  form  it

changes. And the reason is, that he could not very well have told: for there is

no rule; according to him it should revert to the first and best, and then there

would be a complete cycle. But in point of fact a tyranny often changes into a

tyranny, as that at Sicyon changed from the tyranny of Myron into that of

Cleisthenes; into oligarchy, as the tyranny of Antileon did at Chalcis; into

democracy, as that of Gelo’s family did at Syracuse; into aristocracy, as at

Carthage, and the tyranny of Charilaus at Lacedaemon. Often an oligarchy

changes into a tyranny, like most of the ancient oligarchies in Sicily; for

example, the oligarchy at Leontini changed into the tyranny of Panaetius; that

at Gela into the tyranny of Cleander; that at Rhegium into the tyranny of

Anaxilaus;  the  same  thing  has  happened  in  many  other  states.  And  it  is

absurd to suppose that the state changes into oligarchy merely because the

ruling class are lovers and makers of money, and not because the very rich

think  it  unfair  that  the  very  poor  should  have  an  equal  share  in  the

government with themselves. Moreover, in many oligarchies there are laws

against making money in trade. But at Carthage, which is a democracy. there

is no such prohibition; and yet to this day the Carthaginians have never had a

revolution. It is absurd too for him to say that an oligarchy is two cities, one

of the rich, and the other of the poor. Is not this just as much the case in the

Spartan constitution, or in any other in which either all do not possess equal

property, or all are not equally good men? Nobody need be any poorer than

he  was  before,  and  yet  the  oligarchy  may  change  an  the  same  into  a

democracy, if the poor form the majority; and a democracy may change into

an oligarchy, if the wealthy class are stronger than the people, and the one are

energetic, the other indifferent. Once more, although the causes of the change

are very numerous, he mentions only one, which is, that the citizens become

poor  through  dissipation  and  debt,  as  though  he  thought  that  all,  or  the

majority of them, were originally rich. This is not true: though it is true that

when any of the leaders lose their property they are ripe for revolution; but,when anybody else, it is no great matter, and an oligarchy does not even then

more often pass into a democracy than into any other form of government.

Again,  if  men  are  deprived  of  the  honors  of  state,  and  are  wronged,  and

insulted,  they  make  revolutions,  and  change  forms  of  government,  even

although they have not wasted their substance because they might do what

they liked—of which extravagance he declares excessive freedom to be the

cause.

  Finally, although there are many forms of oligarchies and democracies,

Socrates speaks of their revolutions as though there were only one form of

either of them.                                Politics, Book VI


Translated by Benjamin Jowett


<

div id="book6" class="book">


I


We have now considered the varieties of the deliberative or supreme power

in states, and the various arrangements of law-courts and state offices, and

which of them are adapted to different forms of government. We have also

spoken of the destruction and preservation of constitutions, how and from

what causes they arise.

Of democracy and all other forms of government there are many kinds;

and it will be well to assign to them severally the modes of organization

which are proper and advantageous to each, adding what remains to be said

about them. Moreover, we ought to consider the various combinations of

these modes themselves; for such combinations make constitutions overlap

one  another,  so  that  aristocracies  have  an  oligarchical  character,  and

constitutional governments incline to democracies.

  When I speak of the combinations which remain to be considered, and thus

far  have  not  been  considered  by  us,  I  mean  such  as  these:  when  the

deliberative part of the government and the election of officers is constituted

oligarchically, and the law-courts aristocratically, or when the courts and the

deliberative  part  of  the  state  are  oligarchical,  and  the  election  to  office

aristocratical, or when in any other way there is a want of harmony in the

composition of a state.

I have shown already what forms of democracy are suited to particular

cities, and what of oligarchy to particular peoples, and to whom each of the

other forms of government is suited. Further, we must not only show which

of these governments is the best for each state, but also briefly proceed to

consider how these and other forms of government are to be established.

First of all let us speak of democracy, which will also bring to light the

opposite form of government commonly called oligarchy. For the purposes ofthis  inquiry  we  need  to  ascertain  all  the  elements  and  characteristics  of

democracy, since from the combinations of these the varieties of democratic

government arise. There are several of these differing from each other, and

the difference is due to two causes. One (1) has been already mentioned—

differences  of  population;  for  the  popular  element  may  consist  of

husbandmen, or of mechanics, or of laborers, and if the first of these be added

to the second, or the third to the two others, not only does the democracy

become better or worse, but its very nature is changed. A second cause (2)

remains  to  be  mentioned:  the  various  properties  and  characteristics  of

democracy, when variously combined, make a difference. For one democracy

will have less and another will have more, and another will have all of these

characteristics. There is an advantage in knowing them all, whether a man

wishes to establish some new form of democracy, or only to remodel an

existing one. Founders of states try to bring together all the elements which

accord with the ideas of the several constitutions; but this is a mistake of

theirs,  as  I  have  already  remarked  when  speaking  of  the  destruction  and

preservation of states. We will now set forth the principles, characteristics,

and aims of such states.


II


The basis of a democratic state is liberty; which, according to the common

opinion of men, can only be enjoyed in such a state; this they affirm to be the

great end of every democracy. One principle of liberty is for all to rule and be

ruled in turn, and indeed democratic justice is the application of numerical

not  proportionate  equality;  whence  it  follows  that  the  majority  must  be

supreme, and that whatever the majority approve must be the end and the

just.  Every  citizen,  it  is  said,  must  have  equality,  and  therefore  in  a

democracy the poor have more power than the rich, because there are more of

them, and the will of the majority is supreme. This, then, is one note of

liberty which all democrats affirm to be the principle of their state. Another is

that  a  man  should  live  as  he  likes.  This,  they  say,  is  the  privilege  of  a

freeman, since, on the other hand, not to live as a man likes is the mark of a

slave. This is the second characteristic of democracy, whence has arisen the

claim of men to be ruled by none, if possible, or, if this is impossible, to rule

and  be  ruled  in  turns;  and  so  it  contributes  to  the  freedom  based  upon

equality.  Such being our foundation and such the principle from which we start, the

characteristics of democracy are as follows the election of officers by all out

of all; and that all should rule over each, and each in his turn over all; that the

appointment to all offices, or to all but those which require experience and

skill, should be made by lot; that no property qualification should be required

for offices, or only a very low one; that a man should not hold the same office

twice, or not often, or in the case of few except military offices: that the

tenure of all offices, or of as many as possible, should be brief, that all men

should sit in judgment, or that judges selected out of all should judge, in all

matters,  or  in  most  and  in  the  greatest  and  most  important—such  as  the

scrutiny of accounts, the constitution, and private contracts; that the assembly

should be supreme over all causes, or at any rate over the most important, and

the magistrates over none or only over a very few. Of all magistracies, a

council is the most democratic when there is not the means of paying all the

citizens, but when they are paid even this is robbed of its power; for the

people then draw all cases to themselves, as I said in the previous discussion.

The next characteristic of democracy is payment for services; assembly, law

courts, magistrates, everybody receives pay, when it is to be had; or when it

is not to be had for all, then it is given to the law-courts and to the stated

assemblies, to the council and to the magistrates, or at least to any of them

who are compelled to have their meals together. And whereas oligarchy is

characterized by birth, wealth, and education, the notes of democracy appear

to be the opposite of these—low birth, poverty, mean employment. Another

note is that no magistracy is perpetual, but if any such have survived some

ancient change in the constitution it should be stripped of its power, and the

holders should be elected by lot and no longer by vote. These are the points

common to all democracies; but democracy and demos in their truest form

are based upon the recognized principle of democratic justice, that all should

count equally; for equality implies that the poor should have no more share in

the government than the rich, and should not be the only rulers, but that all

should rule equally according to their numbers. And in this way men think

that they will secure equality and freedom in their state.


III


Next comes the question, how is this equality to be obtained? Are we to

assign to a thousand poor men the property qualifications of five hundred richmen?  and  shall  we  give  the  thousand  a  power  equal  to  that  of  the  five

hundred? or, if this is not to be the mode, ought we, still retaining the same

ratio,  to  take  equal  numbers  from  each  and  give  them  the  control  of  the

elections and of the courts?—Which, according to the democratical notion, is

the  juster  form  of  the  constitution—this  or  one  based  on  numbers  only?

Democrats say that justice is that to which the majority agree, oligarchs that

to which the wealthier class; in their opinion the decision should be given

according  to  the  amount  of  property.  In  both  principles  there  is  some

inequality and injustice. For if justice is the will of the few, any one person

who has more wealth than all the rest of the rich put together, ought, upon the

oligarchical principle, to have the sole power—but this would be tyranny; or

if justice is the will of the majority, as I was before saying, they will unjustly

confiscate  the  property  of  the  wealthy  minority.  To  find  a  principle  of

equality which they both agree we must inquire into their respective ideas of

justice.

Now they agree in saying that whatever is decided by the majority of the

citizens is to be deemed law. Granted: but not without some reserve; since

there are two classes out of which a state is composed—the poor and the rich

—that is to be deemed law, on which both or the greater part of both agree;

and if they disagree, that which is approved by the greater number, and by

those who have the higher qualification. For example, suppose that there are

ten rich and twenty poor, and some measure is approved by six of the rich

and is disapproved by fifteen of the poor, and the remaining four of the rich

join with the party of the poor, and the remaining five of the poor with that of

the rich; in such a case the will of those whose qualifications, when both

sides are added up, are the greatest, should prevail. If they turn out to be

equal, there is no greater difficulty than at present, when, if the assembly or

the courts are divided, recourse is had to the lot, or to some similar expedient.

But, although it may be difficult in theory to know what is just and equal, the

practical  difficulty  of  inducing  those  to  forbear  who  can,  if  they  like,

encroach, is far greater, for the weaker are always asking for equality and

justice, but the stronger care for none of these things.


IV


Of  the  four  kinds  of  democracy,  as  was  said  in  the  in  the  previous

discussion, the best is that which comes first in order; it is also the oldest ofthem all. I am speaking of them according to the natural classification of their

inhabitants. For the best material of democracy is an agricultural population;

there is no difficulty in forming a democracy where the mass of the people

live by agriculture or tending of cattle. Being poor, they have no leisure, and

therefore do not often attend the assembly, and not having the necessaries of

life they are always at work, and do not covet the property of others. Indeed,

they find their employment pleasanter than the cares of government or office

where  no  great  gains  can  be  made  out  of  them,  for  the  many  are  more

desirous of gain than of honor. A proof is that even the ancient tyrannies were

patiently endured by them, as they still endure oligarchies, if they are allowed

to  work  and  are  not  deprived  of  their  property;  for  some  of  them  grow

quickly rich and the others are well enough off. Moreover, they have the

power of electing the magistrates and calling them to account; their ambition,

if they have any, is thus satisfied; and in some democracies, although they do

not all share in the appointment of offices, except through representatives

elected in turn out of the whole people, as at Mantinea; yet, if they have the

power of deliberating, the many are contented. Even this form of government

may be regarded as a democracy, and was such at Mantinea. Hence it is both

expedient and customary in the aforementioned type of democracy that all

should elect to offices, and conduct scrutinies, and sit in the law-courts, but

that the great offices should be filled up by election and from persons having

a qualification; the greater requiring a greater qualification, or, if there be no

offices for which a qualification is required, then those who are marked out

by special ability should be appointed. Under such a form of government the

citizens are sure to be governed well (for the offices will always be held by

the best persons; the people are willing enough to elect them and are not

jealous of the good). The good and the notables will then be satisfied, for

they will not be governed by men who are their inferiors, and the persons

elected will rule justly, because others will call them to account. Every man

should be responsible to others, nor should any one be allowed to do just as

he pleases; for where absolute freedom is allowed, there is nothing to restrain

the evil which is inherent in every man. But the principle of responsibility

secures that which is the greatest good in states; the right persons rule and are

prevented from doing wrong, and the people have their due. It is evident that

this is the best kind of democracy, and why? Because the people are drawn

from a certain class. Some of the ancient laws of most states were, all of

them, useful with a view to making the people husbandmen. They provided