especially when he is credited with it by people whom he thinks good judges.

His neighbours are better judges than people at a distance; his associates and

fellow-countrymen  better  than  strangers;  his  contemporaries  better  than

posterity; sensible persons better than foolish ones; a large number of people

better than a small number: those of the former class, in each case, are the

more likely to be good judges of him. Honour and credit bestowed by those

whom you think much inferior to yourself-e.g. children or animals-you do not

value: not for its own sake, anyhow: if you do value it, it is for some other

reason. Friends belong to the class of pleasant things; it is pleasant to love-if

you love wine, you certainly find it delightful: and it is pleasant to be loved,

for this too makes a man see himself as the possessor of goodness, a thing

that every being that has a feeling for it desires to possess: to be loved means

to be valued for one’s own personal qualities. To be admired is also pleasant,

simply because of the honour implied. Flattery and flatterers are pleasant: the

flatterer is a man who, you believe, admires and likes To do the same thing

often is pleasant, since, as we saw, anything habitual is pleasant. And to

change  is  also  pleasant:  change  means  an  approach  to  nature,  whereas

invariable  repetition  of  anything  causes  the  excessive  prolongation  of  a

settled condition: therefore, says the poet,


  Change is in all things sweet.


That is why what comes to us only at long intervals is pleasant, whether it

be a person or a thing; for it is a change from what we had before, and,

besides, what comes only at long intervals has the value of rarity. Learning

things and wondering at things are also pleasant as a rule; wondering implies

the desire of learning, so that the object of wonder is an object of desire;

while in learning one is brought into one’s natural condition. Conferring and

receiving benefits belong to the class of pleasant things; to receive a benefit is

to get what one desires; to confer a benefit implies both posses sion and

superiority, both of which are things we try to attain. It is because beneficent

acts are pleasant that people find it pleasant to put their neighbours straight

again and to supply what they lack. Again, since learning and wondering are

pleasant, it follows that such things as acts of imitation must be pleasant-for

instance, painting, sculpture, poetry and every product of skilful imitation;

this latter, even if the object imitated is not itself pleasant; for it is not the

object itself which here gives delight; the spectator draws inferences (’That isa so-and-so’) and thus learns something fresh. Dramatic turns of fortune and

hairbreadth escapes from perils are pleasant, because we feel all such things

are wonderful.

And since what is natural is pleasant, and things akin to each other seem

natural  to  each  other,  therefore  all  kindred  and  similar  things  are  usually

pleasant  to  each  other;  for  instance,  one  man,  horse,  or  young  person  is

pleasant to another man, horse, or young person. Hence the proverbs ‘mate

delights mate’, ‘like to like’, ‘beast knows beast’, ‘jackdaw to jackdaw’, and

the rest of them. But since everything like and akin to oneself is pleasant, and

since every man is himself more like and akin to himself than any one else is,

it follows that all of us must be more or less fond of ourselves. For all this

resemblance and kinship is present particularly in the relation of an individual

to himself. And because we are all fond of ourselves, it follows that what is

our own is pleasant to all of us, as for instance our own deeds and words.

That is why we are usually fond of our flatterers, [our lovers,] and honour;

also of our children, for our children are our own work. It is also pleasant to

complete what is defective, for the whole thing thereupon becomes our own

work.  And  since  power  over  others  is  very  pleasant,  it  is  pleasant  to  be

thought wise, for practical wisdom secures us power over others. (Scientific

wisdom  is  also  pleasant,  because  it  is  the  knowledge  of  many  wonderful

things.)  Again,  since  most  of  us  are  ambitious,  it  must  be  pleasant  to

disparage our neighbours as well as to have power over them. It is pleasant

for a man to spend his time over what he feels he can do best; just as the poet

says,


To that he bends himself,

To that each day allots most time, wherein

He is indeed the best part of himself.


  Similarly, since amusement and every kind of relaxation and laughter too

belong to the class of pleasant things, it follows that ludicrous things are

pleasant, whether men, words, or deeds. We have discussed the ludicrous

separately in the treatise on the Art of Poetry.

So much for the subject of pleasant things: by considering their opposites

we can easily see what things are unpleasant.


12The above are the motives that make men do wrong to others; we are next

to consider the states of mind in which they do it, and the persons to whom

they do it.

  They must themselves suppose that the thing can be done, and done by

them: either that they can do it without being found out, or that if they are

found out they can escape being punished, or that if they are punished the

disadvantage will be less than the gain for themselves or those they care for.

The general subject of apparent possibility and impossibility will be handled

later on, since it is relevant not only to forensic but to all kinds of speaking.

But it may here be said that people think that they can themselves most easily

do wrong to others without being punished for it if they possess eloquence, or

practical ability, or much legal experience, or a large body of friends, or a

great deal of money. Their confidence is greatest if they personally possess

the advantages mentioned: but even without them they are satisfied if they

have friends or supporters or partners who do possess them: they can thus

both  commit  their  crimes  and  escape  being  found  out  and  punished  for

committing them. They are also safe, they think, if they are on good terms

with their victims or with the judges who try them. Their victims will in that

case  not  be  on  their  guard  against  being  wronged,  and  will  make  some

arrangement with them instead of prosecuting; while their judges will favour

them because they like them, either letting them off altogether or imposing

light  sentences.  They  are  not  likely  to  be  found  out  if  their  appearance

contradicts the charges that might be brought against them: for instance, a

weakling is unlikely to be charged with violent assault, or a poor and ugly

man with adultery. Public and open injuries are the easiest to do, because

nobody could at all suppose them possible, and therefore no precautions are

taken. The same is true of crimes so great and terrible that no man living

could be suspected of them: here too no precautions are taken. For all men

guard against ordinary offences, just as they guard against ordinary diseases;

but no one takes precautions against a disease that nobody has ever had. You

feel safe, too, if you have either no enemies or a great many; if you have

none, you expect not to be watched and therefore not to be detected; if you

have a great many, you will be watched, and therefore people will think you

can never risk an attempt on them, and you can defend your innocence by

pointing out that you could never have taken such a risk. You may also trust

to hide your crime by the way you do it or the place you do it in, or by some

convenient means of disposal.You may feel that even if you are found out you can stave off a trial, or

have it postponed, or corrupt your judges: or that even if you are sentenced

you can avoid paying damages, or can at least postpone doing so for a long

time: or that you are so badly off that you will have nothing to lose. You may

feel that the gain to be got by wrong-doing is great or certain or immediate,

and  that  the  penalty  is  small  or  uncertain  or  distant.  It  may  be  that  the

advantage to be gained is greater than any possible retribution: as in the case

of despotic power, according to the popular view. You may consider your

crimes as bringing you solid profit, while their punishment is nothing more

than being called bad names. Or the opposite argument may appeal to you:

your  crimes  may  bring  you  some  credit  (thus  you  may,  incidentally,  be

avenging your father or mother, like Zeno), whereas the punishment may

amount to a fine, or banishment, or something of that sort. People may be led

on to wrong others by either of these motives or feelings; but no man by

both-they  will  affect  people  of  quite  opposite  characters.  You  may  be

encouraged by having often escaped detection or punishment already; or by

having often tried and failed; for in crime, as in war, there are men who will

always refuse to give up the struggle. You may get your pleasure on the spot

and the pain later, or the gain on the spot and the loss later. That is what

appeals to weak-willed persons—and weakness of will may be shown with

regard to all the objects of desire. It may on the contrary appeal to you as it

does appeal to self-controlled and sensible people—that the pain and loss are

immediate, while the pleasure and profit come later and last longer. You may

feel able to make it appear that your crime was due to chance, or to necessity,

or to natural causes, or to habit: in fact, to put it generally, as if you had failed

to do right rather than actually done wrong. You may be able to trust other

people to judge you equitably. You may be stimulated by being in want:

which may mean that you want necessaries, as poor people do, or that you

want  luxuries,  as  rich  people  do.  You  may  be  encouraged  by  having  a

particularly  good  reputation,  because  that  will  save  you  from  being

suspected: or by having a particularly bad one, because nothing you are likely

to do will make it worse.

The above, then, are the various states of mind in which a man sets about

doing wrong to others. The kind of people to whom he does wrong, and the

ways in which he does it, must be considered next. The people to whom he

does  it  are  those  who  have  what  he  wants  himself,  whether  this  means

necessities or luxuries and materials for enjoyment. His victims may be faroff or near at hand. If they are near, he gets his profit quickly; if they are far

off, vengeance is slow, as those think who plunder the Carthaginians. They

may be those who are trustful instead of being cautious and watchful, since

all such people are easy to elude. Or those who are too easy-going to have

enough energy to prosecute an offender. Or sensitive people, who are not apt

to show fight over questions of money. Or those who have been wronged

already by many people, and yet have not prosecuted; such men must surely

be the proverbial ‘Mysian prey’. Or those who have either never or often

been wronged before; in neither case will they take precautions; if they have

never been wronged they think they never will, and if they have often been

wronged  they  feel  that  surely  it  cannot  happen  again.  Or  those  whose

character has been attacked in the past, or is exposed to attack in the future:

they will be too much frightened of the judges to make up their minds to

prosecute, nor can they win their case if they do: this is true of those who are

hated or unpopular. Another likely class of victim is those who their injurer

can pretend have, themselves or through their ancestors or friends, treated

badly, or intended to treat badly, the man himself, or his ancestors, or those

he cares for; as the proverb says, ‘wickedness needs but a pretext’. A man

may wrong his enemies, because that is pleasant: he may equally wrong his

friends, because that is easy. Then there are those who have no friends, and

those who lack eloquence and practical capacity; these will either not attempt

to prosecute, or they will come to terms, or failing that they will lose their

case. There are those whom it does not pay to waste time in waiting for trial

or damages, such as foreigners and small farmers; they will settle for a trifle,

and always be ready to leave off. Also those who have themselves wronged

others,  either  often,  or  in  the  same  way  as  they  are  now  being  wronged

themselves-for it is felt that next to no wrong is done to people when it is the

same wrong as they have often themselves done to others: if, for instance,

you  assault  a  man  who  has  been  accustomed  to  behave  with  violence  to

others. So too with those who have done wrong to others, or have meant to,

or mean to, or are likely to do so; there is something fine and pleasant in

wronging such persons, it seems as though almost no wrong were done. Also

those by doing wrong to whom we shall be gratifying our friends, or those we

admire or love, or our masters, or in general the people by reference to whom

we mould our lives. Also those whom we may wrong and yet be sure of

equitable treatment. Also those against whom we have had any grievance, or

any previous differences with them, as Callippus had when he behaved as hedid to Dion: here too it seems as if almost no wrong were being done. Also

those who are on the point of being wronged by others if we fail to wrong

them ourselves, since here we feel we have no time left for thinking the

matter  over.  So  Aenesidemus  is  said  to  have  sent  the  ‘cottabus’  prize  to

Gelon, who had just reduced a town to slavery, because Gelon had got there

first and forestalled his own attempt. Also those by wronging whom we shall

be able to do many righteous acts; for we feel that we can then easily cure the

harm done. Thus Jason the Thessalian said that it is a duty to do some unjust

acts in order to be able to do many just ones.

  Among  the  kinds  of  wrong  done  to  others  are  those  that  are  done

universally, or at least commonly: one expects to be forgiven for doing these.

Also those that can easily be kept dark, as where things that can rapidly be

consumed like eatables are concerned, or things that can easily be changed in

shape,  colour,  or  combination,  or  things  that  can  easily  be  stowed  away

almost anywhere-portable objects that you can stow away in small corners, or

things so like others of which you have plenty already that nobody can tell

the difference. There are also wrongs of a kind that shame prevents the victim

speaking about, such as outrages done to the women in his household or to

himself  or  to  his  sons.  Also  those  for  which  you  would  be  thought  very

litigious to prosecute any one-trifling wrongs, or wrongs for which people are

usually excused.

The above is a fairly complete account of the circumstances under which

men do wrong to others, of the sort of wrongs they do, of the sort of persons

to whom they do them, and of their reasons for doing them.


13


It will now be well to make a complete classification of just and unjust

actions. We may begin by observing that they have been defined relatively to

two kinds of law, and also relatively to two classes of persons. By the two

kinds of law I mean particular law and universal law. Particular law is that

which each community lays down and applies to its own members: this is

partly written and partly unwritten. Universal law is the law of Nature. For

there really is, as every one to some extent divines, a natural justice and

injustice that is binding on all men, even on those who have no association or

covenant with each other. It is this that Sophocles’ Antigone clearly means

when she says that the burial of Polyneices was a just act in spite of theprohibition: she means that it was just by nature.


  Not of to-day or yesterday it is,

But lives eternal: none can date its birth.


And so Empedocles, when he bids us kill no living creature, says that

doing this is not just for some people while unjust for others,


  Nay, but, an all-embracing law, through the realms of the sky

  Unbroken it stretcheth, and over the earth’s immensity.


And as Alcidamas says in his Messeniac Oration… .

The actions that we ought to do or not to do have also been divided into

two  classes  as  affecting  either  the  whole  community  or  some  one  of  its

members. From this point of view we can perform just or unjust acts in either

of two ways-towards one definite person, or towards the community. The

man who is guilty of adultery or assault is doing wrong to some definite

person;  the  man  who  avoids  service  in  the  army  is  doing  wrong  to  the

community.

  Thus the whole class of unjust actions may be divided into two classes,

those  affecting  the  community,  and  those  affecting  one  or  more  other

persons. We will next, before going further, remind ourselves of what ‘being

wronged’ means. Since it has already been settled that ‘doing a wrong’ must

be intentional, ‘being wronged’ must consist in having an injury done to you

by some one who intends to do it. In order to be wronged, a man must (1)

suffer actual harm, (2) suffer it against his will. The various possible forms of

harm are clearly explained by our previous, separate discussion of goods and

evils. We have also seen that a voluntary action is one where the doer knows

what he is doing. We now see that every accusation must be of an action

affecting either the community or some individual. The doer of the action

must either understand and intend the action, or not understand and intend it.

In the former case, he must be acting either from deliberate choice or from

passion. (Anger will be discussed when we speak of the passions the motives

for crime and the state of mind of the criminal have already been discussed.)

Now it often happens that a man will admit an act, but will not admit the

prosecutor’s label for the act nor the facts which that label implies. He will

admit that he took a thing but not that he ‘stole’ it; that he struck some one

first,  but  not  that  he  committed  ‘outrage’;  that  he  had  intercourse  with  awoman, but not that he committed ‘adultery’; that he is guilty of theft, but not

that he is guilty of ‘sacrilege’, the object stolen not being consecrated; that he

has encroached, but not that he has ‘encroached on State lands’; that he has

been in communication with the enemy, but not that he has been guilty of

‘treason’. Here therefore we must be able to distinguish what is theft, outrage,

or adultery, from what is not, if we are to be able to make the justice of our

case  clear,  no  matter  whether  our  aim  is  to  establish  a  man’s  guilt  or  to

establish his innocence. Wherever such charges are brought against a man,

the  question  is  whether  he  is  or  is  not  guilty  of  a  criminal  offence.  It  is

deliberate purpose that constitutes wickedness and criminal guilt, and such

names as ‘outrage’ or ‘theft’ imply deliberate purpose as well as the mere

action. A blow does not always amount to ‘outrage’, but only if it is struck

with some such purpose as to insult the man struck or gratify the striker

himself.  Nor  does  taking  a  thing  without  the  owner’s  knowledge  always

amount to ‘theft’, but only if it is taken with the intention of keeping it and

injuring the owner. And as with these charges, so with all the others.

We  saw  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  right  and  wrong  conduct  towards

others, one provided for by written ordinances, the other by unwritten. We

have now discussed the kind about which the laws have something to say.

The other kind has itself two varieties. First, there is the conduct that springs

from  exceptional  goodness  or  badness,  and  is  visited  accordingly  with

censure  and  loss  of  honour,  or  with  praise  and  increase  of  honour  and

decorations:  for  instance,  gratitude  to,  or  requital  of,  our  benefactors,

readiness to help our friends, and the like. The second kind makes up for the

defects of a community’s written code of law. This is what we call equity;

people regard it as just; it is, in fact, the sort of justice which goes beyond the

written law. Its existence partly is and partly is not intended by legislators;

not intended, where they have noticed no defect in the law; intended, where

find themselves unable to define things exactly, and are obliged to legislate as

if that held good always which in fact only holds good usually; or where it is

not easy to be complete owing to the endless possible cases presented, such

as  the  kinds  and  sizes  of  weapons  that  may  be  used  to  inflict  wounds-a

lifetime would be too short to make out a complete list of these. If, then, a

precise statement is impossible and yet legislation is necessary, the law must

be expressed in wide terms; and so, if a man has no more than a finger-ring

on his hand when he lifts it to strike or actually strikes another man, he is

guilty of a criminal act according to the unwritten words of the law; but he isinnocent  really,  and  it  is  equity  that  declares  him  to  be  so.  From  this

definition of equity it is plain what sort of actions, and what sort of persons,

are equitable or the reverse. Equity must be applied to forgivable actions; and

it must make us distinguish between criminal acts on the one hand, and errors

of judgement, or misfortunes, on the other. (A ‘misfortune’ is an act, not due

to moral badness, that has unexpected results: an ‘error of judgement’ is an

act, also not due to moral badness, that has results that might have been

expected: a ‘criminal act’ has results that might have been expected, but is

due to moral badness, for that is the source of all actions inspired by our

appetites.) Equity bids us be merciful to the weakness of human nature; to

think less about the laws than about the man who framed them, and less about

what he said than about what he meant; not to consider the actions of the

accused so much as his intentions, nor this or that detail so much as the whole

story; to ask not what a man is now but what he has always or usually been. It

bids us remember benefits rather than injuries, and benefits received rather

than  benefits  conferred;  to  be  patient  when  we  are  wronged;  to  settle  a

dispute by negotiation and not by force; to prefer arbitration to motion-for an

arbitrator  goes  by  the  equity  of  a  case,  a  judge  by  the  strict  law,  and

arbitration was invented with the express purpose of securing full power for

equity.

The above may be taken as a sufficient account of the nature of equity.


14


The worse of two acts of wrong done to others is that which is prompted

by the worse disposition. Hence the most trifling acts may be the worst ones;

as  when  Callistratus  charged  Melanopus  with  having  cheated  the  temple-

builders of three consecrated half-obols. The converse is true of just acts.

This is because the greater is here potentially contained in the less: there is no

crime that a man who has stolen three consecrated half-obols would shrink

from committing. Sometimes, however, the worse act is reckoned not in this

way but by the greater harm that it does. Or it may be because no punishment

for it is severe enough to be adequate; or the harm done may be incurable-a

difficult and even hopeless crime to defend; or the sufferer may not be able to

get his injurer legally punished, a fact that makes the harm incurable, since

legal punishment and chastisement are the proper cure. Or again, the man

who  has  suffered  wrong  may  have  inflicted  some  fearful  punishment  onhimself; then the doer of the wrong ought in justice to receive a still more

fearful  punishment.  Thus  Sophocles,  when  pleading  for  retribution  to

Euctemon, who had cut his own throat because of the outrage done to him,

said he would not fix a penalty less than the victim had fixed for himself.

Again, a man’s crime is worse if he has been the first man, or the only man,

or almost the only man, to commit it: or if it is by no means the first time he

has gone seriously wrong in the same way: or if his crime has led to the

thinking-out and invention of measures to prevent and punish similar crimes-

thus in Argos a penalty is inflicted on a man on whose account a law is

passed, and also on those on whose account the prison was built: or if a crime

is specially brutal, or specially deliberate: or if the report of it awakes more

terror than pity. There are also such rhetorically effective ways of putting it as

the following: That the accused has disregarded and broken not one but many

solemn obligations like oaths, promises, pledges, or rights of intermarriage

between states-here the crime is worse because it consists of many crimes;

and  that  the  crime  was  committed  in  the  very  place  where  criminals  are

punished,  as  for  example  perjurers  do-it  is  argued  that  a  man  who  will

commit a crime in a law-court would commit it anywhere. Further, the worse

deed is that which involves the doer in special shame; that whereby a man

wrongs  his  benefactors-for  he  does  more  than  one  wrong,  by  not  merely

doing them harm but failing to do them good; that which breaks the unwritten

laws of justice-the better sort of man will be just without being forced to be

so, and the written laws depend on force while the unwritten ones do not. It

may however be argued otherwise, that the crime is worse which breaks the

written laws: for the man who commits crimes for which terrible penalties are

provided will not hesitate over crimes for which no penalty is provided at

all.-So much, then, for the comparative badness of criminal actions.


15


  There are also the so-called ‘non-technical’ means of persuasion; and we

must now take a cursory view of these, since they are specially characteristic

of  forensic  oratory.  They  are  five  in  number:  laws,  witnesses,  contracts,

tortures, oaths.

First, then, let us take laws and see how they are to be used in persuasion

and dissuasion, in accusation and defence. If the written law tells against our

case, clearly we must appeal to the universal law, and insist on its greaterequity and justice. We must argue that the juror’s oath ‘I will give my verdict

according to honest opinion’ means that one will not simply follow the letter

of the written law. We must urge that the principles of equity are permanent

and changeless, and that the universal law does not change either, for it is the

law of nature, whereas written laws often do change. This is the bearing the

lines  in  Sophocles’  Antigone,  where  Antigone  pleads  that  in  burying  her

brother she had broken Creon’s law, but not the unwritten law:


  Not of to-day or yesterday they are,

But live eternal: (none can date their birth.)

  Not I would fear the wrath of any man

  (And brave God’s vengeance) for defying these.


We shall argue that justice indeed is true and profitable, but that sham

justice is not, and that consequently the written law is not, because it does not

fulfil  the  true  purpose  of  law.  Or  that  justice  is  like  silver,  and  must  be

assayed  by  the  judges,  if  the  genuine  is  to  be  distinguished  from  the

counterfeit. Or that the better a man is, the more he will follow and abide by

the unwritten law in preference to the written. Or perhaps that the law in

question  contradicts  some  other  highly-esteemed  law,  or  even  contradicts

itself. Thus it may be that one law will enact that all contracts must be held

binding, while another forbids us ever to make illegal contracts. Or if a law is

ambiguous, we shall turn it about and consider which construction best fits

the interests of justice or utility, and then follow that way of looking at it. Or

if, though the law still exists, the situation to meet which it was passed exists

no longer, we must do our best to prove this and to combat the law thereby. If

however the written law supports our case, we must urge that the oath ‘to

give  my  verdict  according  to  my  honest  opinion’  not  meant  to  make  the

judges give a verdict that is contrary to the law, but to save them from the

guilt of perjury if they misunderstand what the law really means. Or that no

one chooses what is absolutely good, but every one what is good for himself.

Or that not to use the laws is as ahas to have no laws at all. Or that, as in the

other arts, it does not pay to try to be cleverer than the doctor: for less harm

comes from the doctor’s mistakes than from the growing habit of disobeying

authority. Or that trying to be cleverer than the laws is just what is forbidden

by  those  codes  of  law  that  are  accounted  best.-So  far  as  the  laws  are

concerned, the above discussion is probably sufficient.As to witnesses, they are of two kinds, the ancient and the recent; and these

latter, again, either do or do not share in the risks of the trial. By ‘ancient’

witnesses I mean the poets and all other notable persons whose judgements

are known to all. Thus the Athenians appealed to Homer as a witness about

Salamis;  and  the  men  of  Tenedos  not  long  ago  appealed  to  Periander  of

Corinth in their dispute with the people of Sigeum; and Cleophon supported

his accusation of Critias by quoting the elegiac verse of Solon, maintaining

that discipline had long been slack in the family of Critias, or Solon would

never have written,


Pray thee, bid the red-haired Critias do what

his father commands him.


  These witnesses are concerned with past events. As to future events we

shall also appeal to soothsayers: thus Themistocles quoted the oracle about

‘the  wooden  wall’  as  a  reason  for  engaging  the  enemy’s  fleet.  Further,

proverbs are, as has been said, one form of evidence. Thus if you are urging

somebody not to make a friend of an old man, you will appeal to the proverb,


  Never show an old man kindness.


Or if you are urging that he who has made away with fathers should also

make away with their sons, quote,


Fool, who slayeth the father and leaveth his sons to avenge him.


  ‘Recent’  witnesses  are  well-known  people  who  have  expressed  their

opinions about some disputed matter: such opinions will be useful support for

subsequent disputants on the same oints: thus Eubulus used in the law-courts

against the reply Plato had made to Archibius, ‘It has become the regular

custom in this country to admit that one is a scoundrel’. There are also those

witnesses who share the risk of punishment if their evidence is pronounced

false. These are valid witnesses to the fact that an action was or was not done,

that something is or is not the case; they are not valid witnesses to the quality

of an action, to its being just or unjust, useful or harmful. On such questions

of  quality  the  opinion  of  detached  persons  is  highly  trustworthy.  Most

trustworthy of all are the ‘ancient’ witnesses, since they cannot be corrupted.

In  dealing  with  the  evidence  of  witnesses,  the  following  are  usefularguments. If you have no witnesses on your side, you will argue that the

judges must decide from what is probable; that this is meant by ‘giving a

verdict in accordance with one’s honest opinion’; that probabilities cannot be

bribed  to  mislead  the  court;  and  that  probabilities  are  never  convicted  of

perjury. If you have witnesses, and the other man has not, you will argue that

probabilities cannot be put on their trial, and that we could do without the

evidence of witnesses altogether if we need do no more than balance the

pleas advanced on either side.

The evidence of witnesses may refer either to ourselves or to our opponent;

and  either  to  questions  of  fact  or  to  questions  of  personal  character:  so,

clearly, we need never be at a loss for useful evidence. For if we have no

evidence  of  fact  supporting  our  own  case  or  telling  against  that  of  our

opponent, at least we can always find evidence to prove our own worth or our

opponent’s worthlessness. Other arguments about a witness-that he is a friend

or an enemy or neutral, or has a good, bad, or indifferent reputation, and any

other such distinctions-we must construct upon the same general lines as we

use for the regular rhetorical proofs.

  Concerning contracts argument can be so far employed as to increase or

diminish their importance and their credibility; we shall try to increase both if

they tell in our favour, and to diminish both if they tell in favour of our

opponent. Now for confirming or upsetting the credibility of contracts the

procedure is just the same as for dealing with witnesses, for the credit to be

attached to contracts depends upon the character of those who have signed

them or have the custody of them. The contract being once admitted genuine,

we must insist on its importance, if it supports our case. We may argue that a

contract  is  a  law,  though  of  a  special  and  limited  kind;  and  that,  while

contracts do not of course make the law binding, the law does make any

lawful contract binding, and that the law itself as a whole is a of contract, so

that any one who disregards or repudiates any contract is repudiating the law

itself. Further, most business relations-those, namely, that are voluntary-are

regulated  by  contracts,  and  if  these  lose  their  binding  force,  human

intercourse ceases to exist. We need not go very deep to discover the other

appropriate arguments of this kind. If, however, the contract tells against us

and for our opponents, in the first place those arguments are suitable which

we can use to fight a law that tells against us. We do not regard ourselves as

bound to observe a bad law which it was a mistake ever to pass: and it is

ridiculous  to  suppose  that  we  are  bound  to  observe  a  bad  and  mistakencontract. Again, we may argue that the duty of the judge as umpire is to

decide what is just, and therefore he must ask where justice lies, and not what

this or that document means. And that it is impossible to pervert justice by

fraud or by force, since it is founded on nature, but a party to a contract may

be the victim of either fraud or force. Moreover, we must see if the contract

contravenes either universal law or any written law of our own or another

country; and also if it contradicts any other previous or subsequent contract;

arguing that the subsequent is the binding contract, or else that the previous

one was right and the subsequent one fraudulent-whichever way suits us.

Further, we must consider the question of utility, noting whether the contract

is against the interest of the judges or not; and so on-these arguments are as

obvious as the others.

  Examination by torture is one form of evidence, to which great weight is

often attached because it is in a sense compulsory. Here again it is not hard to

point out the available grounds for magnifying its value, if it happens to tell

in  our  favour,  and  arguing  that  it  is  the  only  form  of  evidence  that  is

infallible; or, on the other hand, for refuting it if it tells against us and for our

opponent, when we may say what is true of torture of every kind alike, that

people  under  its  compulsion  tell  lies  quite  as  often  as  they  tell  the  truth,

sometimes persistently refusing to tell the truth, sometimes recklessly making

a false charge in order to be let off sooner. We ought to be able to quote

cases,  familiar  to  the  judges,  in  which  this  sort  of  thing  has  actually

happened. [We must say that evidence under torture is not trustworthy, the

fact being that many men whether thick-witted, tough-skinned, or stout of

heart endure their ordeal nobly, while cowards and timid men are full of

boldness till they see the ordeal of these others: so that no trust can be placed

in evidence under torture.]

In regard to oaths, a fourfold division can be made. A man may either both

offer and accept an oath, or neither, or one without the other-that is, he may

offer an oath but not accept one, or accept an oath but not offer one. There is

also the situation that arises when an oath has already been sworn either by

himself or by his opponent.

If you refuse to offer an oath, you may argue that men do not hesitate to

perjure  themselves;  and  that  if  your  opponent  does  swear,  you  lose  your

money, whereas, if he does not, you think the judges will decide against him;

and that the risk of an unfavourable verdict is prefer, able, since you trust the

judges and do not trust him.If you refuse to accept an oath, you may argue that an oath is always paid

for; that you would of course have taken it if you had been a rascal, since if

you are a rascal you had better make something by it, and you would in that

case have to swear in order to succeed. Thus your refusal, you argue, must be

due to high principle, not to fear of perjury: and you may aptly quote the

saying of Xenophanes,


  ‘Tis not fair that he who fears not God

  should challenge him who doth.


It is as if a strong man were to challenge a weakling to strike, or be struck

by, him.

If you agree to accept an oath, you may argue that you trust yourself but

not your opponent; and that (to invert the remark of Xenophanes) the fair

thing is for the impious man to offer the oath and for the pious man to accept

it; and that it would be monstrous if you yourself were unwilling to accept an

oath in a case where you demand that the judges should do so before giving

their verdict. If you wish to offer an oath, you may argue that piety disposes

you to commit the issue to the gods; and that your opponent ought not to

want other judges than himself, since you leave the decision with him; and

that it is outrageous for your opponents to refuse to swear about this question,

when they insist that others should do so.

Now that we see how we are to argue in each case separately, we see also

how we are to argue when they occur in pairs, namely, when you are willing

to accept the oath but not to offer it; to offer it but not to accept it; both to

accept and to offer it; or to do neither. These are of course combinations of

the  cases  already  mentioned,  and  so  your  arguments  also  must  be

combinations of the arguments already mentioned.

If you have already sworn an oath that contradicts your present one, you

must argue that it is not perjury, since perjury is a crime, and a crime must be

a voluntary action, whereas actions due to the force or fraud of others are

involuntary. You must further reason from this that perjury depends on the

intention and not on the spoken words. But if it is your opponent who has

already sworn an oath that contradicts his present one, you must say that if he

does not abide by his oaths he is the enemy of society, and that this is the

reason why men take an oath before administering the laws. ‘My opponents

insist that you, the judges, must abide by the oath you have sworn, and yetthey  are  not  abiding  by  their  own  oaths.’  And  there  are  other  arguments

which may be used to magnify the importance of the oath. [So much, then,

for the ‘non-technical’ modes of persuasion.]                                Rhetoric, Book II


Translated by W. Rhys Roberts


<

div id="book3" class="book">1


We  have  now  considered  the  materials  to  be  used  in  supporting  or

opposing a political measure, in pronouncing eulogies or censures, and for

prosecution and defence in the law courts. We have considered the received

opinions on which we may best base our arguments so as to convince our

hearers-those opinions with which our enthymemes deal, and out of which

they are built, in each of the three kinds of oratory, according to what may be

called the special needs of each.

But since rhetoric exists to affect the giving of decisions-the hearers decide

between one political speaker and another, and a legal verdict is a decision-

the  orator  must  not  only  try  to  make  the  argument  of  his  speech

demonstrative and worthy of belief; he must also make his own character

look right and put his hearers, who are to decide, into the right frame of mind.

Particularly  in  political  oratory,  but  also  in  lawsuits,  it  adds  much  to  an

orator’s influence that his own character should look right and that he should

be thought to entertain the right feelings towards his hearers; and also that his

hearers themselves should be in just the right frame of mind. That the orator’s

own  character  should  look  right  is  particularly  important  in  political

speaking: that the audience should be in the right frame of mind, in lawsuits.

When people are feeling friendly and placable, they think one sort of thing;

when they are feeling angry or hostile, they think either something totally

different or the same thing with a different intensity: when they feel friendly

to the man who comes before them for judgement, they regard him as having

done little wrong, if any; when they feel hostile, they take the opposite view.

Again, if they are eager for, and have good hopes of, a thing that will be

pleasant if it happens, they think that it certainly will happen and be good for

them: whereas if they are indifferent or annoyed, they do not think so.

  There  are  three  things  which  inspire  confidence  in  the  orator’s  own

character-the three, namely, that induce us to believe a thing apart from any

proof of it: good sense, good moral character, and goodwill. False statementsand bad advice are due to one or more of the following three causes. Men

either form a false opinion through want of good sense; or they form a true

opinion, but because of their moral badness do not say what they really think;

or finally, they are both sensible and upright, but not well disposed to their

hearers, and may fail in consequence to recommend what they know to be the

best course. These are the only possible cases. It follows that any one who is

thought  to  have  all  three  of  these  good  qualities  will  inspire  trust  in  his

audience. The way to make ourselves thought to be sensible and morally

good must be gathered from the analysis of goodness already given: the way

to establish your own goodness is the same as the way to establish that of

others.  Good  will  and  friendliness  of  disposition  will  form  part  of  our

discussion of the emotions, to which we must now turn.

The Emotions are all those feelings that so change men as to affect their

judgements, and that are also attended by pain or pleasure. Such are anger,

pity, fear and the like, with their opposites. We must arrange what we have to

say about each of them under three heads. Take, for instance, the emotion of

anger: here we must discover (1) what the state of mind of angry people is,

(2) who the people are with whom they usually get angry, and (3) on what

grounds they get angry with them. It is not enough to know one or even two

of these points; unless we know all three, we shall be unable to arouse anger

in any one. The same is true of the other emotions. So just as earlier in this

work  we  drew  up  a  list  of  useful  propositions  for  the  orator,  let  us  now

proceed in the same way to analyse the subject before us.


2


Anger  may  be  defined  as  an  impulse,  accompanied  by  pain,  to  a

conspicuous revenge for a conspicuous slight directed without justification

towards what concerns oneself or towards what concerns one’s friends. If this

is a proper definition of anger, it must always be felt towards some particular

individual, e.g. Cleon, and not ‘man’ in general. It must be felt because the

other has done or intended to do something to him or one of his friends. It

must always be attended by a certain pleasure-that which arises from the

expectation of revenge. For since nobody aims at what he thinks he cannot

attain, the angry man is aiming at what he can attain, and the belief that you

will attain your aim is pleasant. Hence it has been well said about wrath,  Sweeter it is by far than the honeycomb

  dripping with sweetness,

And spreads through the hearts of men.


It is also attended by a certain pleasure because the thoughts dwell upon

the act of vengeance, and the images then called up cause pleasure, like the

images called up in dreams.

Now  slighting  is  the  actively  entertained  opinion  of  something  as

obviously of no importance. We think bad things, as well as good ones, have

serious importance; and we think the same of anything that tends to produce

such things, while those which have little or no such tendency we consider

unimportant.  There  are  three  kinds  of  slighting-contempt,  spite,  and

insolence. (1) Contempt is one kind of slighting: you feel contempt for what

you consider unimportant, and it is just such things that you slight. (2) Spite

is another kind; it is a thwarting another man’s wishes, not to get something

yourself but to prevent his getting it. The slight arises just from the fact that

you do not aim at something for yourself: clearly you do not think that he can

do you harm, for then you would be afraid of him instead of slighting him,

nor yet that he can do you any good worth mentioning, for then you would be

anxious to make friends with him. (3) Insolence is also a form of slighting,

since it consists in doing and saying things that cause shame to the victim, not

in  order  that  anything  may  happen  to  yourself,  or  because  anything  has

happened to yourself, but simply for the pleasure involved. (Retaliation is not

‘insolence’, but vengeance.) The cause of the pleasure thus enjoyed by the

insolent man is that he thinks himself greatly superior to others when ill-

treating  them.  That  is  why  youths  and  rich  men  are  insolent;  they  think

themselves superior when they show insolence. One sort of insolence is to

rob people of the honour due to them; you certainly slight them thus; for it is

the unimportant, for good or evil, that has no honour paid to it. So Achilles

says in anger:


He hath taken my prize for himself

and hath done me dishonour,


and


Like an alien honoured by none,  meaning  that  this  is  why  he  is  angry.  A  man  expects  to  be  specially

respected by his inferiors in birth, in capacity, in goodness, and generally in

anything in which he is much their superior: as where money is concerned a

wealthy  man  looks  for  respect  from  a  poor  man;  where  speaking  is

concerned, the man with a turn for oratory looks for respect from one who

cannot speak; the ruler demands the respect of the ruled, and the man who

thinks he ought to be a ruler demands the respect of the man whom he thinks

he ought to be ruling. Hence it has been said


  Great is the wrath of kings, whose father is Zeus almighty,


and


Yea, but his rancour abideth long afterward also,


their great resentment being due to their great superiority. Then again a

man looks for respect from those who he thinks owe him good treatment, and

these are the people whom he has treated or is treating well, or means or has

meant to treat well, either himself, or through his friends, or through others at

his request.

It will be plain by now, from what has been said, (1) in what frame of

mind, (2) with what persons, and (3) on what grounds people grow angry. (1)

The frame of mind is that of one in which any pain is being felt. In that

condition, a man is always aiming at something. Whether, then, another man

opposes him either directly in any way, as by preventing him from drinking

when he is thirsty, or indirectly, the act appears to him just the same; whether

some one works against him, or fails to work with him, or otherwise vexes

him while he is in this mood, he is equally angry in all these cases. Hence

people who are afflicted by sickness or poverty or love or thirst or any other

unsatisfied desires are prone to anger and easily roused: especially against

those  who  slight  their  present  distress.  Thus  a  sick  man  is  angered  by

disregard of his illness, a poor man by disregard of his poverty, a man aging

war by disregard of the war he is waging, a lover by disregard of his love,

and so throughout, any other sort of slight being enough if special slights are

wanting. Each man is predisposed, by the emotion now controlling him, to

his  own  particular  anger.  Further,  we  are  angered  if  we  happen  to  be

expecting a contrary result: for a quite unexpected evil is specially painful,

just as the quite unexpected fulfilment of our wishes is specially pleasant.Hence it is plain what seasons, times, conditions, and periods of life tend to

stir men easily to anger, and where and when this will happen; and it is plain

that the more we are under these conditions the more easily we are stirred.

These, then, are the frames of mind in which men are easily stirred to

anger. The persons with whom we get angry are those who laugh, mock, or

jeer at us, for such conduct is insolent. Also those who inflict injuries upon us

that  are  marks  of  insolence.  These  injuries  must  be  such  as  are  neither

retaliatory nor profitable to the doers: for only then will they be felt to be due

to insolence. Also those who speak ill of us, and show contempt for us, in

connexion with the things we ourselves most care about: thus those who are

eager to win fame as philosophers get angry with those who show contempt

for their philosophy; those who pride themselves upon their appearance get

angry with those who show contempt for their appearance and so on in other

cases. We feel particularly angry on this account if we suspect that we are in

fact, or that people think we are, lacking completely or to any effective extent

in the qualities in question. For when we are convinced that we excel in the

qualities for which we are jeered at, we can ignore the jeering. Again, we are

angrier with our friends than with other people, since we feel that our friends

ought to treat us well and not badly. We are angry with those who have

usually treated us with honour or regard, if a change comes and they behave

to us otherwise: for we think that they feel contempt for us, or they would

still be behaving as they did before. And with those who do not return our

kindnesses or fail to return them adequately, and with those who oppose us

though they are our inferiors: for all such persons seem to feel contempt for

us; those who oppose us seem to think us inferior to themselves, and those

who do not return our kindnesses seem to think that those kindnesses were

conferred by inferiors. And we feel particularly angry with men of no account

at all, if they slight us. For, by our hypothesis, the anger caused by the slight

is felt towards people who are not justified in slighting us, and our inferiors

are not thus justified. Again, we feel angry with friends if they do not speak

well of us or treat us well; and still more, if they do the contrary; or if they do

not perceive our needs, which is why Plexippus is angry with Meleager in

Antiphon’s play; for this want of perception shows that they are slighting us-

we do not fail to perceive the needs of those for whom we care. Again we are

angry with those who rejoice at our misfortunes or simply keep cheerful in

the midst of our misfortunes, since this shows that they either hate us or are

slighting us. Also with those who are indifferent to the pain they give us: thisis why we get angry with bringers of bad news. And with those who listen to

stories about us or keep on looking at our weaknesses; this seems like either

slighting us or hating us; for those who love us share in all our distresses and

it must distress any one to keep on looking at his own weaknesses. Further,

with those who slight us before five classes of people: namely, (1) our rivals,

(2) those whom we admire, (3) those whom we wish to admire us, (4) those

for whom we feel reverence, (5) those who feel reverence for us: if any one

slights us before such persons, we feel particularly angry. Again, we feel

angry with those who slight us in connexion with what we are as honourable

men bound to champion-our parents, children, wives, or subjects. And with

those who do not return a favour, since such a slight is unjustifiable. Also

with those who reply with humorous levity when we are speaking seriously,

for such behaviour indicates contempt. And with those who treat us less well

than  they  treat  everybody  else;  it  is  another  mark  of  contempt  that  they

should think we do not deserve what every one else deserves. Forgetfulness,

too, causes anger, as when our own names are forgotten, trifling as this may

be; since forgetfulness is felt to be another sign that we are being slighted; it

is due to negligence, and to neglect us is to slight us.

The persons with whom we feel anger, the frame of mind in which we feel

it, and the reasons why we feel it, have now all been set forth. Clearly the

orator will have to speak so as to bring his hearers into a frame of mind that

will dispose them to anger, and to represent his adversaries as open to such

charges and possessed of such qualities as do make people angry.


3


  Since growing calm is the opposite of growing angry, and calmness the

opposite of anger, we must ascertain in what frames of mind men are calm,

towards whom they feel calm, and by what means they are made so. Growing

calm may be defined as a settling down or quieting of anger. Now we get

angry with those who slight us; and since slighting is a voluntary act, it is

plain that we feel calm towards those who do nothing of the kind, or who do

or seem to do it involuntarily. Also towards those who intended to do the

opposite of what they did do. Also towards those who treat themselves as

they have treated us: since no one can be supposed to slight himself. Also

towards those who admit their fault and are sorry: since we accept their grief

at what they have done as satisfaction, and cease to be angry. The punishmentof servants shows this: those who contradict us and deny their offence we

punish all the more, but we cease to be incensed against those who agree that

they deserved their punishment. The reason is that it is shameless to deny

what is obvious, and those who are shameless towards us slight us and show

contempt for us: anyhow, we do not feel shame before those of whom we are

thoroughly  contemptuous.  Also  we  feel  calm  towards  those  who  humble

themselves before us and do not gainsay us; we feel that they thus admit

themselves our inferiors, and inferiors feel fear, and nobody can slight any

one so long as he feels afraid of him. That our anger ceases towards those

who humble themselves before us is shown even by dogs, who do not bite

people when they sit down. We also feel calm towards those who are serious

when we are serious, because then we feel that we are treated seriously and

not contemptuously. Also towards those who have done us more kindnesses

than we have done them. Also towards those who pray to us and beg for

mercy, since they humble themselves by doing so. Also towards those who

do not insult or mock at or slight any one at all, or not any worthy person or

any  one  like  ourselves.  In  general,  the  things  that  make  us  calm  may  be

inferred by seeing what the opposites are of those that make us angry. We are

not angry with people we fear or respect, as long as we fear or respect them;

you cannot be afraid of a person and also at the same time angry with him.

Again, we feel no anger, or comparatively little, with those who have done

what they did through anger: we do not feel that they have done it from a

wish to slight us, for no one slights people when angry with them, since

slighting is painless, and anger is painful. Nor do we grow angry with those

who reverence us.

As to the frame of mind that makes people calm, it is plainly the opposite

to that which makes them angry, as when they are amusing themselves or

laughing  or  feasting;  when  they  are  feeling  prosperous  or  successful  or

satisfied; when, in fine, they are enjoying freedom from pain, or inoffensive

pleasure, or justifiable hope. Also when time has passed and their anger is no

longer fresh, for time puts an end to anger. And vengeance previously taken

on one person puts an end to even greater anger felt against another person.

Hence Philocrates, being asked by some one, at a time when the public was

angry with him, ‘Why don’t you defend yourself?’ did right to reply, ‘The

time  is  not  yet.’  ‘Why,  when  is  the  time?’  ‘When  I  see  someone  else

calumniated.’ For men become calm when they have spent their anger on

somebody else. This happened in the case of Ergophilus: though the peoplewere more irritated against him than against Callisthenes, they acquitted him

because they had condemned Callisthenes to death the day before. Again,

men become calm if they have convicted the offender; or if he has already

suffered  worse  things  than  they  in  their  anger  would  have  themselves

inflicted upon him; for they feel as if they were already avenged. Or if they

feel that they themselves are in the wrong and are suffering justly (for anger

is not excited by what is just), since men no longer think then that they are

suffering without justification; and anger, as we have seen, means this. Hence

we ought always to inflict a preliminary punishment in words: if that is done,

even slaves are less aggrieved by the actual punishment. We also feel calm if

we think that the offender will not see that he is punished on our account and

because of the way he has treated us. For anger has to do with individuals.

This is plain from the definition. Hence the poet has well written:


  Say that it was Odysseus, sacker of cities,


  implying that Odysseus would not have considered himself avenged unless

the  Cyclops  perceived  both  by  whom  and  for  what  he  had  been  blinded.

Consequently we do not get angry with any one who cannot be aware of our

anger, and in particular we cease to be angry with people once they are dead,

for we feel that the worst has been done to them, and that they will neither

feel pain nor anything else that we in our anger aim at making them feel. And

therefore the poet has well made Apollo say, in order to put a stop to the

anger of Achilles against the dead Hector,


For behold in his fury he doeth despite to the senseless clay.


It is now plain that when you wish to calm others you must draw upon

these lines of argument; you must put your hearers into the corresponding

frame of mind, and represent those with whom they are angry as formidable,

or as worthy of reverence, or as benefactors, or as involuntary agents, or as

much distressed at what they have done.


4


Let us now turn to Friendship and Enmity, and ask towards whom these

feelings are entertained, and why. We will begin by defining and friendlyfeeling. We may describe friendly feeling towards any one as wishing for him

what you believe to be good things, not for your own sake but for his, and

being inclined, so far as you can, to bring these things about. A friend is one

who feels thus and excites these feelings in return: those who think they feel

thus  towards  each  other  think  themselves  friends.  This  being  assumed,  it

follows that your friend is the sort of man who shares your pleasure in what is

good and your pain in what is unpleasant, for your sake and for no other

reason. This pleasure and pain of his will be the token of his good wishes for

you, since we all feel glad at getting what we wish for, and pained at getting

what we do not. Those, then, are friends to whom the same things are good

and evil; and those who are, moreover, friendly or unfriendly to the same

people; for in that case they must have the same wishes, and thus by wishing

for each other what they wish for themselves, they show themselves each

other’s friends. Again, we feel friendly to those who have treated us well,

either ourselves or those we care for, whether on a large scale, or readily, or

at some particular crisis; provided it was for our own sake. And also to those

who we think wish to treat us well. And also to our friends’ friends, and to

those who like, or are liked by, those whom we like ourselves. And also to

those who are enemies to those whose enemies we are, and dislike, or are

disliked by, those whom we dislike. For all such persons think the things

good which we think good, so that they wish what is good for us; and this, as

we saw, is what friends must do. And also to those who are willing to treat us

well  where  money  or  our  personal  safety  is  concerned:  and  therefore  we

value those who are liberal, brave, or just. The just we consider to be those

who do not live on others; which means those who work for their living,

especially farmers and others who work with their own hands. We also like

temperate  men,  because  they  are  not  unjust  to  others;  and,  for  the  same

reason, those who mind their own business. And also those whose friends we

wish to be, if it is plain that they wish to be our friends: such are the morally

good, and those well thought of by every one, by the best men, or by those

whom we admire or who admire us. And also those with whom it is pleasant

to live and spend our days: such are the good-tempered, and those who are

not too ready to show us our mistakes, and those who are not cantankerous or

quarrelsome-such people are always wanting to fight us, and those who fight

us we feel wish for the opposite of what we wish for ourselves-and those who

have the tact to make and take a joke; here both parties have the same object

in view, when they can stand being made fun of as well as do it prettilythemselves. And we also feel friendly towards those who praise such good

qualities as we possess, and especially if they praise the good qualities that

we are not too sure we do possess. And towards those who are cleanly in

their person, their dress, and all their way of life. And towards those who do

not reproach us with what we have done amiss to them or they have done to

help us, for both actions show a tendency to criticize us. And towards those

who do not nurse grudges or store up grievances, but are always ready to

make friends again; for we take it that they will behave to us just as we find

them  behaving  to  every  one  else.  And  towards  those  who  are  not  evil

speakers and who are aware of neither their neighbours’ bad points nor our

own, but of our good ones only, as a good man always will be. And towards

those who do not try to thwart us when we are angry or in earnest, which

would  mean  being  ready  to  fight  us.  And  towards  those  who  have  some

serious  feeling  towards  us,  such  as  admiration  for  us,  or  belief  in  our

goodness, or pleasure in our company; especially if they feel like this about

qualities in us for which we especially wish to be admired, esteemed, or

liked. And towards those who are like ourselves in character and occupation,

provided they do not get in our way or gain their living from the same source

as we do-for then it will be a case of ‘potter against potter’:


  Potter to potter and builder to builder begrudge their reward.


And those who desire the same things as we desire, if it is possible for us

both to share them together; otherwise the same trouble arises here too. And

towards those with whom we are on such terms that, while we respect their

opinions, we need not blush before them for doing what is conventionally

wrong: as well as towards those before whom we should be ashamed to do

anything really wrong. Again, our rivals, and those whom we should like to

envy us—though without ill-feeling—either we like these people or at least

we wish them to like us. And we feel friendly towards those whom we help

to secure good for themselves, provided we are not likely to suffer heavily by

it ourselves. And those who feel as friendly to us when we are not with them

as when we are-which is why all men feel friendly towards those who are

faithful to their dead friends. And, speaking generally, towards those who are

really fond of their friends and do not desert them in trouble; of all good men,

we feel most friendly to those who show their goodness as friends. Also

towards those who are honest with us, including those who will tell us oftheir  own  weak  points:  it  has  just  said  that  with  our  friends  we  are  not

ashamed of what is conventionally wrong, and if we do have this feeling, we

do not love them; if therefore we do not have it, it looks as if we did love

them.  We  also  like  those  with  whom  we  do  not  feel  frightened  or

uncomfortable-nobody  can  like  a  man  of  whom  he  feels  frightened.

Friendship has various forms-comradeship, intimacy, kinship, and so on.

  Things that cause friendship are: doing kindnesses; doing them unasked;

and not proclaiming the fact when they are done, which shows that they were

done for our own sake and not for some other reason.

  Enmity  and  Hatred  should  clearly  be  studied  by  reference  to  their

opposites.  Enmity  may  be  produced  by  anger  or  spite  or  calumny.  Now

whereas anger arises from offences against oneself, enmity may arise even

without that; we may hate people merely because of what we take to be their

character.  Anger  is  always  concerned  with  individuals-a  Callias  or  a

Socrates-whereas hatred is directed also against classes: we all hate any thief

and any informer. Moreover, anger can be cured by time; but hatred cannot.

The one aims at giving pain to its object, the other at doing him harm; the

angry man wants his victims to feel; the hater does not mind whether they

feel or not. All painful things are felt; but the greatest evils, injustice and

folly, are the least felt, since their presence causes no pain. And anger is

accompanied by pain, hatred is not; the angry man feels pain, but the hater

does not. Much may happen to make the angry man pity those who offend

him, but the hater under no circumstances wishes to pity a man whom he has

once hated: for the one would have the offenders suffer for what they have

done; the other would have them cease to exist.

It is plain from all this that we can prove people to be friends or enemies; if

they are not, we can make them out to be so; if they claim to be so, we can

refute their claim; and if it is disputed whether an action was due to anger or

to hatred, we can attribute it to whichever of these we prefer.


5


To turn next to Fear, what follows will show things and persons of which,

and the states of mind in which, we feel afraid. Fear may be defined as a pain

or disturbance due to a mental picture of some destructive or painful evil in

the future. Of destructive or painful evils only; for there are some evils, e.g.

wickedness or stupidity, the prospect of which does not frighten us: I meanonly such as amount to great pains or losses. And even these only if they

appear not remote but so near as to be imminent: we do not fear things that

are a very long way off: for instance, we all know we shall die, but we are not

troubled thereby, because death is not close at hand. From this definition it

will  follow  that  fear  is  caused  by  whatever  we  feel  has  great  power  of

destroying or of harming us in ways that tend to cause us great pain. Hence

the very indications of such things are terrible, making us feel that the terrible

thing itself is close at hand; the approach of what is terrible is just what we

mean by ‘danger’. Such indications are the enmity and anger of people who

have power to do something to us; for it is plain that they have the will to do

it, and so they are on the point of doing it. Also injustice in possession of

power; for it is the unjust man’s will to do evil that makes him unjust. Also

outraged virtue in possession of power; for it is plain that, when outraged, it

always has the will to retaliate, and now it has the power to do so. Also fear

felt by those who have the power to do something to us, since such persons

are sure to be ready to do it. And since most men tend to be bad-slaves to

greed, and cowards in danger-it is, as a rule, a terrible thing to be at another

man’s mercy; and therefore, if we have done anything horrible, those in the

secret terrify us with the thought that they may betray or desert us. And those

who can do us wrong are terrible to us when we are liable to be wronged; for

as a rule men do wrong to others whenever they have the power to do it. And

those who have been wronged, or believe themselves to be wronged, are

terrible; for they are always looking out for their opportunity. Also those who

have done people wrong, if they possess power, since they stand in fear of

retaliation: we have already said that wickedness possessing power is terrible.

Again, our rivals for a thing cause us fear when we cannot both have it at

once; for we are always at war with such men. We also fear those who are to

be feared by stronger people than ourselves: if they can hurt those stronger

people, still more can they hurt us; and, for the same reason, we fear those

whom  those  stronger  people  are  actually  afraid  of.  Also  those  who  have

destroyed people stronger than we are. Also those who are attacking people

weaker than we are: either they are already formidable, or they will be so

when they have thus grown stronger. Of those we have wronged, and of our

enemies or rivals, it is not the passionate and outspoken whom we have to

fear, but the quiet, dissembling, unscrupulous; since we never know when

they are upon us, we can never be sure they are at a safe distance. All terrible

things are more terrible if they give us no chance of retrieving a blundereither no chance at all, or only one that depends on our enemies and not

ourselves. Those things are also worse which we cannot, or cannot easily,

help. Speaking generally, anything causes us to feel fear that when it happens

to, or threatens, others cause us to feel pity.

The above are, roughly, the chief things that are terrible and are feared. Let

us now describe the conditions under which we ourselves feel fear. If fear is

associated with the expectation that something destructive will happen to us,

plainly nobody will be afraid who believes nothing can happen to him; we

shall not fear things that we believe cannot happen to us, nor people who we

believe cannot inflict them upon us; nor shall we be afraid at times when we

think ourselves safe from them. It follows therefore that fear is felt by those

who  believe  something  to  be  likely  to  happen  to  them,  at  the  hands  of

particular persons, in a particular form, and at a particular time. People do not

believe  this  when  they  are,  or  think  they  a  are,  in  the  midst  of  great

prosperity, and are in consequence insolent, contemptuous, and reckless-the

kind  of  character  produced  by  wealth,  physical  strength,  abundance  of

friends, power: nor yet when they feel they have experienced every kind of

horror already and have grown callous about the future, like men who are

being flogged and are already nearly dead-if they are to feel the anguish of

uncertainty, there must be some faint expectation of escape. This appears

from the fact that fear sets us thinking what can be done, which of course

nobody does when things are hopeless. Consequently, when it is advisable

that the audience should be frightened, the orator must make them feel that

they really are in danger of something, pointing out that it has happened to

others who were stronger than they are, and is happening, or has happened, to

people like themselves, at the hands of unexpected people, in an unexpected

form, and at an unexpected time.

  Having now seen the nature of fear, and of the things that cause it, and the

various states of mind in which it is felt, we can also see what Confidence is,

about what things we feel it, and under what conditions. It is the opposite of

fear, and what causes it is the opposite of what causes fear; it is, therefore, the

expectation associated with a mental picture of the nearness of what keeps us

safe and the absence or remoteness of what is terrible: it may be due either to

the  near  presence  of  what  inspires  confidence  or  to  the  absence  of  what

causes alarm. We feel it if we can take steps-many, or important, or both-to

cure or prevent trouble; if we have neither wronged others nor been wronged

by them; if we have either no rivals at all or no strong ones; if our rivals whoare strong are our friends or have treated us well or been treated well by us;

or if those whose interest is the same as ours are the more numerous party, or

the stronger, or both.

As for our own state of mind, we feel confidence if we believe we have

often succeeded and never suffered reverses, or have often met danger and

escaped it safely. For there are two reasons why human beings face danger

calmly: they may have no experience of it, or they may have means to deal

with it: thus when in danger at sea people may feel confident about what will

happen either because they have no experience of bad weather, or because

their  experience  gives  them  the  means  of  dealing  with  it.  We  also  feel

confident whenever there is nothing to terrify other people like ourselves, or

people weaker than ourselves, or people than whom we believe ourselves to

be stronger-and we believe this if we have conquered them, or conquered

others who are as strong as they are, or stronger. Also if we believe ourselves

superior to our rivals in the number and importance of the advantages that

make men formidable-wealth, physical strength, strong bodies of supporters,

extensive  territory,  and  the  possession  of  all,  or  the  most  important,

appliances of war. Also if we have wronged no one, or not many, or not those

of  whom  we  are  afraid;  and  generally,  if  our  relations  with  the  gods  are

satisfactory, as will be shown especially by signs and oracles. The fact is that

anger makes us confident-that anger is excited by our knowledge that we are

not  the  wrongers  but  the  wronged,  and  that  the  divine  power  is  always

supposed to be on the side of the wronged. Also when, at the outset of an

enterprise,  we  believe  that  we  cannot  and  shall  not  fail,  or  that  we  shall

succeed completely.-So much for the causes of fear and confidence.


6


We now turn to Shame and Shamelessness; what follows will explain the

things that cause these feelings, and the persons before whom, and the states

of  mind  under  which,  they  are  felt.  Shame  may  be  defined  as  pain  or

disturbance in regard to bad things, whether present, past, or future, which

seem  likely  to  involve  us  in  discredit;  and  shamelessness  as  contempt  or

indifference in regard to these same bad things. If this definition be granted, it

follows that we feel shame at such bad things as we think are disgraceful to

ourselves or to those we care for. These evils are, in the first place, those due

to moral badness. Such are throwing away one’s shield or taking to flight; forthese  bad  things  are  due  to  cowardice.  Also,  withholding  a  deposit  or

otherwise wronging people about money; for these acts are due to injustice.

Also, having carnal intercourse with forbidden persons, at wrong times, or in

wrong places; for these things are due to licentiousness. Also, making profit

in petty or disgraceful ways, or out of helpless persons, e.g. the poor, or the

dead-whence the proverb ‘He would pick a corpse’s pocket’; for all this is

due to low greed and meanness. Also, in money matters, giving less help than

you  might,  or  none  at  all,  or  accepting  help  from  those  worse  off  than

yourself; so also borrowing when it will seem like begging; begging when it

will seem like asking the return of a favour; asking such a return when it will

seem like begging; praising a man in order that it may seem like begging; and

going on begging in spite of failure: all such actions are tokens of meanness.

Also, praising people to their face, and praising extravagantly a man’s good

points and glozing over his weaknesses, and showing extravagant sympathy

with his grief when you are in his presence, and all that sort of thing; all this

shows the disposition of a flatterer. Also, refusing to endure hardships that

are endured by people who are older, more delicately brought up, of higher

rank, or generally less capable of endurance than ourselves: for all this shows

effeminacy. Also, accepting benefits, especially accepting them often, from

another man, and then abusing him for conferring them: all this shows a

mean, ignoble disposition. Also, talking incessantly about yourself, making

loud professions, and appropriating the merits of others; for this is due to

boastfulness. The same is true of the actions due to any of the other forms of

badness of moral character, of the tokens of such badness, &c.: they are all

disgraceful and shameless. Another sort of bad thing at which we feel shame

is, lacking a share in the honourable things shared by every one else, or by all

or nearly all who are like ourselves. By ‘those like ourselves’ I mean those of

our own race or country or age or family, and generally those who are on our

own level. Once we are on a level with others, it is a disgrace to be, say, less

well educated than they are; and so with other advantages: all the more so, in

each case, if it is seen to be our own fault: wherever we are ourselves to

blame for our present, past, or future circumstances, it follows at once that

this  is  to  a  greater  extent  due  to  our  moral  badness.  We  are  moreover

ashamed of having done to us, having had done, or being about to have done

to us acts that involve us in dishonour and reproach; as when we surrender

our persons, or lend ourselves to vile deeds, e.g. when we submit to outrage.

And acts of yielding to the lust of others are shameful whether willing orunwilling  (yielding  to  force  being  an  instance  of  unwillingness),  since

unresisting submission to them is due to unmanliness or cowardice.

  These things, and others like them, are what cause the feeling of shame.

Now since shame is a mental picture of disgrace, in which we shrink from the

disgrace itself and not from its consequences, and we only care what opinion

is held of us because of the people who form that opinion, it follows that the

people before whom we feel shame are those whose opinion of us matters to

us. Such persons are: those who admire us, those whom we admire, those by

whom we wish to be admired, those with whom we are competing, and those

whose opinion of us we respect. We admire those, and wish those to admire

us, who possess any good thing that is highly esteemed; or from whom we

are very anxious to get something that they are able to give us-as a lover

feels. We compete with our equals. We respect, as true, the views of sensible

people, such as our elders and those who have been well educated. And we

feel more shame about a thing if it is done openly, before all men’s eyes.

Hence the proverb, ‘shame dwells in the eyes’. For this reason we feel most

shame before those who will always be with us and those who notice what

we do, since in both cases eyes are upon us. We also feel it before those not

open to the same imputation as ourselves: for it is plain that their opinions

about it are the opposite of ours. Also before those who are hard on any one

whose conduct they think wrong; for what a man does himself, he is said not

to resent when his neighbours do it: so that of course he does resent their

doing what he does not do himself. And before those who are likely to tell

everybody about you; not telling others is as good as not be lieving you

wrong. People are likely to tell others about you if you have wronged them,

since they are on the look out to harm you; or if they speak evil of everybody,

for those who attack the innocent will be still more ready to attack the guilty.

And before those whose main occupation is with their neighbours’ failings-

people like satirists and writers of comedy; these are really a kind of evil-

speakers and tell-tales. And before those who have never yet known us come

to grief, since their attitude to us has amounted to admiration so far: that is

why we feel ashamed to refuse those a favour who ask one for the first time-

we  have  not  as  yet  lost  credit  with  them.  Such  are  those  who  are  just

beginning to wish to be our friends; for they have seen our best side only

(hence the appropriateness of Euripides’ reply to the Syracusans): and such

also  are  those  among  our  old  acquaintances  who  know  nothing  to  our

discredit. And we are ashamed not merely of the actual shameful conductmentioned, but also of the evidences of it: not merely, for example, of actual

sexual intercourse, but also of its evidences; and not merely of disgraceful

acts  but  also  of  disgraceful  talk.  Similarly  we  feel  shame  not  merely  in

presence of the persons mentioned but also of those who will tell them what

we have done, such as their servants or friends. And, generally, we feel no

shame  before  those  upon  whose  opinions  we  quite  look  down  as

untrustworthy (no one feels shame before small children or animals); nor are

we  ashamed  of  the  same  things  before  intimates  as  before  strangers,  but

before the former of what seem genuine faults, before the latter of what seem

conventional ones.

The conditions under which we shall feel shame are these: first, having

people related to us like those before whom, as has been said, we feel shame.

These are, as was stated, persons whom we admire, or who admire us, or by

whom we wish to be admired, or from whom we desire some service that we

shall  not  obtain  if  we  forfeit  their  good  opinion.  These  persons  may  be

actually  looking  on  (as  Cydias  represented  them  in  his  speech  on  land

assignments in Samos, when he told the Athenians to imagine the Greeks to

be  standing  all  around  them,  actually  seeing  the  way  they  voted  and  not

merely going to hear about it afterwards): or again they may be near at hand,

or may be likely to find out about what we do. This is why in misfortune we

do not wish to be seen by those who once wished themselves like us; for such

a feeling implies admiration. And men feel shame when they have acts or

exploits to their credit on which they are bringing dishonour, whether these

are  their  own,  or  those  of  their  ancestors,  or  those  of  other  persons  with

whom  they  have  some  close  connexion.  Generally,  we  feel  shame  before

those  for  whose  own  misconduct  we  should  also  feel  it-those  already

mentioned;  those  who  take  us  as  their  models;  those  whose  teachers  or

advisers we have been; or other people, it may be, like ourselves, whose

rivals we are. For there are many things that shame before such people makes

us do or leave undone. And we feel more shame when we are likely to be

continually seen by, and go about under the eyes of, those who know of our

disgrace. Hence, when Antiphon the poet was to be cudgelled to death by

order of Dionysius, and saw those who were to perish with him covering their

faces as they went through the gates, he said, ‘Why do you cover your faces?

Is it lest some of these spectators should see you to-morrow?’

So much for Shame; to understand Shamelessness, we need only consider

the converse cases, and plainly we shall have all we need.7


To take Kindness next: the definition of it will show us towards whom it is

felt, why, and in what frames of mind. Kindness-under the influence of which

a man is said to ‘be kind’ may be defined as helpfulness towards some one in

need, not in return for anything, nor for the advantage of the helper himself,

but for that of the person helped. Kindness is great if shown to one who is in

great need, or who needs what is important and hard to get, or who needs it at

an important and difficult crisis; or if the helper is the only, the first, or the

chief person to give the help. Natural cravings constitute such needs; and in

particular cravings, accompanied by pain, for what is not being attained. The

appetites are cravings for this kind: sexual desire, for instance, and those

which arise during bodily injuries and in dangers; for appetite is active both

in  danger  and  in  pain.  Hence  those  who  stand  by  us  in  poverty  or  in

banishment,  even  if  they  do  not  help  us  much,  are  yet  really  kind  to  us,

because our need is great and the occasion pressing; for instance, the man

who  gave  the  mat  in  the  Lyceum.  The  helpfulness  must  therefore  meet,

preferably, just this kind of need; and failing just this kind, some other kind

as great or greater. We now see to whom, why, and under what conditions

kindness is shown; and these facts must form the basis of our arguments. We

must show that the persons helped are, or have been, in such pain and need as

has been described, and that their helpers gave, or are giving, the kind of help

described, in the kind of need described. We can also see how to eliminate

the  idea  of  kindness  and  make  our  opponents  appear  unkind:  we  may

maintain that they are being or have been helpful simply to promote their

own interest-this, as has been stated, is not kindness; or that their action was

accidental, or was forced upon them; or that they were not doing a favour, but

merely returning one, whether they know this or not-in either case the action

is a mere return, and is therefore not a kindness even if the doer does not

know how the case stands. In considering this subject we must look at all the

categories: an act may be an act of kindness because (1) it is a particular

thing, (2) it has a particular magnitude or (3) quality, or (4) is done at a

particular time or (5) place. As evidence of the want of kindness, we may

point out that a smaller service had been refused to the man in need; or that

the same service, or an equal or greater one, has been given to his enemies;

these facts show that the service in question was not done for the sake of the

person helped. Or we may point out that the thing desired was worthless andthat  the  helper  knew  it:  no  one  will  admit  that  he  is  in  need  of  what  is

worthless.


8


So much for Kindness and Unkindness. Let us now consider Pity, asking

ourselves what things excite pity, and for what persons, and in what states of

our mind pity is felt. Pity may be defined as a feeling of pain caused by the

sight of some evil, destructive or painful, which befalls one who does not

deserve it, and which we might expect to befall ourselves or some friend of

ours, and moreover to befall us soon. In order to feel pity, we must obviously

be capable of supposing that some evil may happen to us or some friend of

ours, and moreover some such evil as is stated in our definition or is more or

less of that kind. It is therefore not felt by those completely ruined, who

suppose that no further evil can befall them, since the worst has befallen them

already;  nor  by  those  who  imagine  themselves  immensely  fortunate-their

feeling is rather presumptuous insolence, for when they think they possess all

the good things of life, it is clear that the impossibility of evil befalling them

will be included, this being one of the good things in question. Those who

think evil may befall them are such as have already had it befall them and

have safely escaped from it; elderly men, owing to their good sense and their

experience;  weak  men,  especially  men  inclined  to  cowardice;  and  also

educated  people,  since  these  can  take  long  views.  Also  those  who  have

parents living, or children, or wives; for these are our own, and the evils

mentioned above may easily befall them. And those who neither moved by

any courageous emotion such as anger or confidence (these emotions take no

account  of  the  future),  nor  by  a  disposition  to  presumptuous  insolence

(insolent men, too, take no account of the possibility that something evil will

happen to them), nor yet by great fear (panic-stricken people do not feel pity,

because they are taken up with what is happening to themselves); only those

feel pity who are between these two extremes. In order to feel pity we must

also believe in the goodness of at least some people; if you think nobody

good, you will believe that everybody deserves evil fortune. And, generally,

we feel pity whenever we are in the condition of remembering that similar

misfortunes have happened to us or ours, or expecting them to happen in the

future.

So much for the mental conditions under which we feel pity. What we pityis stated clearly in the definition. All unpleasant and painful things excite pity

if they tend to destroy pain and annihilate; and all such evils as are due to

chance, if they are serious. The painful and destructive evils are: death in its

various forms, bodily injuries and afflictions, old age, diseases, lack of food.

The evils due to chance are: friendlessness, scarcity of friends (it is a pitiful

thing to be torn away from friends and companions), deformity, weakness,

mutilation; evil coming from a source from which good ought to have come;

and the frequent repetition of such misfortunes. Also the coming of good

when the worst has happened: e.g. the arrival of the Great King’s gifts for

Diopeithes after his death. Also that either no good should have befallen a

man at all, or that he should not be able to enjoy it when it has.

The  grounds,  then,  on  which  we  feel  pity  are  these  or  like  these.  The

people we pity are: those whom we know, if only they are not very closely

related  to  us-in  that  case  we  feel  about  them  as  if  we  were  in  danger

ourselves. For this reason Amasis did not weep, they say, at the sight of his

son being led to death, but did weep when he saw his friend begging: the

latter sight was pitiful, the former terrible, and the terrible is different from

the pitiful; it tends to cast out pity, and often helps to produce the opposite of

pity. Again, we feel pity when the danger is near ourselves. Also we pity

those who are like us in age, character, disposition, social standing, or birth;

for in all these cases it appears more likely that the same misfortune may

befall us also. Here too we have to remember the general principle that what

we fear for ourselves excites our pity when it happens to others. Further,

since it is when the sufferings of others are close to us that they excite our

pity (we cannot remember what disasters happened a hundred centuries ago,

nor  look  forward  to  what  will  happen  a  hundred  centuries  hereafter,  and

therefore feel little pity, if any, for such things): it follows that those who

heighten the effect of their words with suitable gestures, tones, dress, and

dramatic action generally, are especially successful in exciting pity: they thus

put  the  disasters  before  our  eyes,  and  make  them  seem  close  to  us,  just

coming or just past. Anything that has just happened, or is going to happen

soon, is particularly piteous: so too therefore are the tokens and the actions of

sufferers-the garments and the like of those who have already suffered; the

words and the like of those actually suffering-of those, for instance, who are

on the point of death. Most piteous of all is it when, in such times of trial, the

victims  are  persons  of  noble  character:  whenever  they  are  so,  our  pity  is

especially excited, because their innocence, as well as the setting of theirmisfortunes before our eyes, makes their misfortunes seem close to ourselves.


9


  Most  directly  opposed  to  pity  is  the  feeling  called  Indignation.  Pain  at

unmerited good fortune is, in one sense, opposite to pain at unmerited bad

fortune, and is due to the same moral qualities. Both feelings are associated

with good moral character; it is our duty both to feel sympathy and pity for

unmerited  distress,  and  to  feel  indignation  at  unmerited  prosperity;  for

whatever is undeserved is unjust, and that is why we ascribe indignation even

to the gods. It might indeed be thought that envy is similarly opposed to pity,

on the ground that envy it closely akin to indignation, or even the same thing.

But it is not the same. It is true that it also is a disturbing pain excited by the

prosperity of others. But it is excited not by the prosperity of the undeserving

but by that of people who are like us or equal with us. The two feelings have

this in common, that they must be due not to some untoward thing being

likely to befall ourselves, but only to what is happening to our neighbour. The

feeling ceases to be envy in the one case and indignation in the other, and

becomes  fear,  if  the  pain  and  disturbance  are  due  to  the  prospect  of

something bad for ourselves as the result of the other man’s good fortune.

The  feelings  of  pity  and  indignation  will  obviously  be  attended  by  the

converse feelings of satisfaction. If you are pained by the unmerited distress

of others, you will be pleased, or at least not pained, by their merited distress.

Thus  no  good  man  can  be  pained  by  the  punishment  of  parricides  or

murderers. These are things we are bound to rejoice at, as we must at the

prosperity of the deserving; both these things are just, and both give pleasure

to any honest man, since he cannot help expecting that what has happened to

a man like him will happen to him too. All these feelings are associated with

the same type of moral character. And their contraries are associated with the

contrary type; the man who is delighted by others’ misfortunes is identical

with the man who envies others’ prosperity. For any one who is pained by the

occurrence or existence of a given thing must be pleased by that thing’s non-

existence  or  destruction.  We  can  now  see  that  all  these  feelings  tend  to

prevent pity (though they differ among themselves, for the reasons given), so

that all are equally useful for neutralizing an appeal to pity.

We  will  first  consider  Indignation-reserving  the  other  emotions  for

subsequent discussion-and ask with whom, on what grounds, and in whatstates of mind we may be indignant. These questions are really answered by

what  has  been  said  already.  Indignation  is  pain  caused  by  the  sight  of

undeserved good fortune. It is, then, plain to begin with that there are some

forms of good the sight of which cannot cause it. Thus a man may be just or

brave, or acquire moral goodness: but we shall not be indignant with him for

that  reason,  any  more  than  we  shall  pity  him  for  the  contrary  reason.

Indignation is roused by the sight of wealth, power, and the like-by all those

things, roughly speaking, which are deserved by good men and by those who

possess the goods of nature-noble birth, beauty, and so on. Again, what is

long established seems akin to what exists by nature; and therefore we feel

more indignation at those possessing a given good if they have as a matter of

fact only just got it and the prosperity it brings with it. The newly rich give

more offence than those whose wealth is of long standing and inherited. The

same is true of those who have office or power, plenty of friends, a fine

family, &c. We feel the same when these advantages of theirs secure them

others. For here again, the newly rich give us more offence by obtaining

office through their riches than do those whose wealth is of long standing;

and so in all other cases. The reason is that what the latter have is felt to be

really their own, but what the others have is not; what appears to have been

always what it is is regarded as real, and so the possessions of the newly rich

do not seem to be really their own. Further, it is not any and every man that

deserves  any  given  kind  of  good;  there  is  a  certain  correspondence  and

appropriateness in such things; thus it is appropriate for brave men, not for

just men, to have fine weapons, and for men of family, not for parvenus, to

make  distinguished  marriages.  Indignation  may  therefore  properly  be  felt

when any one gets what is not appropriate for him, though he may be a good

man enough. It may also be felt when any one sets himself up against his

superior, especially against his superior in some particular respect-whence the

lines


  Only from battle he shrank with Aias Telamon’s son;

Zeus had been angered with him,

had he fought with a mightier one;


but also, even apart from that, when the inferior in any sense contends with

his superior; a musician, for instance, with a just man, for justice is a finer

thing than music.  Enough has been said to make clear the grounds on which, and the persons

against whom, Indignation is felt-they are those mentioned, and others like

him. As for the people who feel it; we feel it if we do ourselves deserve the

greatest possible goods and moreover have them, for it is an injustice that

those who are not our equals should have been held to deserve as much as we

have. Or, secondly, we feel it if we are really good and honest people; our

judgement is then sound, and we loathe any kind of injustice. Also if we are

ambitious and eager to gain particular ends, especially if we are ambitious for

what others are getting without deserving to get it. And, generally, if we think

that we ourselves deserve a thing and that others do not, we are disposed to

be indignant with those others so far as that thing is concerned. Hence servile,

worthless, unambitious persons are not inclined to Indignation, since there is

nothing they can believe themselves to deserve.

  From all this it is plain what sort of men those are at whose misfortunes,

distresses, or failures we ought to feel pleased, or at least not pained: by

considering the facts described we see at once what their contraries are. If

therefore our speech puts the judges in such a frame of mind as that indicated

and  shows  that  those  who  claim  pity  on  certain  definite  grounds  do  not

deserve to secure pity but do deserve not to secure it, it will be impossible for

the judges to feel pity.


10


To take Envy next: we can see on what grounds, against what persons, and

in what states of mind we feel it. Envy is pain at the sight of such good

fortune as consists of the good things already mentioned; we feel it towards

our equals; not with the idea of getting something for ourselves, but because

the other people have it. We shall feel it if we have, or think we have, equals;

and  by  ‘equals’  I  mean  equals  in  birth,  relationship,  age,  disposition,

distinction, or wealth. We feel envy also if we fall but a little short of having

everything; which is why people in high place and prosperity feel it-they

think every one else is taking what belongs to themselves. Also if we are

exceptionally distinguished for some particular thing, and especially if that

thing is wisdom or good fortune. Ambitious men are more envious than those

who are not. So also those who profess wisdom; they are ambitious to be

thought wise. Indeed, generally, those who aim at a reputation for anything

are envious on this particular point. And small-minded men are envious, foreverything seems great to them. The good things which excite envy have

already been mentioned. The deeds or possessions which arouse the love of

reputation  and  honour  and  the  desire  for  fame,  and  the  various  gifts  of

fortune, are almost all subject to envy; and particularly if we desire the thing

ourselves, or think we are entitled to it, or if having it puts us a little above

others, or not having it a little below them. It is clear also what kind of people

we envy; that was included in what has been said already: we envy those who

are near us in time, place, age, or reputation. Hence the line:


Ay, kin can even be jealous of their kin.


  Also our fellow-competitors, who are indeed the people just mentioned-we

do not compete with men who lived a hundred centuries ago, or those not yet

born, or the dead, or those who dwell near the Pillars of Hercules, or those

whom, in our opinion or that of others, we take to be far below us or far

above  us.  So  too  we  compete  with  those  who  follow  the  same  ends  as

ourselves: we compete with our rivals in sport or in love, and generally with

those who are after the same things; and it is therefore these whom we are

bound to envy beyond all others. Hence the saying:


  Potter against potter.


We also envy those whose possession of or success in a thing is a reproach

to us: these are our neighbours and equals; for it is clear that it is our own

fault we have missed the good thing in question; this annoys us, and excites

envy in us. We also envy those who have what we ought to have, or have got

what we did have once. Hence old men envy younger men, and those who

have spent much envy those who have spent little on the same thing. And

men who have not got a thing, or not got it yet, envy those who have got it

quickly.  We  can  also  see  what  things  and  what  persons  give  pleasure  to

envious people, and in what states of mind they feel it: the states of mind in

which they feel pain are those under which they will feel pleasure in the

contrary things. If therefore we ourselves with whom the decision rests are

put into an envious state of mind, and those for whom our pity, or the award

of  something  desirable,  is  claimed  are  such  as  have  been  described,  it  is

obvious that they will win no pity from us.11


We will next consider Emulation, showing in what follows its causes and

objects, and the state of mind in which it is felt. Emulation is pain caused by

seeing the presence, in persons whose nature is like our own, of good things

that are highly valued and are possible for ourselves to acquire; but it is felt

not  because  others  have  these  goods,  but  because  we  have  not  got  them

ourselves. It is therefore a good feeling felt by good persons, whereas envy is

a bad feeling felt by bad persons. Emulation makes us take steps to secure the

good  things  in  question,  envy  makes  us  take  steps  to  stop  our  neighbour

having them. Emulation must therefore tend to be felt by persons who believe

themselves to deserve certain good things that they have not got, it being

understood  that  no  one  aspires  to  things  which  appear  impossible.  It  is

accordingly felt by the young and by persons of lofty disposition. Also by

those who possess such good things as are deserved by men held in honour-

these are wealth, abundance of friends, public office, and the like; on the

assumption that they ought to be good men, they are emulous to gain such

goods because they ought, in their belief, to belong to men whose state of

mind is good. Also by those whom all others think deserving. We also feel it

about anything for which our ancestors, relatives, personal friends, race, or

country are specially honoured, looking upon that thing as really our own,

and therefore feeling that we deserve to have it. Further, since all good things

that  are  highly  honoured  are  objects  of  emulation,  moral  goodness  in  its

various forms must be such an object, and also all those good things that are

useful and serviceable to others: for men honour those who are morally good,

and  also  those  who  do  them  service.  So  with  those  good  things  our

possession of which can give enjoyment to our neighbours-wealth and beauty

rather  than  health.  We  can  see,  too,  what  persons  are  the  objects  of  the

feeling.  They  are  those  who  have  these  and  similar  things-those  already

mentioned,  as  courage,  wisdom,  public  office.  Holders  of  public  office-

generals, orators, and all who possess such powers-can do many people a

good turn. Also those whom many people wish to be like; those who have

many acquaintances or friends; those whom admire, or whom we ourselves

admire; and those who have been praised and eulogized by poets or prose-

writers. Persons of the contrary sort are objects of contempt: for the feeling

and notion of contempt are opposite to those of emulation. Those who are

such as to emulate or be emulated by others are inevitably disposed to becontemptuous of all such persons as are subject to those bad things which are

contrary to the good things that are the objects of emulation: despising them

for just that reason. Hence we often despise the fortunate, when luck comes

to them without their having those good things which are held in honour.

This completes our discussion of the means by which the several emotions

may  be  produced  or  dissipated,  and  upon  which  depend  the  persuasive

arguments connected with the emotions.


12


Let us now consider the various types of human character, in relation to the

emotions and moral qualities, showing how they correspond to our various

ages and fortunes. By emotions I mean anger, desire, and the like; these we

have discussed already. By moral qualities I mean virtues and vices; these

also have been discussed already, as well as the various things that various

types of men tend to will and to do. By ages I mean youth, the prime of life,

and old age. By fortune I mean birth, wealth, power, and their opposites-in

fact, good fortune and ill fortune.

To begin with the Youthful type of character. Young men have strong

passions, and tend to gratify them indiscriminately. Of the bodily desires, it is

the sexual by which they are most swayed and in which they show absence of

self-control. They are changeable and fickle in their desires, which are violent

while they last, but quickly over: their impulses are keen but not deep-rooted,

and are like sick people’s attacks of hunger and thirst. They are hot-tempered,

and quick-tempered, and apt to give way to their anger; bad temper often gets

the better of them, for owing to their love of honour they cannot bear being

slighted, and are indignant if they imagine themselves unfairly treated. While

they  love  honour,  they  love  victory  still  more;  for  youth  is  eager  for

superiority over others, and victory is one form of this. They love both more

than they love money, which indeed they love very little, not having yet

learnt what it means to be without it-this is the point of Pittacus’ remark

about Amphiaraus. They look at the good side rather than the bad, not having

yet  witnessed  many  instances  of  wickedness.  They  trust  others  readily,

because  they  have  not  yet  often  been  cheated.  They  are  sanguine;  nature

warms their blood as though with excess of wine; and besides that, they have

as yet met with few disappointments. Their lives are mainly spent not in

memory but in expectation; for expectation refers to the future, memory tothe past, and youth has a long future before it and a short past behind it: on

the first day of one’s life one has nothing at all to remember, and can only

look forward. They are easily cheated, owing to the sanguine disposition just

mentioned.  Their  hot  tempers  and  hopeful  dispositions  make  them  more

courageous than older men are; the hot temper prevents fear, and the hopeful

disposition creates confidence; we cannot feel fear so long as we are feeling

angry,  and  any  expectation  of  good  makes  us  confident.  They  are  shy,

accepting the rules of society in which they have been trained, and not yet

believing  in  any  other  standard  of  honour.  They  have  exalted  notions,

because  they  have  not  yet  been  humbled  by  life  or  learnt  its  necessary

limitations; moreover, their hopeful disposition makes them think themselves

equal  to  great  things-and  that  means  having  exalted  notions.  They  would

always rather do noble deeds than useful ones: their lives are regulated more

by moral feeling than by reasoning; and whereas reasoning leads us to choose

what is useful, moral goodness leads us to choose what is noble. They are

fonder  of  their  friends,  intimates,  and  companions  than  older  men  are,

because they like spending their days in the company of others, and have not

yet come to value either their friends or anything else by their usefulness to

themselves. All their mistakes are in the direction of doing things excessively

and  vehemently.  They  disobey  Chilon’s  precept  by  overdoing  everything,

they love too much and hate too much, and the same thing with everything

else. They think they know everything, and are always quite sure about it;

this, in fact, is why they overdo everything. If they do wrong to others, it is

because they mean to insult them, not to do them actual harm. They are ready

to pity others, because they think every one an honest man, or anyhow better

than he is: they judge their neighbour by their own harmless natures, and so

cannot think he deserves to be treated in that way. They are fond of fun and

therefore witty, wit being well-bred insolence.


13


  Such, then is the character of the Young. The character of Elderly Men-

men who are past their prime-may be said to be formed for the most part of

elements that are the contrary of all these. They have lived many years; they

have often been taken in, and often made mistakes; and life on the whole is a

bad business. The result is that they are sure about nothing and under-do

everything.  They  ‘think’,  but  they  never  ‘know’;  and  because  of  theirhesitation they always add a ‘possibly’or a ‘perhaps’, putting everything this

way and nothing positively. They are cynical; that is, they tend to put the

worse  construction  on  everything.  Further,  their  experience  makes  them

distrustful and therefore suspicious of evil. Consequently they neither love

warmly nor hate bitterly, but following the hint of Bias they love as though

they will some day hate and hate as though they will some day love. They are

small-minded, because they have been humbled by life: their desires are set

upon nothing more exalted or unusual than what will help them to keep alive.

They are not generous, because money is one of the things they must have,

and at the same time their experience has taught them how hard it is to get

and how easy to lose. They are cowardly, and are always anticipating danger;

unlike that of the young, who are warm-blooded, their temperament is chilly;

old age has paved the way for cowardice; fear is, in fact, a form of chill. They

love life; and all the more when their last day has come, because the object of

all desire is something we have not got, and also because we desire most

strongly that which we need most urgently. They are too fond of themselves;

this is one form that small-mindedness takes. Because of this, they guide their

lives too much by considerations of what is useful and too little by what is

noble-for the useful is what is good for oneself, and the noble what is good

absolutely. They are not shy, but shameless rather; caring less for what is

noble than for what is useful, they feel contempt for what people may think

of them. They lack confidence in the future; partly through experience-for

most things go wrong, or anyhow turn out worse than one expects; and partly

because of their cowardice. They live by memory rather than by hope; for

what is left to them of life is but little as compared with the long past; and

hope is of the future, memory of the past. This, again, is the cause of their

loquacity;  they  are  continually  talking  of  the  past,  because  they  enjoy

remembering  it.  Their  fits  of  anger  are  sudden  but  feeble.  Their  sensual

passions have either altogether gone or have lost their vigour: consequently

they do not feel their passions much, and their actions are inspired less by

what they do feel than by the love of gain. Hence men at this time of life are

often  supposed  to  have  a  self-controlled  character;  the  fact  is  that  their

passions have slackened, and they are slaves to the love of gain. They guide

their lives by reasoning more than by moral feeling; reasoning being directed

to utility and moral feeling to moral goodness. If they wrong others, they

mean to injure them, not to insult them. Old men may feel pity, as well as

young men, but not for the same reason. Young men feel it out of kindness;old men out of weakness, imagining that anything that befalls any one else

might easily happen to them, which, as we saw, is a thought that excites pity.

Hence they are querulous, and not disposed to jesting or laughter-the love of

laughter being the very opposite of querulousness.

  Such are the characters of Young Men and Elderly Men. People always

think well of speeches adapted to, and reflecting, their own character: and we

can now see how to compose our speeches so as to adapt both them and

ourselves to our audiences.


14


As for Men in their Prime, clearly we shall find that they have a character

between that of the young and that of the old, free from the extremes of

either.  They  have  neither  that  excess  of  confidence  which  amounts  to

rashness, nor too much timidity, but the right amount of each. They neither

trust  everybody  nor  distrust  everybody,  but  judge  people  correctly.  Their

lives will be guided not by the sole consideration either of what is noble or of

what is useful, but by both; neither by parsimony nor by prodigality, but by

what is fit and proper. So, too, in regard to anger and desire; they will be

brave as well as temperate, and temperate as well as brave; these virtues are

divided between the young and the old; the young are brave but intemperate,

the old temperate but cowardly. To put it generally, all the valuable qualities

that youth and age divide between them are united in the prime of life, while

all their excesses or defects are replaced by moderation and fitness. The body

is in its prime from thirty to five-and-thirty; the mind about forty-nine.


15


So much for the types of character that distinguish youth, old age, and the

prime of life. We will now turn to those Gifts of Fortune by which human

character is affected. First let us consider Good Birth. Its effect on character

is to make those who have it more ambitious; it is the way of all men who

have  something  to  start  with  to  add  to  the  pile,  and  good  birth  implies

ancestral distinction. The well-born man will look down even on those who

are as good as his own ancestors, because any far-off distinction is greater

than the same thing close to us, and better to boast about. Being well-born,which means coming of a fine stock, must be distinguished from nobility,

which means being true to the family nature-a quality not usually found in the

well-born, most of whom are poor creatures. In the generations of men as in

the fruits of the earth, there is a varying yield; now and then, where the stock

is good, exceptional men are produced for a while, and then decadence sets

in. A clever stock will degenerate towards the insane type of character, like

the  descendants  of  Alcibiades  or  of  the  elder  Dionysius;  a  steady  stock

towards the fatuous and torpid type, like the descendants of Cimon, Pericles,

and Socrates.


16


The type of character produced by Wealth lies on the surface for all to see.

Wealthy men are insolent and arrogant; their possession of wealth affects

their understanding; they feel as if they had every good thing that exists;

wealth becomes a sort of standard of value for everything else, and therefore

they  imagine  there  is  nothing  it  cannot  buy.  They  are  luxurious  and

ostentatious;  luxurious,  because  of  the  luxury  in  which  they  live  and  the

prosperity which they display; ostentatious and vulgar, because, like other

people’s, their minds are regularly occupied with the object of their love and

admiration, and also because they think that other people’s idea of happiness

is the same as their own. It is indeed quite natural that they should be affected

thus; for if you have money, there are always plenty of people who come

begging from you. Hence the saying of Simonides about wise men and rich

men, in answer to Hiero’s wife, who asked him whether it was better to grow

rich or wise. ‘Why, rich,’ he said; ‘for I see the wise men spending their days

at the rich men’s doors.’ Rich men also consider themselves worthy to hold

public office; for they consider they already have the things that give a claim

to office. In a word, the type of character produced by wealth is that of a

prosperous  fool.  There  is  indeed  one  difference  between  the  type  of  the

newly-enriched and those who have long been rich: the newly-enriched have

all the bad qualities mentioned in an exaggerated and worse form—to be

newly-enriched means, so to speak, no education in riches. The wrongs they

do others are not meant to injure their victims, but spring from insolence or

self-indulgence, e.g. those that end in assault or in adultery.


17As to Power: here too it may fairly be said that the type of character it

produces is mostly obvious enough. Some elements in this type it shares with

the wealthy type, others are better. Those in power are more ambitious and

more manly in character than the wealthy, because they aspire to do the great

deeds that their power permits them to do. Responsibility makes them more

serious:  they  have  to  keep  paying  attention  to  the  duties  their  position

involves. They are dignified rather than arrogant, for the respect in which

they  are  held  inspires  them  with  dignity  and  therefore  with  moderation-

dignity being a mild and becoming form of arrogance. If they wrong others,

they wrong them not on a small but on a great scale.

  Good fortune in certain of its branches produces the types of character

belonging to the conditions just described, since these conditions are in fact

more or less the kinds of good fortune that are regarded as most important. It

may be added that good fortune leads us to gain all we can in the way of

family  happiness  and  bodily  advantages.  It  does  indeed  make  men  more

supercilious and more reckless; but there is one excellent quality that goes

with it-piety, and respect for the divine power, in which they believe because

of events which are really the result of chance.

This account of the types of character that correspond to differences of age

or fortune may end here; for to arrive at the opposite types to those described,

namely, those of the poor, the unfortunate, and the powerless, we have only

to ask what the opposite qualities are.


18


The use of persuasive speech is to lead to decisions. (When we know a

thing, and have decided about it, there is no further use in speaking about it.)

This is so even if one is addressing a single person and urging him to do or

not to do something, as when we scold a man for his conduct or try to change

his views: the single person is as much your ‘judge’ as if he were one of

many; we may say, without qualification, that any one is your judge whom

you have to persuade. Nor does it matter whether we are arguing against an

actual opponent or against a mere proposition; in the latter case we still have

to use speech and overthrow the opposing arguments, and we attack these as

we should attack an actual opponent. Our principle holds good of ceremonial

speeches also; the ‘onlookers’ for whom such a speech is put together are

treated as the judges of it. Broadly speaking, however, the only sort of personwho can strictly be called a judge is the man who decides the issue in some

matter of public controversy; that is, in law suits and in political debates, in

both  of  which  there  are  issues  to  be  decided.  In  the  section  on  political

oratory an account has already been given of the types of character that mark

the different constitutions.

The manner and means of investing speeches with moral character may

now be regarded as fully set forth.

Each of the main divisions of oratory has, we have seen, its own distinct

purpose. With regard to each division, we have noted the accepted views and

propositions  upon  which  we  may  base  our  arguments-for  political,  for

ceremonial,  and  for  forensic  speaking.  We  have  further  determined

completely by what means speeches may be invested with the required moral

character. We are now to proceed to discuss the arguments common to all

oratory. All orators, besides their special lines of argument, are bound to use,

for instance, the topic of the Possible and Impossible; and to try to show that

a thing has happened, or will happen in future. Again, the topic of Size is

common  to  all  oratory;  all  of  us  have  to  argue  that  things  are  bigger  or

smaller than they seem, whether we are making political speeches, speeches

of eulogy or attack, or prosecuting or defending in the law-courts. Having

analysed these subjects, we will try to say what we can about the general

principles  of  arguing  by  ‘enthymeme’  and  ‘example’,  by  the  addition  of

which we may hope to complete the project with which we set out. Of the

above-mentioned  general  lines  of  argument,  that  concerned  with

Amplification  is-as  has  been  already  said-most  appropriate  to  ceremonial

speeches;  that  concerned  with  the  Past,  to  forensic  speeches,  where  the

required decision is always about the past; that concerned with Possibility

and the Future, to political speeches.


19


Let  us  first  speak  of  the  Possible  and  Impossible.  It  may  plausibly  be

argued: That if it is possible for one of a pair of contraries to be or happen,

then it is possible for the other: e.g. if a man can be cured, he can also fall ill;

for any two contraries are equally possible, in so far as they are contraries.

That if of two similar things one is possible, so is the other. That if the harder

of  two  things  is  possible,  so  is  the  easier.  That  if  a  thing  can  come  into

existence  in  a  good  and  beautiful  form,  then  it  can  come  into  existencegenerally; thus a house can exist more easily than a beautiful house. That if

the beginning of a thing can occur, so can the end; for nothing impossible

occurs or begins to occur; thus the commensurability of the diagonal of a

square with its side neither occurs nor can begin to occur. That if the end is

possible, so is the beginning; for all things that occur have a beginning. That

if that which is posterior in essence or in order of generation can come into

being, so can that which is prior: thus if a man can come into being, so can a

boy, since the boy comes first in order of generation; and if a boy can, so can

a man, for the man also is first. That those things are possible of which the

love or desire is natural; for no one, as a rule, loves or desires impossibilities.

That things which are the object of any kind of science or art are possible and

exist or come into existence. That anything is possible the first step in whose

production depends on men or things which we can compel or persuade to

produce it, by our greater strength, our control of them, or our friendship with

them. That where the parts are possible, the whole is possible; and where the

whole is possible, the parts are usually possible. For if the slit in front, the

toe-piece, and the upper leather can be made, then shoes can be made; and if

shoes, then also the front slit and toe-piece. That if a whole genus is a thing

that can occur, so can the species; and if the species can occur, so can the

genus: thus, if a sailing vessel can be made, so also can a trireme; and if a

trireme, then a sailing vessel also. That if one of two things whose existence

depends on each other is possible, so is the other; for instance, if ‘double’,

then  ‘half’,  and  if  ‘half’,  then  ‘double’.  That  if  a  thing  can  be  produced

without  art  or  preparation,  it  can  be  produced  still  more  certainly  by  the

careful application of art to it. Hence Agathon has said:


To some things we by art must needs attain,

  Others by destiny or luck we gain.


That if anything is possible to inferior, weaker, and stupider people, it is

more so for their opposites; thus Isocrates said that it would be a strange

thing if he could not discover a thing that Euthynus had found out. As for

Impossibility, we can clearly get what we want by taking the contraries of the

arguments stated above.

  Questions of Past Fact may be looked at in the following ways: First, that

if  the  less  likely  of  two  things  has  occurred,  the  more  likely  must  have

occurred also. That if one thing that usually follows another has happened,then that other thing has happened; that, for instance, if a man has forgotten a

thing, he has also once learnt it. That if a man had the power and the wish to

do a thing, he has done it; for every one does do whatever he intends to do

whenever he can do it, there being nothing to stop him. That, further, he has

done  the  thing  in  question  either  if  he  intended  it  and  nothing  external

prevented him; or if he had the power to do it and was angry at the time; or if

he had the power to do it and his heart was set upon it-for people as a rule do

what they long to do, if they can; bad people through lack of self-control;

good people, because their hearts are set upon good things. Again, that if a

thing was ‘going to happen’, it has happened; if a man was ‘going to do

something’, he has done it, for it is likely that the intention was carried out.

That if one thing has happened which naturally happens before another or

with a view to it, the other has happened; for instance, if it has lightened, it

has also thundered; and if an action has been attempted, it has been done.

That if one thing has happened which naturally happens after another, or with

a view to which that other happens, then that other (that which happens first,

or  happens  with  a  view  to  this  thing)  has  also  happened;  thus,  if  it  has

thundered  it  has  lightened,  and  if  an  action  has  been  done  it  has  been

attempted. Of all these sequences some are inevitable and some merely usual.

The arguments for the non-occurrence of anything can obviously be found by

considering the opposites of those that have been mentioned.

How questions of Future Fact should be argued is clear from the same

considerations: That a thing will be done if there is both the power and the

wish to do it; or if along with the power to do it there is a craving for the

result, or anger, or calculation, prompting it. That the thing will be done, in

these cases, if the man is actually setting about it, or even if he means to do it

later-for usually what we mean to do happens rather than what we do not

mean to do. That a thing will happen if another thing which naturally happens

before it has already happened; thus, if it is clouding over, it is likely to rain.

That if the means to an end have occurred, then the end is likely to occur;

thus, if there is a foundation, there will be a house.

For arguments about the Greatness and Smallness of things, the greater and

the lesser, and generally great things and small, what we have already said

will show the line to take. In discussing deliberative oratory we have spoken

about the relative greatness of various goods, and about the greater and lesser

in general. Since therefore in each type oratory the object under discussion is

some kind of good-whether it is utility, nobleness, or justice-it is clear thatevery  orator  must  obtain  the  materials  of  amplification  through  these

channels.  To  go  further  than  this,  and  try  to  establish  abstract  laws  of

greatness  and  superiority,  is  to  argue  without  an  object;  in  practical  life,

particular facts count more than generalizations.

  Enough has now been said about these questions of possibility and the

reverse, of past or future fact, and of the relative greatness or smallness of

things.


20


The special forms of oratorical argument having now been discussed, we

have next to treat of those which are common to all kinds of oratory. These

are of two main kinds, ‘Example’ and ‘Enthymeme’; for the ‘Maxim’ is part

of an enthymeme.

We  will  first  treat  of  argument  by  Example,  for  it  has  the  nature  of

induction, which is the foundation of reasoning. This form of argument has

two varieties; one consisting in the mention of actual past facts, the other in

the  invention  of  facts  by  the  speaker.  Of  the  latter,  again,  there  are  two

varieties, the illustrative parallel and the fable (e.g. the fables of Aesop, those

from Libya). As an instance of the mention of actual facts, take the following.

The speaker may argue thus: ‘We must prepare for war against the king of

Persia and not let him subdue Egypt. For Darius of old did not cross the

Aegean until he had seized Egypt; but once he had seized it, he did cross.

And Xerxes, again, did not attack us until he had seized Egypt; but once he

had seized it, he did cross. If therefore the present king seizes Egypt, he also

will cross, and therefore we must not let him.’

The illustrative parallel is the sort of argument Socrates used: e.g. ‘Public

officials ought not to be selected by lot. That is like using the lot to select

athletes, instead of choosing those who are fit for the contest; or using the lot

to select a steersman from among a ship’s crew, as if we ought to take the

man on whom the lot falls, and not the man who knows most about it.’

  Instances of the fable are that of Stesichorus about Phalaris, and that of

Aesop in defence of the popular leader. When the people of Himera had

made Phalaris military dictator, and were going to give him a bodyguard,

Stesichorus wound up a long talk by telling them the fable of the horse who

had a field all to himself. Presently there came a stag and began to spoil his

pasturage. The horse, wishing to revenge himself on the stag, asked a man ifhe could help him to do so. The man said, ‘Yes, if you will let me bridle you

and get on to your back with javelins in my hand’. The horse agreed, and the

man mounted; but instead of getting his revenge on the stag, the horse found

himself the slave of the man. ‘You too’, said Stesichorus, ‘take care lest your

desire for revenge on your enemies, you meet the same fate as the horse. By

making Phalaris military dictator, you have already let yourselves be bridled.

If you let him get on to your backs by giving him a bodyguard, from that

moment you will be his slaves.’

  Aesop, defending before the assembly at Samos a poular leader who was

being tried for his life, told this story: A fox, in crossing a river, was swept

into a hole in the rocks; and, not being able to get out, suffered miseries for a

long time through the swarms of fleas that fastened on her. A hedgehog,

while roaming around, noticed the fox; and feeling sorry for her asked if he

might  remove  the  fleas.  But  the  fox  declined  the  offer;  and  when  the

hedgehog asked why, she replied, ‘These fleas are by this time full of me and

not sucking much blood; if you take them away, others will come with fresh

appetites and drink up all the blood I have left.’ ‘So, men of Samos’, said

Aesop, ‘my client will do you no further harm; he is wealthy already. But if

you put him to death, others will come along who are not rich, and their

peculations will empty your treasury completely.’

  Fables are suitable for addresses to popular assemblies; and they have one

advantage-they are comparatively easy to invent, whereas it is hard to find

parallels among actual past events. You will in fact frame them just as you

frame illustrative parallels: all you require is the power of thinking out your

analogy, a power developed by intellectual training. But while it is easier to

supply  parallels  by  inventing  fables,  it  is  more  valuable  for  the  political

speaker to supply them by quoting what has actually happened, since in most

respects the future will be like what the past has been.

  Where we are unable to argue by Enthymeme, we must try to demonstrate

our point by this method of Example, and to convince our hearers thereby. If

we can argue by Enthymeme, we should use our Examples as subsequent

supplementary evidence. They should not precede the Enthymemes: that will

give the argument an inductive air, which only rarely suits the conditions of

speech-making.  If  they  follow  the  enthymemes,  they  have  the  effect  of

witnesses giving evidence, and this alway tells. For the same reason, if you

put your examples first you must give a large number of them; if you put

them last, a single one is sufficient; even a single witness will serve if he is agood  one.  It  has  now  been  stated  how  many  varieties  of  argument  by

Example there are, and how and when they are to be employed.


21


We now turn to the use of Maxims, in order to see upon what subjects and

occasions, and for what kind of speaker, they will appropriately form part of

a speech. This will appear most clearly when we have defined a maxim. It is

a statement; not a particular fact, such as the character of lphicrates, but of a

general  kind;  nor  is  it  about  any  and  every  subject—e.g.  ‘straight  is  the

contrary of curved’ is not a maxim—but only about questions of practical

conduct, courses of conduct to be chosen or avoided. Now an Enthymeme is

a syllogism dealing with such practical subjects. It is therefore roughly true

that the premisses or conclusions of Enthymemes, considered apart from the

rest of the argument, are Maxims: e.g.


  Never should any man whose wits are sound

  Have his sons taught more wisdom than their fellows.


Here we have a Maxim; add the reason or explanation, and the whole thing

is an Enthymeme; thus—


It makes them idle; and therewith they earn

  Ill-will and jealousy throughout the city.


  Again,


  There is no man in all things prosperous,


and


  There is no man among us all is free,


are maxims; but the latter, taken with what follows it, is an Enthymeme—


For all are slaves of money or of chance.


  From this definition of a maxim it follows that there are four kinds ofmaxims. In the first Place, the maxim may or may not have a supplement.

Proof  is  needed  where  the  statement  is  paradoxical  or  disputable;  no

supplement  is  wanted  where  the  statement  contains  nothing  paradoxical,

either because the view expressed is already a known truth, e.g.


  Chiefest of blessings is health for a man, as it seemeth to me,


this being the general opinion: or because, as soon as the view is stated, it

is clear at a glance, e.g.


No love is true save that which loves for ever.


Of the Maxims that do have a supplement attached, some are part of an

Enthymeme, e.g.


  Never should any man whose wits are sound, &c.


  Others have the essential character of Enthymemes, but are not stated as

parts of Enthymemes; these latter are reckoned the best; they are those in

which the reason for the view expressed is simply implied, e.g.


O mortal man, nurse not immortal wrath.


To say ‘it is not right to nurse immortal wrath’ is a maxim; the added

words  ‘mortal  man’  give  the  reason.  Similarly,  with  the  words  Mortal

creatures ought to cherish mortal, not immortal thoughts.

  What has been said has shown us how many kinds of Maxims there are,

and to what subjects the various kinds are appropriate. They must not be

given without supplement if they express disputed or paradoxical views: we

must, in that case, either put the supplement first and make a maxim of the

conclusion, e.g. you might say, ‘For my part, since both unpopularity and

idleness are undesirable, I hold that it is better not to be educated’; or you

may  say  this  first,  and  then  add  the  previous  clause.  Where  a  statement,

without being paradoxical, is not obviously true, the reason should be added

as concisely as possible. In such cases both laconic and enigmatic sayings are

suitable: thus one might say what Stesichorus said to the Locrians, ‘Insolence

is better avoided, lest the cicalas chirp on the ground’.

The use of Maxims is appropriate only to elderly men, and in handlingsubjects in which the speaker is experienced. For a young man to use them is-

like telling stories-unbecoming; to use them in handling things in which one

has  no  experience  is  silly  and  ill-bred:  a  fact  sufficiently  proved  by  the

special  fondness  of  country  fellows  for  striking  out  maxims,  and  their

readiness to air them.

To declare a thing to be universally true when it is not is most appropriate

when working up feelings of horror and indignation in our hearers; especially

by way of preface, or after the facts have been proved. Even hackneyed and

commonplace maxims are to be used, if they suit one’s purpose: just because

they are commonplace, every one seems to agree with them, and therefore

they are taken for truth. Thus, any one who is calling on his men to risk an

engagement without obtaining favourable omens may quote


One omen of all is hest, that we fight for our fatherland.


Or, if he is calling on them to attack a stronger force—


The War-God showeth no favour.


Or, if he is urging people to destroy the innocent children of their enemies

—


Fool, who slayeth the father and leaveth his sons to avenge him.


  Some proverbs are also maxims, e.g. the proverb ‘An Attic neighbour’.

You are not to avoid uttering maxims that contradict such sayings as have

become public property (I mean such sayings as ‘know thyself’ and ‘nothing

in excess’) if doing so will raise your hearers’ opinion of your character, or

convey an effect of strong emotion—e.g. an angry speaker might well say, ‘It

is not true that we ought to know ourselves: anyhow, if this man had known

himself, he would never have thought himself fit for an army command.’ It

will raise people’s opinion of our character to say, for instance, ‘We ought

not to follow the saying that bids us treat our friends as future enemies: much

better to treat our enemies as future friends.’ The moral purpose should be

implied partly by the very wording of our maxim. Failing this, we should add

our reason: e.g. having said ‘We should treat our friends, not as the saying

advises, but as if they were going to be our friends always’, we should add

‘for the other behaviour is that of a traitor’: or we might put it, I disapproveof that saying. A true friend will treat his friend as if he were going to be his

friend  for  ever’;  and  again,  ‘Nor  do  I  approve  of  the  saying  “nothing  in

excess”: we are bound to hate bad men excessively.’ One great advantage of

Maxims to a speaker is due to the want of intelligence in his hearers, who

love to hear him succeed in expressing as a universal truth the opinions which

they hold themselves about particular cases. I will explain what I mean by

this,  indicating  at  the  same  time  how  we  are  to  hunt  down  the  maxims

required.  The  maxim,  as  has  been  already  said,  a  general  statement  and

people love to hear stated in general terms what they already believe in some

particular connexion: e.g. if a man happens to have bad neighbours or bad

children,  he  will  agree  with  any  one  who  tells  him,  ‘Nothing  is  more

annoying than having neighbours’, or, ‘Nothing is more foolish than to be the

parent of children.’ The orator has therefore to guess the subjects on which

his hearers really hold views already, and what those views are, and then

must express, as general truths, these same views on these same subjects.

This  is  one  advantage  of  using  maxims.  There  is  another  which  is  more

important-it invests a speech with moral character. There is moral character

in  every  speech  in  which  the  moral  purpose  is  conspicuous:  and  maxims

always  produce  this  effect,  because  the  utterance  of  them  amounts  to  a

general declaration of moral principles: so that, if the maxims are sound, they

display  the  speaker  as  a  man  of  sound  moral  character.  So  much  for  the

Maxim-its nature, varieties, proper use, and advantages.


22


We now come to the Enthymemes, and will begin the subject with some

general  consideration  of  the  proper  way  of  looking  for  them,  and  then

proceed to what is a distinct question, the lines of argument to be embodied

in them. It has already been pointed out that the Enthymeme is a syllogism,

and in what sense it is so. We have also noted the differences between it and

the syllogism of dialectic. Thus we must not carry its reasoning too far back,

or the length of our argument will cause obscurity: nor must we put in all the

steps that lead to our conclusion, or we shall waste words in saying what is

manifest. It is this simplicity that makes the uneducated more effective than

the educated when addressing popular audiences-makes them, as the poets

tell us, ‘charm the crowd’s ears more finely’. Educated men lay down broad

general principles; uneducated men argue from common knowledge and drawobvious  conclusions.  We  must  not,  therefore,  start  from  any  and  every

accepted opinion, but only from those we have defined-those accepted by our

judges or by those whose authority they recognize: and there must, moreover,

be no doubt in the minds of most, if not all, of our judges that the opinions

put forward really are of this sort. We should also base our arguments upon

probabilities as well as upon certainties.

The  first  thing  we  have  to  remember  is  this.  Whether  our  argument

concerns public affairs or some other subject, we must know some, if not all,

of the facts about the subject on which we are to speak and argue. Otherwise

we can have no materials out of which to construct arguments. I mean, for

instance, how could we advise the Athenians whether they should go to war

or not, if we did not know their strength, whether it was naval or military or

both, and how great it is; what their revenues amount to; who their friends

and enemies are; what wars, too, they have waged, and with what success;

and so on? Or how could we eulogize them if we knew nothing about the sea-

fight  at  Salamis,  or  the  battle  of  Marathon,  or  what  they  did  for  the

Heracleidae, or any other facts like that? All eulogy is based upon the noble

deeds—real or imaginary—that stand to the credit of those eulogized. On the

same principle, invectives are based on facts of the opposite kind: the orator

looks to see what base deeds—real or imaginary—stand to the discredit of

those he is attacking, such as treachery to the cause of Hellenic freedom, or

the  enslavement  of  their  gallant  allies  against  the  barbarians  (Aegina,

Potidaea, &c.), or any other misdeeds of this kind that are recorded against

them. So, too, in a court of law: whether we are prosecuting or defending, we

must pay attention to the existing facts of the case. It makes no difference

whether the subject is the Lacedaemonians or the Athenians, a man or a god;

we must do the same thing. Suppose it to be Achilles whom we are to advise,

to praise or blame, to accuse or defend; here too we must take the facts, real

or imaginary; these must be our material, whether we are to praise or blame

him for the noble or base deeds he has done, to accuse or defend him for his

just or unjust treatment of others, or to advise him about what is or is not to

his  interest.  The  same  thing  applies  to  any  subject  whatever.  Thus,  in

handling the question whether justice is or is not a good, we must start with

the real facts about justice and goodness. We see, then, that this is the only

way  in  which  any  one  ever  proves  anything,  whether  his  arguments  are

strictly cogent or not: not all facts can form his basis, but only those that bear

on the matter in hand: nor, plainly, can proof be effected otherwise by meansof the speech. Consequently, as appears in the Topics, we must first of all

have by us a selection of arguments about questions that may arise and are

suitable for us to handle; and then we must try to think out arguments of the

same type for special needs as they emerge; not vaguely and indefinitely, but

by keeping our eyes on the actual facts of the subject we have to speak on,

and gathering in as many of them as we can that bear closely upon it: for the

more actual facts we have at our command, the more easily we prove our

case; and the more closely they bear on the subject, the more they will seem

to  belong  to  that  speech  only  instead  of  being  commonplaces.  By

‘commonplaces’ I mean, for example, eulogy of Achilles because he is a

human  being  or  a  demi-god,  or  because  he  joined  the  expedition  against

Troy: these things are true of many others, so that this kind of eulogy applies

no better to Achilles than to Diomede. The special facts here needed are those

that are true of Achilles alone; such facts as that he slew Hector, the bravest

of the Trojans, and Cycnus the invulnerable, who prevented all the Greeks

from  landing,  and  again  that  he  was  the  youngest  man  who  joined  the

expedition, and was not bound by oath to join it, and so on.

Here, again, we have our first principle of selection of Enthymemes-that

which refers to the lines of argument selected. We will now consider the

various  elementary  classes  of  enthymemes.  (By  an  ‘elementary  class’  of

enthymeme I mean the same thing as a ‘line of argument’.) We will begin, as

we must begin, by observing that there are two kinds of enthymemes. One

kind  proves  some  affirmative  or  negative  proposition;  the  other  kind

disproves  one.  The  difference  between  the  two  kinds  is  the  same  as  that

between  syllogistic  proof  and  disproof  in  dialectic.  The  demonstrative

enthymeme  is  formed  by  the  conjunction  of  compatible  propositions;  the

refutative, by the conjunction of incompatible propositions.

We may now be said to have in our hands the lines of argument for the

various  special  subjects  that  it  is  useful  or  necessary  to  handle,  having

selected the propositions suitable in various cases. We have, in fact, already

ascertained the lines of argument applicable to enthymemes about good and

evil, the noble and the base, justice and injustice, and also to those about

types of character, emotions, and moral qualities. Let us now lay hold of

certain facts about the whole subject, considered from a different and more

general point of view. In the course of our discussion we will take note of the

distinction between lines of proof and lines of disproof: and also of those

lines of argument used in what seems to be enthymemes, but are not, sincethey do not represent valid syllogisms. Having made all this clear, we will

proceed to classify Objections and Refutations, showing how they can be

brought to bear upon enthymemes.


23


1. One line of positive proof is based upon consideration of the opposite of

the thing in question. Observe whether that opposite has the opposite quality.

If it has not, you refute the original proposition; if it has, you establish it. E.g.

‘Temperance  is  beneficial;  for  licentiousness  is  hurtful’.  Or,  as  in  the

Messenian speech, ‘If war is the cause of our present troubles, peace is what

we need to put things right again’. Or—


For if not even evil-doers should

Anger us if they meant not what they did,

  Then can we owe no gratitude to such

As were constrained to do the good they did us.


  Or—


  Since in this world liars may win belief,

Be sure of the opposite likewise-that this world

  Hears many a true word and believes it not.


2. Another line of proof is got by considering some modification of the

key-word, and arguing that what can or cannot be said of the one, can or

cannot be said of the other: e.g. ‘just’ does not always mean ‘beneficial’, or

‘justly’ would always mean ‘beneficially’, whereas it is not desirable to be

justly put to death.

3. Another line of proof is based upon correlative ideas. If it is true that one

man noble or just treatment to another, you argue that the other must have

received  noble  or  just  treatment;  or  that  where  it  is  right  to  command

obedience, it must have been right to obey the command. Thus Diomedon,

the tax-farmer, said of the taxes: ‘If it is no disgrace for you to sell them, it is

no disgrace for us to buy them’. Further, if ‘well’ or ‘justly’ is true of the

person to whom a thing is done, you argue that it is true of the doer. But it is

possible to draw a false conclusion here. It may be just that A should betreated in a certain way, and yet not just that he should be so treated by B.

Hence you must ask yourself two distinct questions: (1) Is it right that A

should be thus treated? (2) Is it right that B should thus treat him? and apply

your results properly, according as your answers are Yes or No. Sometimes

in such a case the two answers differ: you may quite easily have a position

like that in the Alcmaeon of Theodectes:


And was there none to loathe thy mother’s crime?


to which question Alcmaeon in reply says,


Why, there are two things to examine here.


And when Alphesiboea asks what he means, he rejoins:


  They judged her fit to die, not me to slay her.


  Again there is the lawsuit about Demosthenes and the men who killed

Nicanor; as they were judged to have killed him justly, it was thought that he

was killed justly. And in the case of the man who was killed at Thebes, the

judges  were  requested  to  decide  whether  it  was  unjust  that  he  should  be

killed, since if it was not, it was argued that it could not have been unjust to

kill him.

4. Another line of proof is the ‘a fortiori’. Thus it may be argued that if

even  the  gods  are  not  omniscient,  certainly  human  beings  are  not.  The

principle here is that, if a quality does not in fact exist where it is more likely

to exist, it clearly does not exist where it is less likely. Again, the argument

that a man who strikes his father also strikes his neighbours follows from the

principle that, if the less likely thing is true, the more likely thing is true also;

for a man is less likely to strike his father than to strike his neighbours. The

argument, then, may run thus. Or it may be urged that, if a thing is not true

where it is more likely, it is not true where it is less likely; or that, if it is true

where it is less likely, it is true where it is more likely: according as we have

to show that a thing is or is not true. This argument might also be used in a

case of parity, as in the lines:


  Thou hast pity for thy sire, who has lost his sons:

Hast none for Oeneus, whose brave son is dead?  And, again, ‘if Theseus did no wrong, neither did Paris’; or ‘the sons of

Tyndareus did no wrong, neither did Paris’; or ‘if Hector did well to slay

Patroclus, Paris did well to slay Achilles’. And ‘if other followers of an art

are not bad men, neither are philosophers’. And ‘if generals are not bad men

because  it  often  happens  that  they  are  condemned  to  death,  neither  are

sophists’. And the remark that ‘if each individual among you ought to think

of his own city’s reputation, you ought all to think of the reputation of Greece

as a whole’.

5.  Another  line  of  argument  is  based  on  considerations  of  time.  Thus

Iphicrates, in the case against Harmodius, said, ‘if before doing the deed I

had bargained that, if I did it, I should have a statue, you would have given

me one. Will you not give me one now that I have done the deed? You must

not make promises when you are expecting a thing to be done for you, and

refuse to fulfil them when the thing has been done.’ And, again, to induce the

Thebans to let Philip pass through their territory into Attica, it was argued

that ‘if he had insisted on this before he helped them against the Phocians,

they  would  have  promised  to  do  it.  It  is  monstrous,  therefore,  that  just

because he threw away his advantage then, and trusted their honour, they

should not let him pass through now’.

6. Another line is to apply to the other speaker what he has said against

yourself. It is an excellent turn to give to a debate, as may be seen in the

Teucer. It was employed by Iphicrates in his reply to Aristophon. ‘Would

you’, he asked, ‘take a bribe to betray the fleet?’ ‘No’, said Aristophon; and

Iphicrates replied, ‘Very good: if you, who are Aristophon, would not betray

the  fleet,  would  I,  who  am  Iphicrates?’  Only,  it  must  be  recognized

beforehand that the other man is more likely than you are to commit the

crime  in  question.  Otherwise  you  will  make  yourself  ridiculous;  it  is

Aristeides who is prosecuting, you cannot say that sort of thing to him. The

purpose is to discredit the prosecutor, who as a rule would have it appear that

his character is better than that of the defendant, a pretension which it is

desirable to upset. But the use of such an argument is in all cases ridiculous if

you are attacking others for what you do or would do yourself, or are urging

others to do what you neither do nor would do yourself.

7. Another line of proof is secured by defining your terms. Thus, ‘What is

the supernatural? Surely it is either a god or the work of a god. Well, any one

who believes that the work of a god exists, cannot help also believing that

gods exist.’ Or take the argument of Iphicrates, ‘Goodness is true nobility;neither Harmodius nor Aristogeiton had any nobility before they did a noble

deed’.  He  also  argued  that  he  himself  was  more  akin  to  Harmodius  and

Aristogeiton than his opponent was. ‘At any rate, my deeds are more akin to

those of Harmodius and Aristogeiton than yours are’. Another example may

be found in the Alexander. ‘Every one will agree that by incontinent people

we mean those who are not satisfied with the enjoyment of one love.’ A

further example is to be found in the reason given by Socrates for not going

to the court of Archelaus. He said that ‘one is insulted by being unable to

requite  benefits,  as  well  as  by  being  unable  to  requite  injuries’.  All  the

persons mentioned define their term and get at its essential meaning, and then

use the result when reasoning on the point at issue.

8. Another line of argument is founded upon the various senses of a word.

Such a word is ‘rightly’, as has been explained in the Topics. Another line is

based upon logical division. Thus, ‘All men do wrong from one of three

motives, A, B, or C: in my case A and B are out of the question, and even the

accusers do not allege C’.

10. Another line is based upon induction. Thus from the case of the woman

of Peparethus it might be argued that women everywhere can settle correctly

the facts about their children. Another example of this occurred at Athens in

the case between the orator Mantias and his son, when the boy’s mother

revealed  the  true  facts:  and  yet  another  at  Thebes,  in  the  case  between

Ismenias and Stilbon, when Dodonis proved that it was Ismenias who was the

father of her son Thettaliscus, and he was in consequence always regarded as

being  so.  A  further  instance  of  induction  may  be  taken  from  the  Law  of

Theodectes: ‘If we do not hand over our horses to the care of men who have

mishandled other people’s horses, nor ships to those who have wrecked other

people’s ships, and if this is true of everything else alike, then men who have

failed to secure other people’s safety are not to be employed to secure our

own.’ Another instance is the argument of Alcidamas: ‘Every one honours

the wise’. Thus the Parians have honoured Archilochus, in spite of his bitter

tongue;  the  Chians  Homer,  though  he  was  not  their  countryman;  the

Mytilenaeans  Sappho,  though  she  was  a  woman;  the  Lacedaemonians

actually made Chilon a member of their senate, though they are the least

literary of men; the Italian Greeks honoured Pythagoras; the inhabitants of

Lampsacus gave public burial to Anaxagoras, though he was an alien, and

honour  him  even  to  this  day.  (It  may  be  argued  that  peoples  for  whom

philosophers  legislate  are  always  prosperous)  on  the  ground  that  theAthenians became prosperous under Solon’s laws and the Lacedaemonians

under those of Lycurgus, while at Thebes no sooner did the leading men

become philosophers than the country began to prosper.

11.  Another  line  of  argument  is  founded  upon  some  decision  already

pronounced, whether on the same subject or on one like it or contrary to it.

Such a proof is most effective if every one has always decided thus; but if not

every one, then at any rate most people; or if all, or most, wise or good men

have  thus  decided,  or  the  actual  judges  of  the  present  question,  or  those

whose authority they accept, or any one whose decision they cannot gainsay

because he has complete control over them, or those whom it is not seemly to

gainsay, as the gods, or one’s father, or one’s teachers. Thus Autocles said,

when  attacking  Mixidemides,  that  it  was  a  strange  thing  that  the  Dread

Goddesses  could  without  loss  of  dignity  submit  to  the  judgement  of  the

Areopagus, and yet Mixidemides could not. Or as Sappho said, ‘Death is an

evil  thing;  the  gods  have  so  judged  it,  or  they  would  die’.  Or  again  as

Aristippus said in reply to Plato when he spoke somewhat too dogmatically,

as Aristippus thought: ‘Well, anyhow, our friend’, meaning Socrates, ‘never

spoke  like  that’.  And  Hegesippus,  having  previously  consulted  Zeus  at

Olympia, asked Apollo at Delphi ‘whether his opinion was the same as his

father’s’, implying that it would be shameful for him to contradict his father.

Thus too Isocrates argued that Helen must have been a good woman, because

Theseus decided that she was; and Paris a good man, because the goddesses

chose him before all others; and Evagoras also, says Isocrates, was good,

since when Conon met with his misfortune he betook himself to Evagoras

without trying any one else on the way.

12. Another line of argument consists in taking separately the parts of a

subject. Such is that given in the Topics: ‘What sort of motion is the soul? for

it must be this or that.’ The Socrates of Theodectes provides an example:

‘What temple has he profaned? What gods recognized by the state has he not

honoured?’

13. Since it happens that any given thing usually has both good and bad

consequences, another line of argument consists in using those consequences

as  a  reason  for  urging  that  a  thing  should  or  should  not  be  done,  for

prosecuting or defending any one, for eulogy or censure. E.g. education leads

both to unpopularity, which is bad, and to wisdom, which is good. Hence you

either argue, ‘It is therefore not well to be educated, since it is not well to be

unpopular’: or you answer, ‘No, it is well to be educated, since it is well to bewise’. The Art of Rhetoric of Callippus is made up of this line of argument,

with the addition of those of Possibility and the others of that kind already

described.

14. Another line of argument is used when we have to urge or discourage a

course of action that may be done in either of two opposite ways, and have to

apply the method just mentioned to both. The difference between this one and

the last is that, whereas in the last any two things are contrasted, here the

things contrasted are opposites. For instance, the priestess enjoined upon her

son not to take to public speaking: ‘For’, she said, ‘if you say what is right,

men will hate you; if you say what is wrong, the gods will hate you.’ The

reply might be, ‘On the contrary, you ought to take to public speaking: for if

you say what is right the gods will love you; if you say what is wrong, men

will love you.’ This amounts to the proverbial ‘buying the marsh with the

salt’. It is just this situation, viz. when each of two opposites has both a good

and a bad consequence opposite respectively to each other, that has been

termed divarication.

15. Another line of argument is this: The things people approve of openly

are not those which they approve of secretly: openly, their chief praise is

given  to  justice  and  nobleness;  but  in  their  hearts  they  prefer  their  own

advantage. Try, in face of this, to establish the point of view which your

opponent has not adopted. This is the most effective of the forms of argument

that contradict common opinion.

16. Another line is that of rational correspondence. E.g. Iphicrates, when

they were trying to compel his son, a youth under the prescribed age, to

perform one of the state duties because he was tall, said ‘If you count tall

boys men, you will next be voting short men boys’. And Theodectes in his

Law  said,  ‘You  make  citizens  of  such  mercenaries  as  Strabax  and

Charidemus, as a reward of their merits; will you not make exiles of such

citizens as those who have done irreparable harm among the mercenaries?’

17.  Another  line  is  the  argument  that  if  two  results  are  the  same  their

antecedents are also the same. For instance, it was a saying of Xenophanes

that to assert that the gods had birth is as impious as to say that they die; the

consequence of both statements is that there is a time when the gods do not

exist. This line of proof assumes generally that the result of any given thing is

always the same: e.g. ‘you are going to decide not about Isocrates, but about

the  value  of  the  whole  profession  of  philosophy.’  Or,  ‘to  give  earth  and

water’ means slavery; or, ‘to share in the Common Peace’ means obeyingorders. We are to make either such assumptions or their opposite, as suits us

best.

18. Another line of argument is based on the fact that men do not always

make the same choice on a later as on an earlier occasion, but reverse their

previous choice. E.g. the following enthymeme: ‘When we were exiles, we

fought  in  order  to  return;  now  we  have  returned,  it  would  be  strange  to

choose exile in order not to have to fight.’ one occasion, that is, they chose to

be  true  to  their  homes  at  the  cost  of  fighting,  and  on  the  other  to  avoid

fighting at the cost of deserting their homes.

19. Another line of argument is the assertion that some possible motive for

an event or state of things is the real one: e.g. that a gift was given in order to

cause pain by its withdrawal. This notion underlies the lines:


God gives to many great prosperity,

  Not of good God towards them, but to make

The ruin of them more conspicuous.


Or take the passage from the Meleager of Antiphon:


To slay no boar, but to be witnesses

Of Meleager’s prowess unto Greece.


Or  the  argument  in  the  Ajax  of  Theodectes,  that  Diomede  chose  out

Odysseus not to do him honour, but in order that his companion might be a

lesser man than himself-such a motive for doing so is quite possible.

20.  Another  line  of  argument  is  common  to  forensic  and  deliberative

oratory,  namely,  to  consider  inducements  and  deterrents,  and  the  motives

people  have  for  doing  or  avoiding  the  actions  in  question.  These  are  the

conditions which make us bound to act if they are for us, and to refrain from

action if they are against us: that is, we are bound to act if the action is

possible,  easy,  and  useful  to  ourselves  or  our  friends  or  hurtful  to  our

enemies;  this  is  true  even  if  the  action  entails  loss,  provided  the  loss  is

outweighed by the solid advantage. A speaker will urge action by pointing to

such conditions, and discourage it by pointing to the opposite. These same

arguments also form the materials for accusation or defence-the deterrents

being pointed out by the defence, and the inducements by the prosecution. As

for  the  defence,…  This  topic  forms  the  whole  Art  of  Rhetoric  both  of

Pamphilus and of Callippus.21. Another line of argument refers to things which are supposed to happen

and yet seem incredible. We may argue that people could not have believed

them, if they had not been true or nearly true: even that they are the more

likely  to  be  true  because  they  are  incredible.  For  the  things  which  men

believe are either facts or probabilities: if, therefore, a thing that is believed is

improbable  and  even  incredible,  it  must  be  true,  since  it  is  certainly  not

believed  because  it  is  at  all  probable  or  credible.  An  example  is  what

Androcles of the deme Pitthus said in his well-known arraignment of the law.

The  audience  tried  to  shout  him  down  when  he  observed  that  the  laws

required  a  law  to  set  them  right.  ‘Why’,  he  went  on,  ‘fish  need  salt,

improbable  and  incredible  as  this  might  seem  for  creatures  reared  in  salt

water; and olive-cakes need oil, incredible as it is that what produces oil

should need it.’

22. Another line of argument is to refute our opponent’s case by noting any

contrasts or contradictions of dates, acts, or words that it anywhere displays;

and  this  in  any  of  the  three  following  connexions.  (1)  Referring  to  our

opponent’s conduct, e.g. ‘He says he is devoted to you, yet he conspired with

the Thirty.’ (2) Referring to our own conduct, e.g. ‘He says I am litigious,

and yet he cannot prove that I have been engaged in a single lawsuit.’ (3)

Referring  to  both  of  us  together,  e.g.  ‘He  has  never  even  lent  any  one  a

penny, but I have ransomed quite a number of you.’

23. Another line that is useful for men and causes that have been really or

seemingly slandered, is to show why the facts are not as supposed; pointing

out that there is a reason for the false impression given. Thus a woman, who

had  palmed  off  her  son  on  another  woman,  was  thought  to  be  the  lad’s

mistress because she embraced him; but when her action was explained the

charge was shown to be groundless. Another example is from the Ajax of

Theodectes, where Odysseus tells Ajax the reason why, though he is really

braver than Ajax, he is not thought so.

24. Another line of argument is to show that if the cause is present, the

effect is present, and if absent, absent. For by proving the cause you at once

prove the effect, and conversely nothing can exist without its cause. Thus

Thrasybulus  accused  Leodamas  of  having  had  his  name  recorded  as  a

criminal on the slab in the Acropolis, and of erasing the record in the time of

the Thirty Tyrants: to which Leodamas replied, ‘Impossible: for the Thirty

would have trusted me all the more if my quarrel with the commons had been

inscribed on the slab.’25. Another line is to consider whether the accused person can take or

could  have  taken  a  better  course  than  that  which  he  is  recommending  or

taking, or has taken. If he has not taken this better course, it is clear that he is

not guilty, since no one deliberately and consciously chooses what is bad.

This argument is, however, fallacious, for it often becomes clear after the

event how the action could have been done better, though before the event

this was far from clear.

26. Another line is, when a contemplated action is inconsistent with any

past action, to examine them both together. Thus, when the people of Elea

asked Xenophanes if they should or should not sacrifice to Leucothea and

mourn for her, he advised them not to mourn for her if they thought her a

goddess, and not to sacrifice to her if they thought her a mortal woman.

27. Another line is to make previous mistakes the grounds of accusation or

defence. Thus, in the Medea of Carcinus the accusers allege that Medea has

slain her children; ‘at all events’, they say, ‘they are not to be seen’-Medea

having made the mistake of sending her children away. In defence she argues

that it is not her children, but Jason, whom she would have slain; for it would

have been a mistake on her part not to do this if she had done the other. This

special  line  of  argument  for  enthymeme  forms  the  whole  of  the  Art  of

Rhetoric in use before Theodorus.


  Another line is to draw meanings from names. Sophocles, for


  instance, says,


O steel in heart as thou art steel in name.


This line of argument is common in praises of the gods. Thus, too, Conon

called Thrasybulus rash in counsel. And Herodicus said of Thrasymachus,

‘You are always bold in battle’; of Polus, ‘you are always a colt’; and of the

legislator  Draco  that  his  laws  were  those  not  of  a  human  being  but  of  a

dragon, so savage were they. And, in Euripides, Hecuba says of Aphrodite,


Her name and Folly’s (aphrosuns) lightly begin alike,


and Chaeremon writes


  Pentheus-a name foreshadowing grief (penthos) to come.The  Refutative  Enthymeme  has  a  greater  reputation  than  the

Demonstrative,  because  within  a  small  space  it  works  out  two  opposing

arguments, and arguments put side by side are clearer to the audience. But of

all syllogisms, whether refutative or demonstrative, those are most applauded

of which we foresee the conclusions from the beginning, so long as they are

not  obvious  at  first  sight-for  part  of  the  pleasure  we  feel  is  at  our  own

intelligent  anticipation;  or  those  which  we  follow  well  enough  to  see  the

point of them as soon as the last word has been uttered.


24


  Besides genuine syllogisms, there may be syllogisms that look genuine but

are not; and since an enthymeme is merely a syllogism of a particular kind, it

follows  that,  besides  genuine  enthymemes,  there  may  be  those  that  look

genuine but are not.

1. Among the lines of argument that form the Spurious Enthymeme the

first is that which arises from the particular words employed.

(a) One variety of this is when-as in dialectic, without having gone through

any reasoning process, we make a final statement as if it were the conclusion

of such a process, ‘Therefore so-and-so is not true’, ‘Therefore also so-and-so

must be true’-so too in rhetoric a compact and antithetical utterance passes

for an enthymeme, such language being the proper province of enthymeme,

so  that  it  is  seemingly  the  form  of  wording  here  that  causes  the  illusion

mentioned. In order to produce the effect of genuine reasoning by our form of

wording  it  is  useful  to  summarize  the  results  of  a  number  of  previous

reasonings: as ‘some he saved-others he avenged-the Greeks he freed’. Each

of these statements has been previously proved from other facts; but the mere

collocation  of  them  gives  the  impression  of  establishing  some  fresh

conclusion.

(b)  Another  variety  is  based  on  the  use  of  similar  words  for  different

things; e.g. the argument that the mouse must be a noble creature, since it

gives its name to the most august of all religious rites-for such the Mysteries

are. Or one may introduce, into a eulogy of the dog, the dog-star; or Pan,

because Pindar said:


O thou blessed one!

  Thou whom they of Olympus callThe hound of manifold shape

That follows the Mother of Heaven:


or we may argue that, because there is much disgrace in there not being a

dog about, there is honour in being a dog. Or that Hermes is readier than any

other god to go shares, since we never say ‘shares all round’ except of him.

Or that speech is a very excellent thing, since good men are not said to be

worth money but to be worthy of esteem-the phrase ‘worthy of esteem’ also

having the meaning of ‘worth speech’.

2. Another line is to assert of the whole what is true of the parts, or of the

parts what is true of the whole. A whole and its parts are supposed to be

identical, though often they are not. You have therefore to adopt whichever

of these two lines better suits your purpose. That is how Euthydemus argues:

e.g. that any one knows that there is a trireme in the Peiraeus, since he knows

the separate details that make up this statement. There is also the argument

that one who knows the letters knows the whole word, since the word is the

same thing as the letters which compose it; or that, if a double portion of a

certain thing is harmful to health, then a single portion must not be called

wholesome, since it is absurd that two good things should make one bad

thing. Put thus, the enthymeme is refutative; put as follows; demonstrative:

‘For one good thing cannot be made up of two bad things.’ The whole line of

argument is fallacious. Again, there is Polycrates’ saying that Thrasybulus

put down thirty tyrants, where the speaker adds them up one by one. Or the

argument in the Orestes of Theodectes, where the argument is from part to

whole:


  ‘Tis right that she who slays her lord should die.


‘It is right, too, that the son should avenge his father. Very good: these two

things are what Orestes has done.’ Still, perhaps the two things, once they are

put together, do not form a right act. The fallacy might also be said to be due

to omission, since the speaker fails to say by whose hand a husband-slayer

should die.

3. Another line is the use of indignant language, whether to support your

own  case  or  to  overthrow  your  opponent’s.  We  do  this  when  we  paint  a

highly-coloured picture of the situation without having proved the facts of it:

if the defendant does so, he produces an impression of his innocence; and ifthe  prosecutor  goes  into  a  passion,  he  produces  an  impression  of  the

defendant’s guilt. Here there is no genuine enthymeme: the hearer infers guilt

or  innocence,  but  no  proof  is  given,  and  the  inference  is  fallacious

accordingly.

4. Another line is to use a ‘Sign’, or single instance, as certain evidence;

which, again, yields no valid proof. Thus, it might be said that lovers are

useful to their countries, since the love of Harmodius and Aristogeiton caused

the downfall of the tyrant Hipparchus. Or, again, that Dionysius is a thief,

since he is a vicious man-there is, of course, no valid proof here; not every

vicious man is a thief, though every thief is a vicious man.

5. Another line represents the accidental as essential. An instance is what

Polycrates  says  of  the  mice,  that  they  ‘came  to  the  rescue’  because  they

gnawed through the bowstrings. Or it might be maintained that an invitation

to dinner is a great honour, for it was because he was not invited that Achilles

was ‘angered’ with the Greeks at Tenedos? As a fact, what angered him was

the insult involved; it was a mere accident that this was the particular form

that the insult took.

6.  Another  is  the  argument  from  consequence.  In  the  Alexander,  for

instance, it is argued that Paris must have had a lofty disposition, since he

despised society and lived by himself on Mount Ida: because lofty people do

this kind of thing, therefore Paris too, we are to suppose, had a lofty soul. Or,

if a man dresses fashionably and roams around at night, he is a rake, since

that  is  the  way  rakes  behave.  Another  similar  argument  points  out  that

beggars sing and dance in temples, and that exiles can live wherever they

please, and that such privileges are at the disposal of those we account happy

and therefore every one might be regarded as happy if only he has those

privileges.  What  matters,  however,  is  the  circumstances  under  which  the

privileges are enjoyed. Hence this line too falls under the head of fallacies by

omission.

7. Another line consists in representing as causes things which are not

causes, on the ground that they happened along with or before the event in

question. They assume that, because B happens after A, it happens because of

A. Politicians are especially fond of taking this line. Thus Demades said that

the policy of Demosthenes was the cause of all the mischief, ‘for after it the

war occurred’.

8.  Another  line  consists  in  leaving  out  any  mention  of  time  and

circumstances. E.g. the argument that Paris was justified in taking Helen,since her father left her free to choose: here the freedom was presumably not

perpetual; it could only refer to her first choice, beyond which her father’s

authority could not go. Or again, one might say that to strike a free man is an

act  of  wanton  outrage;  but  it  is  not  so  in  every  case-only  when  it  is

unprovoked.

9. Again, a spurious syllogism may, as in ‘eristical’ discussions, be based

on the confusion of the absolute with that which is not absolute but particular.

As, in dialectic, for instance, it may be argued that what-is-not is, on the

ground that what-is-not is what-is-not: or that the unknown can be known, on

the ground that it can be known to he unknown: so also in rhetoric a spurious

enthymeme may be based on the confusion of some particular probability

with  absolute  probability.  Now  no  particular  probability  is  universally

probable: as Agathon says,


One might perchance say that was probable-

That things improbable oft will hap to men.


For  what  is  improbable  does  happen,  and  therefore  it  is  probable  that

improbable things will happen. Granted this, one might argue that ‘what is

improbable is probable’. But this is not true absolutely. As, in eristic, the

imposture  comes  from  not  adding  any  clause  specifying  relationship  or

reference or manner; so here it arises because the probability in question is

not general but specific. It is of this line of argument that Corax’s Art of

Rhetoric is composed. If the accused is not open to the charge-for instance if

a weakling be tried for violent assault-the defence is that he was not likely to

do such a thing. But if he is open to the charge-i.e. if he is a strong man-the

defence is still that he was not likely to do such a thing, since he could be

sure that people would think he was likely to do it. And so with any other

charge: the accused must be either open or not open to it: there is in either

case an appearance of probable innocence, but whereas in the latter case the

probability is genuine, in the former it can only be asserted in the special

sense mentioned. This sort of argument illustrates what is meant by making

the worse argument seem the better. Hence people were right in objecting to

the training Protagoras undertook to give them. It was a fraud; the probability

it handled was not genuine but spurious, and has a place in no art except

Rhetoric and Eristic.25


  Enthymemes, genuine and apparent, have now been described; the next

subject is their Refutation.

An argument may be refuted either by a counter-syllogism or by bringing

an objection. It is clear that counter-syllogisms can be built up from the same

lines of arguments as the original syllogisms: for the materials of syllogisms

are the ordinary opinions of men, and such opinions often contradict each

other. Objections, as appears in the Topics, may be raised in four ways-either

by directly attacking your opponent’s own statement, or by putting forward

another statement like it, or by putting forward a statement contrary to it, or

by quoting previous decisions.

1. By ‘attacking your opponent’s own statement’ I mean, for instance, this:

if his enthymeme should assert that love is always good, the objection can be

brought in two ways, either by making the general statement that ‘all want is

an  evil’,  or  by  making  the  particular  one  that  there  would  be  no  talk  of

‘Caunian love’ if there were not evil loves as well as good ones.

2. An objection ‘from a contrary statement’ is raised when, for instance,

the opponent’s enthymeme having concluded that a good man does good to

all his friends, you object, ‘That proves nothing, for a bad man does not do

evil to all his friends’.

3. An example of an objection ‘from a like statement’ is, the enthymeme

having shown that ill-used men always hate their ill-users, to reply, ‘That

proves nothing, for well-used men do not always love those who used them

well’.

4. The ‘decisions’ mentioned are those proceeding from well-known men;

for instance, if the enthymeme employed has concluded that ‘that allowance

ought to be made for drunken offenders, since they did not know what they

were doing’, the objection will be, ‘Pittacus, then, deserves no approval, or he

would  not  have  prescribed  specially  severe  penalties  for  offences  due  to

drunkenness’.

  Enthymemes are based upon one or other of four kinds of alleged fact: (1)

Probabilities,  (2)  Examples,  (3)  Infallible  Signs,  (4)  Ordinary  Signs.  (1)

Enthymemes based upon Probabilities are those which argue from what is, or

is supposed to be, usually true. (2) Enthymemes based upon Example are

those which proceed by induction from one or more similar cases, arrive at a

general proposition, and then argue deductively to a particular inference. (3)Enthymemes  based  upon  Infallible  Signs  are  those  which  argue  from  the

inevitable and invariable. (4) Enthymemes based upon ordinary Signs are

those  which  argue  from  some  universal  or  particular  proposition,  true  or

false.

Now (1) as a Probability is that which happens usually but not always,

Enthymemes founded upon Probabilities can, it is clear, always be refuted by

raising  some  objection.  The  refutation  is  not  always  genuine:  it  may  be

spurious: for it consists in showing not that your opponent’s premiss is not

probable, but Only in showing that it is not inevitably true. Hence it is always

in defence rather than in accusation that it is possible to gain an advantage by

using this fallacy. For the accuser uses probabilities to prove his case: and to

refute a conclusion as improbable is not the same thing as to refute it as not

inevitable. Any argument based upon what usually happens is always open to

objection:  otherwise  it  would  not  be  a  probability  but  an  invariable  and

necessary truth. But the judges think, if the refutation takes this form, either

that the accuser’s case is not probable or that they must not decide it; which,

as  we  said,  is  a  false  piece  of  reasoning.  For  they  ought  to  decide  by

considering not merely what must be true but also what is likely to be true:

this is, indeed, the meaning of ‘giving a verdict in accordance with one’s

honest opinion’. Therefore it is not enough for the defendant to refute the

accusation by proving that the charge is not hound to be true: he must do so

by showing that it is not likely to be true. For this purpose his objection must

state what is more usually true than the statement attacked. It may do so in

either of two ways: either in respect of frequency or in respect of exactness. It

will be most convincing if it does so in both respects; for if the thing in

question both happens oftener as we represent it and happens more as we

represent it, the probability is particularly great.

(2) Fallible Signs, and Enthymemes based upon them, can be refuted even

if the facts are correct, as was said at the outset. For we have shown in the

Analytics that no Fallible Sign can form part of a valid logical proof.

(3) Enthymemes depending on examples may be refuted in the same way

as probabilities. If we have a negative instance, the argument is refuted, in so

far as it is proved not inevitable, even though the positive examples are more

similar and more frequent. And if the positive examples are more numerous

and more frequent, we must contend that the present case is dissimilar, or that

its conditions are dissimilar, or that it is different in some way or other.

(4) It will be impossible to refute Infallible Signs, and Enthymemes restingon them, by showing in any way that they do not form a valid logical proof:

this, too, we see from the Analytics. All we can do is to show that the fact

alleged does not exist. If there is no doubt that it does, and that it is an

Infallible Sign, refutation now becomes impossible: for this is equivalent to a

demonstration which is clear in every respect.


26


  Amplification and Depreciation are not an element of enthymeme. By ‘an

element of enthymeme’ I mean the same thing as a line of enthymematic

argument-a general class embracing a large number of particular kinds of

enthymeme. Amplification and Depreciation are one kind of enthymeme, viz.

the kind used to show that a thing is great or small; just as there are other

kinds used to show that a thing is good or bad, just or unjust, and anything

else of the sort. All these things are the subject-matter of syllogisms and

enthymemes; none of these is the line of argument of an enthymeme; no

more,  therefore,  are  Amplification  and  Depreciation.  Nor  are  Refutative

Enthymemes  a  different  species  from  Constructive.  For  it  is  clear  that

refutation consists either in offering positive proof or in raising an objection.

In the first case we prove the opposite of our adversary’s statements. Thus, if

he shows that a thing has happened, we show that it has not; if he shows that

it  has  not  happened,  we  show  that  it  has.  This,  then,  could  not  be  the

distinction if there were one, since the same means are employed by both

parties, enthymemes being adduced to show that the fact is or is not so-and-

so. An objection, on the other hand, is not an enthymeme at all, as was said in

the Topics, consists in stating some accepted opinion from which it will be

clear  that  our  opponent  has  not  reasoned  correctly  or  has  made  a  false

assumption.

  Three  points  must  be  studied  in  making  a  speech;  and  we  have  now

completed  the  account  of  (1)  Examples,  Maxims,  Enthymemes,  and  in

general the thought-element the way to invent and refute arguments. We have

next to discuss (2) Style, and (3) Arrangement.                                Rhetoric, Book III


Translated by W. Rhys Roberts


<

div id="book3" class="book">


1


In  making  a  speech  one  must  study  three  points:  first,  the  means  of

producing persuasion; second, the style, or language, to be used; third, the

proper  arrangement  of  the  various  parts  of  the  speech.  We  have  already

specified the sources of persuasion. We have shown that these are three in

number;  what  they  are;  and  why  there  are  only  these  three:  for  we  have

shown that persuasion must in every case be effected either (1) by working

on  the  emotions  of  the  judges  themselves,  (2)  by  giving  them  the  right

impression  of  the  speakers’  character,  or  (3)  by  proving  the  truth  of  the

statements made.

  Enthymemes also have been described, and the sources from which they

should be derived; there being both special and general lines of argument for

enthymemes.

Our next subject will be the style of expression. For it is not enough to

know what we ought to say; we must also say it as we ought; much help is

thus afforded towards producing the right impression of a speech. The first

question to receive attention was naturally the one that comes first naturally-

how persuasion can be produced from the facts themselves. The second is

how to set these facts out in language. A third would be the proper method of

delivery;  this  is  a  thing  that  affects  the  success  of  a  speech  greatly;  but

hitherto the subject has been neglected. Indeed, it was long before it found a

way into the arts of tragic drama and epic recitation: at first poets acted their

tragedies themselves. It is plain that delivery has just as much to do with

oratory as with poetry. (In connexion with poetry, it has been studied by

Glaucon  of  Teos  among  others.)  It  is,  essentially,  a  matter  of  the  right

management of the voice to express the various emotions-of speaking loudly,

softly, or between the two; of high, low, or intermediate pitch; of the variousrhythms  that  suit  various  subjects.  These  are  the  three  things-volume  of

sound, modulation of pitch, and rhythm-that a speaker bears in mind. It is

those who do bear them in mind who usually win prizes in the dramatic

contests; and just as in drama the actors now count for more than the poets,

so it is in the contests of public life, owing to the defects of our political

institutions. No systematic treatise upon the rules of delivery has yet been

composed; indeed, even the study of language made no progress till late in

the  day.  Besides,  delivery  is-very  properly-not  regarded  as  an  elevated

subject of inquiry. Still, the whole business of rhetoric being concerned with

appearances,  we  must  pay  attention  to  the  subject  of  delivery,  unworthy

though it is, because we cannot do without it. The right thing in speaking

really is that we should be satisfied not to annoy our hearers, without trying

to delight them: we ought in fairness to fight our case with no help beyond

the bare facts: nothing, therefore, should matter except the proof of those

facts.  Still,  as  has  been  already  said,  other  things  affect  the  result

considerably, owing to the defects of our hearers. The arts of language cannot

help having a small but real importance, whatever it is we have to expound to

others: the way in which a thing is said does affect its intelligibility. Not,

however, so much importance as people think. All such arts are fanciful and

meant  to  charm  the  hearer.  Nobody  uses  fine  language  when  teaching

geometry.

  When the principles of delivery have been worked out, they will produce

the same effect as on the stage. But only very slight attempts to deal with

them  have  been  made  and  by  a  few  people,  as  by  Thrasymachus  in  his

‘Appeals  to  Pity’.  Dramatic  ability  is  a  natural  gift,  and  can  hardly  be

systematically taught. The principles of good diction can be so taught, and

therefore we have men of ability in this direction too, who win prizes in their

turn, as well as those speakers who excel in delivery-speeches of the written

or  literary  kind  owe  more  of  their  effect  to  their  direction  than  to  their

thought.

It was naturally the poets who first set the movement going; for words

represent things, and they had also the human voice at their disposal, which

of all our organs can best represent other things. Thus the arts of recitation

and  acting  were  formed,  and  others  as  well.  Now  it  was  because  poets

seemed to win fame through their fine language when their thoughts were

simple enough, that the language of oratorical prose at first took a poetical

colour, e.g. that of Gorgias. Even now most uneducated people think thatpoetical language makes the finest discourses. That is not true: the language

of prose is distinct from that of poetry. This is shown by the state of things to-

day,  when  even  the  language  of  tragedy  has  altered  its  character.  Just  as

iambics  were  adopted,  instead  of  tetrameters,  because  they  are  the  most

prose-like of all metres, so tragedy has given up all those words, not used in

ordinary  talk,  which  decorated  the  early  drama  and  are  still  used  by  the

writers of hexameter poems. It is therefore ridiculous to imitate a poetical

manner which the poets themselves have dropped; and it is now plain that we

have  not  to  treat  in  detail  the  whole  question  of  style,  but  may  confine

ourselves to that part of it which concerns our present subject, rhetoric. The

other—the poetical—part of it has been discussed in the treatise on the Art of

Poetry.


2


We  may,  then,  start  from  the  observations  there  made,  including  the

definition of style. Style to be good must be clear, as is proved by the fact

that speech which fails to convey a plain meaning will fail to do just what

speech has to do. It must also be appropriate, avoiding both meanness and

undue elevation; poetical language is certainly free from meanness, but it is

not appropriate to prose. Clearness is secured by using the words (nouns and

verbs  alike)  that  are  current  and  ordinary.  Freedom  from  meanness,  and

positive adornment too, are secured by using the other words mentioned in

the Art of Poetry. Such variation from what is usual makes the language

appear more stately. People do not feel towards strangers as they do towards

their  own  countrymen,  and  the  same  thing  is  true  of  their  feeling  for

language. It is therefore well to give to everyday speech an unfamiliar air:

people like what strikes them, and are struck by what is out of the way. In

verse such effects are common, and there they are fitting: the persons and

things there spoken of are comparatively remote from ordinary life. In prose

passages  they  are  far  less  often  fitting  because  the  subject-matter  is  less

exalted. Even in poetry, it is not quite appropriate that fine language should

be used by a slave or a very young man, or about very trivial subjects: even in

poetry the style, to be appropriate, must sometimes be toned down, though at

other times heightened. We can now see that a writer must disguise his art

and give the impression of speaking naturally and not artificially. Naturalness

is persuasive, artificiality is the contrary; for our hearers are prejudiced andthink we have some design against them, as if we were mixing their wines for

them. It is like the difference between the quality of Theodorus’ voice and the

voices of all other actors: his really seems to be that of the character who is

speaking, theirs do not. We can hide our purpose successfully by taking the

single words of our composition from the speech of ordinary life. This is

done  in  poetry  by  Euripides,  who  was  the  first  to  show  the  way  to  his

successors.

  Language is composed of nouns and verbs. Nouns are of the various kinds

considered in the treatise on Poetry. Strange words, compound words, and

invented  words  must  be  used  sparingly  and  on  few  occasions:  on  what

occasions we shall state later. The reason for this restriction has been already

indicated: they depart from what is suitable, in the direction of excess. In the

language  of  prose,  besides  the  regular  and  proper  terms  for  things,

metaphorical terms only can be used with advantage. This we gather from the

fact  that  these  two  classes  of  terms,  the  proper  or  regular  and  the

metaphorical-these and no others-are used by everybody in conversation. We

can  now  see  that  a  good  writer  can  produce  a  style  that  is  distinguished

without being obtrusive, and is at the same time clear, thus satisfying our

definition of good oratorical prose. Words of ambiguous meaning are chiefly

useful to enable the sophist to mislead his hearers. Synonyms are useful to

the poet, by which I mean words whose ordinary meaning is the same, e.g.

‘porheueseai’  (advancing)  and  ‘badizein’  (proceeding);  these  two  are

ordinary words and have the same meaning.

In the Art of Poetry, as we have already said, will be found definitions of

these kinds of words; a classification of Metaphors; and mention of the fact

that metaphor is of great value both in poetry and in prose. Prose-writers

must,  however,  pay  specially  careful  attention  to  metaphor,  because  their

other resources are scantier than those of poets. Metaphor, moreover, gives

style clearness, charm, and distinction as nothing else can: and it is not a

thing  whose  use  can  be  taught  by  one  man  to  another.  Metaphors,  like

epithets, must be fitting, which means that they must fairly correspond to the

thing signified: failing this, their inappropriateness will be conspicuous: the

want of harmony between two things is emphasized by their being placed

side by side. It is like having to ask ourselves what dress will suit an old man;

certainly not the crimson cloak that suits a young man. And if you wish to

pay a compliment, you must take your metaphor from something better in the

same line; if to disparage, from something worse. To illustrate my meaning:since opposites are in the same class, you do what I have suggested if you say

that a man who begs ‘prays’, and a man who prays ‘begs’; for praying and

begging are both varieties of asking. So Iphicrates called Callias a ‘mendicant

priest’ instead of a ‘torch-bearer’, and Callias replied that Iphicrates must be

uninitiated or he would have called him not a ‘mendicant priest’ but a ‘torch-

bearer’. Both are religious titles, but one is honourable and the other is not.

Again,  somebody  calls  actors  ‘hangers-on  of  Dionysus’,  but  they  call

themselves ‘artists’: each of these terms is a metaphor, the one intended to

throw  dirt  at  the  actor,  the  other  to  dignify  him.  And  pirates  now  call

themselves ‘purveyors’. We can thus call a crime a mistake, or a mistake a

crime.  We  can  say  that  a  thief  ‘took’  a  thing,  or  that  he  ‘plundered’  his

victim. An expression like that of Euripides’ Telephus,


  King of the oar, on Mysia’s coast he landed,


is inappropriate; the word ‘king’ goes beyond the dignity of the subject,

and so the art is not concealed. A metaphor may be amiss because the very

syllables  of  the  words  conveying  it  fail  to  indicate  sweetness  of  vocal

utterance. Thus Dionysius the Brazen in his elegies calls poetry ‘Calliope’s

screech’. Poetry and screeching are both, to be sure, vocal utterances. But the

metaphor is bad, because the sounds of ‘screeching’, unlike those of poetry,

are discordant and unmeaning. Further, in using metaphors to give names to

nameless things, we must draw them not from remote but from kindred and

similar things, so that the kinship is clearly perceived as soon as the words

are said. Thus in the celebrated riddle


I marked how a man glued bronze with fire to another man’s body,


the process is nameless; but both it and gluing are a kind of application,

and that is why the application of the cupping-glass is here called a ‘gluing’.

Good  riddles  do,  in  general,  provide  us  with  satisfactory  metaphors:  for

metaphors  imply  riddles,  and  therefore  a  good  riddle  can  furnish  a  good

metaphor.  Further,  the  materials  of  metaphors  must  be  beautiful;  and  the

beauty, like the ugliness, of all words may, as Licymnius says, lie in their

sound or in their meaning. Further, there is a third consideration-one that

upsets the fallacious argument of the sophist Bryson, that there is no such

thing as foul language, because in whatever words you put a given thing your

meaning is the same. This is untrue. One term may describe a thing moretruly than another, may be more like it, and set it more intimately before our

eyes. Besides, two different words will represent a thing in two different

lights; so on this ground also one term must be held fairer or fouler than

another. For both of two terms will indicate what is fair, or what is foul, but

not simply their fairness or their foulness, or if so, at any rate not in an equal

degree.  The  materials  of  metaphor  must  be  beautiful  to  the  ear,  to  the

understanding,  to  the  eye  or  some  other  physical  sense.  It  is  better,  for

instance, to say ‘rosy-fingered morn’, than ‘crimson-fingered’ or, worse still,

‘red-fingered morn’. The epithets that we apply, too, may have a bad and

ugly aspect, as when Orestes is called a ‘mother-slayer’; or a better one, as

when he is called his ‘father’s avenger’. Simonides, when the victor in the

mule-race offered him a small fee, refused to write him an ode, because, he

said, it was so unpleasant to write odes to half-asses: but on receiving an

adequate fee, he wrote


Hail to you, daughters of storm-footed steeds?


  though  of  course  they  were  daughters  of  asses  too.  The  same  effect  is

attained by the use of diminutives, which make a bad thing less bad and a

good thing less good. Take, for instance, the banter of Aristophanes in the

Babylonians  where  he  uses  ‘goldlet’  for  ‘gold’,  ‘cloaklet’  for  ‘cloak’,

‘scoffiet’ for ‘scoff, and ‘plaguelet’. But alike in using epithets and in using

diminutives we must be wary and must observe the mean.


3


  Bad taste in language may take any of four forms:

(1) The misuse of compound words. Lycophron, for instance, talks of the

‘many visaged heaven’ above the ‘giant-crested earth’, and again the ‘strait-

pathed shore’; and Gorgias of the ‘pauper-poet flatterer’ and ‘oath-breaking

and over-oath-keeping’. Alcidamas uses such expressions as ‘the soul filling

with  rage  and  face  becoming  flame-flushed’,  and  ‘he  thought  their

enthusiasm  would  be  issue-fraught’  and  ‘issue-fraught  he  made  the

persuasion of his words’, and ‘sombre-hued is the floor of the sea’.The way

all these words are compounded makes them, we feel, fit for verse only. This,

then, is one form in which bad taste is shown.

(2) Another is the employment of strange words. For instance, Lycophrontalks of ‘the prodigious Xerxes’ and ‘spoliative Sciron’; Alcidamas of ‘a toy

for  poetry’  and  ‘the  witlessness  of  nature’,  and  says  ‘whetted  with  the

unmitigated temper of his spirit’.

(3) A third form is the use of long, unseasonable, or frequent epithets. It is

appropriate enough for a poet to talk of ‘white milk’, in prose such epithets

are sometimes lacking in appropriateness or, when spread too thickly, plainly

reveal the author turning his prose into poetry. Of course we must use some

epithets, since they lift our style above the usual level and give it an air of

distinction. But we must aim at the due mean, or the result will be worse than

if we took no trouble at all; we shall get something actually bad instead of

something merely not good. That is why the epithets of Alcidamas seem so

tasteless; he does not use them as the seasoning of the meat, but as the meat

itself, so numerous and swollen and aggressive are they. For instance, he does

not say ‘sweat’, but ‘the moist sweat’; not ‘to the Isthmian games’, but ‘to the

world-concourse of the Isthmian games’; not ‘laws’, but ‘the laws that are

monarchs of states’; not ‘at a run’, but ‘his heart impelling him to speed of

foot’; not ‘a school of the Muses’, but ‘Nature’s school of the Muses had he

inherited’; and so ‘frowning care of heart’, and ‘achiever’ not of ‘popularity’

but of ‘universal popularity’, and ‘dispenser of pleasure to his audience’, and

‘he concealed it’ not ‘with boughs’ but ‘with boughs of the forest trees’, and

‘he clothed’ not ‘his body’ but ‘his body’s nakedness’, and ‘his soul’s desire

was counter imitative’ (this’s at one and the same time a compound and an

epithet, so that it seems a poet’s effort), and ‘so extravagant the excess of his

wickedness’.  We  thus  see  how  the  inappropriateness  of  such  poetical

language imports absurdity and tastelessness into speeches, as well as the

obscurity that comes from all this verbosity-for when the sense is plain, you

only obscure and spoil its clearness by piling up words.

The ordinary use of compound words is where there is no term for a thing

and some compound can be easily formed, like ‘pastime’ (chronotribein); but

if this is much done, the prose character disappears entirely. We now see why

the language of compounds is just the thing for writers of dithyrambs, who

love sonorous noises; strange words for writers of epic poetry, which is a

proud and stately affair; and metaphor for iambic verse, the metre which (as

has been already’ said) is widely used to-day.

(4) There remains the fourth region in which bad taste may be shown,

metaphor. Metaphors like other things may be inappropriate. Some are so

because they are ridiculous; they are indeed used by comic as well as tragicpoets. Others are too grand and theatrical; and these, if they are far-fetched,

may also be obscure. For instance, Gorgias talks of ‘events that are green and

full of sap’, and says ‘foul was the deed you sowed and evil the harvest you

reaped’. That is too much like poetry. Alcidamas, again, called philosophy ‘a

fortress that threatens the power of law’, and the Odyssey ‘a goodly looking-

glass of human life’,’ talked about ‘offering no such toy to poetry’: all these

expressions fail, for the reasons given, to carry the hearer with them. The

address of Gorgias to the swallow, when she had let her droppings fall on him

as she flew overhead, is in the best tragic manner. He said, ‘Nay, shame, O

Philomela’. Considering her as a bird, you could not call her act shameful;

considering her as a girl, you could; and so it was a good gibe to address her

as what she was once and not as what she is.


4


The Simile also is a metaphor; the difference is but slight. When the poet

says of Achilles that he


  Leapt on the foe as a lion,


this is a simile; when he says of him ‘the lion leapt’, it is a metaphor-here,

since both are courageous, he has transferred to Achilles the name of ‘lion’.

Similes are useful in prose as well as in verse; but not often, since they are of

the  nature  of  poetry.  They  are  to  be  employed  just  as  metaphors  are

employed,  since  they  are  really  the  same  thing  except  for  the  difference

mentioned.

The following are examples of similes. Androtion said of Idrieus that he

was like a terrier let off the chain, that flies at you and bites you-Idrieus too

was  savage  now  that  he  was  let  out  of  his  chains.  Theodamas  compared

Archidamus to an Euxenus who could not do geometry-a proportional simile,

implying that Euxenus is an Archidamus who can do geometry. In Plato’s

Republic those who strip the dead are compared to curs which bite the stones

thrown at them but do not touch the thrower, and there is the simile about the

Athenian people, who are compared to a ship’s captain who is strong but a

little deaf; and the one about poets’ verses, which are likened to persons who

lack beauty but possess youthful freshness-when the freshness has faded the

charm  perishes,  and  so  with  verses  when  broken  up  into  prose.  Periclescompared the Samians to children who take their pap but go on crying; and

the Boeotians to holm-oaks, because they were ruining one another by civil

wars just as one oak causes another oak’s fall. Demosthenes said that the

Athenian people were like sea-sick men on board ship. Again, Demosthenes

compared  the  political  orators  to  nurses  who  swallow  the  bit  of  food

themselves and then smear the children’s lips with the spittle. Antisthenes

compared  the  lean  Cephisodotus  to  frankincense,  because  it  was  his

consumption that gave one pleasure. All these ideas may be expressed either

as similes or as metaphors; those which succeed as metaphors will obviously

do well also as similes, and similes, with the explanation omitted, will appear

as metaphors. But the proportional metaphor must always apply reciprocally

to either of its co-ordinate terms. For instance, if a drinking-bowl is the shield

of Dionysus, a shield may fittingly be called the drinking-bowl of Ares.


5


  Such,  then,  are  the  ingredients  of  which  speech  is  composed.  The

foundation of good style is correctness of language, which falls under five

heads. (1) First, the proper use of connecting words, and the arrangement of

them in the natural sequence which some of them require. For instance, the

connective ‘men’ (e.g. ego men) requires the correlative de (e.g. o de). The

answering word must be brought in before the first has been forgotten, and

not be widely separated from it; nor, except in the few cases where this is

appropriate, is another connective to be introduced before the one required.

Consider  the  sentence,  ‘But  as  soon  as  he  told  me  (for  Cleon  had  come

begging and praying), took them along and set out.’ In this sentence many

connecting words are inserted in front of the one required to complete the

sense; and if there is a long interval before ‘set out’, the result is obscurity.

One merit, then, of good style lies in the right use of connecting words. (2)

The second lies in calling things by their own special names and not by vague

general  ones.  (3)  The  third  is  to  avoid  ambiguities;  unless,  indeed,  you

definitely desire to be ambiguous, as those do who have nothing to say but

are pretending to mean something. Such people are apt to put that sort of

thing  into  verse.  Empedocles,  for  instance,  by  his  long  circumlocutions

imposes on his hearers; these are affected in the same way as most people are

when they listen to diviners, whose ambiguous utterances are received with

nods of acquiescence—  Croesus by crossing the Halys will ruin a mighty realm.


  Diviners use these vague generalities about the matter in hand because

their predictions are thus, as a rule, less likely to be falsified. We are more

likely to be right, in the game of ‘odd and even’, if we simply guess ‘even’ or

‘odd’ than if we guess at the actual number; and the oracle-monger is more

likely to be right if he simply says that a thing will happen than if he says

when it will happen, and therefore he refuses to add a definite date. All these

ambiguities have the same sort of effect, and are to be avoided unless we

have some such object as that mentioned. (4) A fourth rule is to observe

Protagoras’ classification of nouns into male, female, and inanimate; for these

distinctions also must be correctly given. ‘Upon her arrival she said her say

and departed (e d elthousa kai dialechtheisa ocheto).’ (5) A fifth rule is to

express plurality, fewness, and unity by the correct wording, e.g. ‘Having

come, they struck me (oi d elthontes etupton me).’

It is a general rule that a written composition should be easy to read and

therefore easy to deliver. This cannot be so where there are many connecting

words  or  clauses,  or  where  punctuation  is  hard,  as  in  the  writings  of

Heracleitus.  To  punctuate  Heracleitus  is  no  easy  task,  because  we  often

cannot  tell  whether  a  particular  word  belongs  to  what  precedes  or  what

follows it. Thus, at the outset of his treatise he says, ‘Though this truth is

always men understand it not’, where it is not clear with which of the two

clauses the word ‘always’ should be joined by the punctuation. Further, the

following fact leads to solecism, viz. that the sentence does not work out

properly if you annex to two terms a third which does not suit them both.

Thus  either  ‘sound’  or  ‘colour’  will  fail  to  work  out  properly  with  some

verbs: ‘perceive’ will apply to both, ‘see’ will not. Obscurity is also caused if,

when you intend to insert a number of details, you do not first make your

meaning clear; for instance, if you say, ‘I meant, after telling him this, that

and the other thing, to set out’, rather than something of this kind ‘I meant to

set out after telling him; then this, that, and the other thing occurred.’


6


The following suggestions will help to give your language impressiveness.

(1) Describe a thing instead of naming it: do not say ‘circle’, but ‘that surface

which extends equally from the middle every way’. To achieve conciseness,do the opposite-put the name instead of the description. When mentioning

anything ugly or unseemly, use its name if it is the description that is ugly,

and describe it if it is the name that is ugly. (2) Represent things with the help

of metaphors and epithets, being careful to avoid poetical effects. (3) Use

plural for singular, as in poetry, where one finds


  Unto havens Achaean,


  though only one haven is meant, and


Here are my letter’s many-leaved folds.


(4) Do not bracket two words under one article, but put one article with

each; e.g. ‘that wife of ours.’ The reverse to secure conciseness; e.g. ‘our

wife.’ Use plenty of connecting words; conversely, to secure conciseness,

dispense  with  connectives,  while  still  preserving  connexion;  e.g.  ‘having

gone  and  spoken’,  and  ‘having  gone,  I  spoke’,  respectively.  (6)  And  the

practice  of  Antimachus,  too,  is  useful-to  describe  a  thing  by  mentioning

attributes it does not possess; as he does in talking of Teumessus


  There is a little wind-swept knoll…


A subject can be developed indefinitely along these lines. You may apply

this  method  of  treatment  by  negation  either  to  good  or  to  bad  qualities,

according to which your subject requires. It is from this source that the poets

draw expressions such as the ‘stringless’ or ‘lyreless’ melody, thus forming

epithets out of negations. This device is popular in proportional metaphors, as

when the trumpet’s note is called ‘a lyreless melody’.


7


  Your language will be appropriate if it expresses emotion and character,

and if it corresponds to its subject. ‘Correspondence to subject’ means that

we must neither speak casually about weighty matters, nor solemnly about

trivial ones; nor must we add ornamental epithets to commonplace nouns, or

the effect will be comic, as in the works of Cleophon, who can use phrases as

absurd  as  ‘O  queenly  fig-tree’.  To  express  emotion,  you  will  employ  the

language of anger in speaking of outrage; the language of disgust and discreetreluctance to utter a word when speaking of impiety or foulness; the language

of exultation for a tale of glory, and that of humiliation for a tale of and so in

all other cases.

This aptness of language is one thing that makes people believe in the truth

of your story: their minds draw the false conclusion that you are to be trusted

from the fact that others behave as you do when things are as you describe

them; and therefore they take your story to be true, whether it is so or not.

Besides, an emotional speaker always makes his audience feel with him, even

when there is nothing in his arguments; which is why many speakers try to

overwhelm their audience by mere noise.

  Furthermore, this way of proving your story by displaying these signs of its

genuineness expresses your personal character. Each class of men, each type

of disposition, will have its own appropriate way of letting the truth appear.

Under ‘class’ I include differences of age, as boy, man, or old man; of sex, as

man or woman; of nationality, as Spartan or Thessalian. By ‘dispositions’ I

here mean those dispositions only which determine the character of a man’s

for it is not every disposition that does this. If, then, a speaker uses the very

words which are in keeping with a particular disposition, he will reproduce

the corresponding character; for a rustic and an educated man will not say the

same things nor speak in the same way. Again, some impression is made

upon  an  audience  by  a  device  which  speech-writers  employ  to  nauseous

excess,  when  they  say  ‘Who  does  not  know  this?’  or  ‘It  is  known  to

everybody.’ The hearer is ashamed of his ignorance, and agrees with the

speaker,  so  as  to  have  a  share  of  the  knowledge  that  everybody  else

possesses.

All the variations of oratorical style are capable of being used in season or

out of season. The best way to counteract any exaggeration is the well-worn

device  by  which  the  speaker  puts  in  some  criticism  of  himself;  for  then

people feel it must be all right for him to talk thus, since he certainly knows

what  he  is  doing.  Further,  it  is  better  not  to  have  everything  always  just

corresponding to everything else-your hearers will see through you less easily

thus. I mean for instance, if your words are harsh, you should not extend this

harshness to your voice and your countenance and have everything else in

keeping. If you do, the artificial character of each detail becomes apparent;

whereas if you adopt one device and not another, you are using art all the

same and yet nobody notices it. (To be sure, if mild sentiments are expressed

in harsh tones and harsh sentiments in mild tones, you become comparativelyunconvincing.) Compound words, fairly plentiful epithets, and strange words

best suit an emotional speech. We forgive an angry man for talking about a

wrong as ‘heaven-high’ or ‘colossal’; and we excuse such language when the

speaker has his hearers already in his hands and has stirred them deeply either

by praise or blame or anger or affection, as Isocrates, for instance, does at the

end of his Panegyric, with his ‘name and fame’ and ‘in that they brooked’.

Men do speak in this strain when they are deeply stirred, and so, once the

audience is in a like state of feeling, approval of course follows. This is why

such language is fitting in poetry, which is an inspired thing. This language,

then, should be used either under stress of emotion, or ironically, after the

manner of Gorgias and of the passages in the Phaedrus.


8


The form of a prose composition should be neither metrical nor destitute of

rhythm.  The  metrical  form  destroys  the  hearer’s  trust  by  its  artificial

appearance, and at the same time it diverts his attention, making him watch

for  metrical  recurrences,  just  as  children  catch  up  the  herald’s  question,

‘Whom  does  the  freedman  choose  as  his  advocate?’,  with  the  answer

‘Cleon!’ On the other hand, unrhythmical language is too unlimited; we do

not want the limitations of metre, but some limitation we must have, or the

effect  will  be  vague  and  unsatisfactory.  Now  it  is  number  that  limits  all

things; and it is the numerical limitation of the forms of a composition that

constitutes rhythm, of which metres are definite sections. Prose, then, is to be

rhythmical, but not metrical, or it will become not prose but verse. It should

not  even  have  too  precise  a  prose  rhythm,  and  therefore  should  only  be

rhythmical to a certain extent.

Of the various rhythms, the heroic has dignity, but lacks the tones of the

spoken language. The iambic is the very language of ordinary people, so that

in common talk iambic lines occur oftener than any others: but in a speech

we need dignity and the power of taking the hearer out of his ordinary self.

The trochee is too much akin to wild dancing: we can see this in tetrameter

verse, which is one of the trochaic rhythms.

  There  remains  the  paean,  which  speakers  began  to  use  in  the  time  of

Thrasymachus, though they had then no name to give it. The paean is a third

class of rhythm, closely akin to both the two already mentioned; it has in it

the ratio of three to two, whereas the other two kinds have the ratio of one toone, and two to one respectively. Between the two last ratios comes the ratio

of one-and-a-half to one, which is that of the paean.

Now  the  other  two  kinds  of  rhythm  must  be  rejected  in  writing  prose,

partly for the reasons given, and partly because they are too metrical; and the

paean must be adopted, since from this alone of the rhythms mentioned no

definite metre arises, and therefore it is the least obtrusive of them. At present

the  same  form  of  paean  is  employed  at  the  beginning  a  at  the  end  of

sentences, whereas the end should differ from the beginning. There are two

opposite  kinds  of  paean,  one  of  which  is  suitable  to  the  beginning  of  a

sentence, where it is indeed actually used; this is the kind that begins with a

long syllable and ends with three short ones, as


  Dalogenes | eite Luki | an,


and


  Chruseokom | a Ekate | pai Dios.


The other paean begins, conversely, with three short syllables and ends

with a long one, as


meta de lan | udata t ok | eanon e | oanise nux.


This kind of paean makes a real close: a short syllable can give no effect of

finality, and therefore makes the rhythm appear truncated. A sentence should

break off with the long syllable: the fact that it is over should be indicated not

by the scribe, or by his period-mark in the margin, but by the rhythm itself.

We have now seen that our language must be rhythmical and not destitute

of rhythm, and what rhythms, in what particular shape, make it so.


9


The language of prose must be either free-running, with its parts united by

nothing  except  the  connecting  words,  like  the  preludes  in  dithyrambs;  or

compact and antithetical, like the strophes of the old poets. The free-running

style is the ancient one, e.g. ‘Herein is set forth the inquiry of Herodotus the

Thurian.’ Every one used this method formerly; not many do so now. By

‘free-running’ style I mean the kind that has no natural stopping-places, andcomes to a stop only because there is no more to say of that subject. This

style is unsatisfying just because it goes on indefinitely-one always likes to

sight a stopping-place in front of one: it is only at the goal that men in a race

faint and collapse; while they see the end of the course before them, they can

keep on going. Such, then, is the free-running kind of style; the compact is

that which is in periods. By a period I mean a portion of speech that has in

itself a beginning and an end, being at the same time not too big to be taken

in at a glance. Language of this kind is satisfying and easy to follow. It is

satisfying,  because  it  is  just  the  reverse  of  indefinite;  and  moreover,  the

hearer  always  feels  that  he  is  grasping  something  and  has  reached  some

definite conclusion; whereas it is unsatisfactory to see nothing in front of you

and get nowhere. It is easy to follow, because it can easily be remembered;

and  this  because  language  when  in  periodic  form  can  be  numbered,  and

number is the easiest of all things to remember. That is why verse, which is

measured, is always more easily remembered than prose, which is not: the

measures  of  verse  can  be  numbered.  The  period  must,  further,  not  be

completed until the sense is complete: it must not be capable of breaking off

abruptly, as may happen with the following iambic lines of Sophocles—


  Calydon’s soil is this; of Pelops’ land

  (The smiling plains face us across the strait.)


By a wrong division of the words the hearer may take the meaning to be

the  reverse  of  what  it  is:  for  instance,  in  the  passage  quoted,  one  might

imagine that Calydon is in the Peloponnesus.

A Period may be either divided into several members or simple. The period

of several members is a portion of speech (1) complete in itself, (2) divided

into parts, and (3) easily delivered at a single breath-as a whole, that is; not

by fresh breath being taken at the division. A member is one of the two parts

of  such  a  period.  By  a  ‘simple’  period,  I  mean  that  which  has  only  one

member. The members, and the whole periods, should be neither curt nor

long. A member which is too short often makes the listener stumble; he is

still expecting the rhythm to go on to the limit his mind has fixed for it; and if

meanwhile he is pulled back by the speaker’s stopping, the shock is bound to

make him, so to speak, stumble. If, on the other hand, you go on too long,

you make him feel left behind, just as people who when walking pass beyond

the boundary before turning back leave their companions behind So too if aperiod is too long you turn it into a speech, or something like a dithyrambic

prelude. The result is much like the preludes that Democritus of Chios jeered

at Melanippides for writing instead of antistrophic stanzas—


He that sets traps for another man’s feet

Is like to fall into them first;

And long-winded preludes do harm to us all,

But the preluder catches it worst.


  Which applies likewise to long-membered orators. Periods whose members

are altogether too short are not periods at all; and the result is to bring the

hearer down with a crash.

The periodic style which is divided into members is of two kinds. It is

either  simply  divided,  as  in  ‘I  have  often  wondered  at  the  conveners  of

national gatherings and the founders of athletic contests’; or it is antithetical,

where, in each of the two members, one of one pair of opposites is put along

with one of another pair, or the same word is used to bracket two opposites,

as ‘They aided both parties-not only those who stayed behind but those who

accompanied them: for the latter they acquired new territory larger than that

at home, and to the former they left territory at home that was large enough’.

Here  the  contrasted  words  are  ‘staying  behind’  and  ‘accompanying’,

‘enough’ and ‘larger’. So in the example, ‘Both to those who want to get

property and to those who desire to enjoy it’ where ‘enjoyment’ is contrasted

with ‘getting’. Again, ‘it often happens in such enterprises that the wise men

fail  and  the  fools  succeed’;  ‘they  were  awarded  the  prize  of  valour

immediately, and won the command of the sea not long afterwards’; ‘to sail

through the mainland and march through the sea, by bridging the Hellespont

and cutting through Athos’; ‘nature gave them their country and law took it

away again’; ‘of them perished in misery, others were saved in disgrace’;

‘Athenian citizens keep foreigners in their houses as servants, while the city

of Athens allows her allies by thousands to live as the foreigner’s slaves’; and

‘to possess in life or to bequeath at death’. There is also what some one said

about Peitholaus and Lycophron in a law-court, ‘These men used to sell you

when they were at home, and now they have come to you here and bought

you’. All these passages have the structure described above. Such a form of

speech is satisfying, because the significance of contrasted ideas is easily felt,

especially when they are thus put side by side, and also because it has theeffect of a logical argument; it is by putting two opposing conclusions side by

side that you prove one of them false.

  Such, then, is the nature of antithesis. Parisosis is making the two members

of a period equal in length. Paromoeosis is making the extreme words of both

members like each other. This must happen either at the beginning or at the

end of each member. If at the beginning, the resemblance must always be

between whole words; at the end, between final syllables or inflexions of the

same word or the same word repeated. Thus, at the beginning


  agron gar elaben arlon par’ autou


and


  dorhetoi t epelonto pararretoi t epeessin


At the end


  ouk wethesan auton paidion tetokenai,

all autou aitlon lelonenai,


and


en pleiotals de opontisi kai en elachistais elpisin


An example of inflexions of the same word is


  axios de staoenai chalkous ouk axios on chalkou;


Of the same word repeated,


su d’ auton kai zonta eleges kakos kai nun grafeis kakos.


Of one syllable,


ti d’ an epaoes deinon, ei andrh’ eides arhgon;


It is possible for the same sentence to have all these features together-

antithesis, parison, and homoeoteleuton. (The possible beginnings of periods

have been pretty fully enumerated in the Theodectea.) There are also spuriousantitheses, like that of Epicharmus—


  There one time I as their guest did stay,

And they were my hosts on another day.


10


We  may  now  consider  the  above  points  settled,  and  pass  on  to  say

something about the way to devise lively and taking sayings. Their actual

invention  can  only  come  through  natural  talent  or  long  practice;  but  this

treatise  may  indicate  the  way  it  is  done.  We  may  deal  with  them  by

enumerating the different kinds of them. We will begin by remarking that we

all naturally find it agreeable to get hold of new ideas easily: words express

ideas, and therefore those words are the most agreeable that enable us to get

hold  of  new  ideas.  Now  strange  words  simply  puzzle  us;  ordinary  words

convey only what we know already; it is from metaphor that we can best get

hold of something fresh. When the poet calls ‘old age a withered stalk’, he

conveys a new idea, a new fact, to us by means of the general notion of

bloom, which is common to both things. The similes of the poets do the

same, and therefore, if they are good similes, give an effect of brilliance. The

simile, as has been said before, is a metaphor, differing from it only in the

way it is put; and just because it is longer it is less attractive. Besides, it does

not say outright that ‘this’ is ‘that’, and therefore the hearer is less interested

in  the  idea.  We  see,  then,  that  both  speech  and  reasoning  are  lively  in

proportion as they make us seize a new idea promptly. For this reason people

are not much taken either by obvious arguments (using the word ‘obvious’ to

mean what is plain to everybody and needs no investigation), nor by those

which puzzle us when we hear them stated, but only by those which convey

their information to us as soon as we hear them, provided we had not the

information already; or which the mind only just fails to keep up with. These

two kinds do convey to us a sort of information: but the obvious and the

obscure kinds convey nothing, either at once or later on. It is these qualities,

then,  that,  so  far  as  the  meaning  of  what  is  said  is  concerned,  make  an

argument acceptable. So far as the style is concerned, it is the antithetical

form that appeals to us, e.g. ‘judging that the peace common to all the rest

was  a  war  upon  their  own  private  interests’,  where  there  is  an  antithesis

between war and peace. It is also good to use metaphorical words; but themetaphors must not be far-fetched, or they will be difficult to grasp, nor

obvious, or they will have no effect. The words, too, ought to set the scene

before  our  eyes;  for  events  ought  to  be  seen  in  progress  rather  than  in

prospect. So we must aim at these three points: Antithesis, Metaphor, and

Actuality.

Of the four kinds of Metaphor the most taking is the proportional kind.

Thus Pericles, for instance, said that the vanishing from their country of the

young men who had fallen in the war was ‘as if the spring were taken out of

the year’. Leptines, speaking of the Lacedaemonians, said that he would not

have the Athenians let Greece ‘lose one of her two eyes’. When Chares was

pressing  for  leave  to  be  examined  upon  his  share  in  the  Olynthiac  war,

Cephisodotus was indignant, saying that he wanted his examination to take

place ‘while he had his fingers upon the people’s throat’. The same speaker

once urged the Athenians to march to Euboea, ‘with Miltiades’ decree as

their rations’. Iphicrates, indignant at the truce made by the Athenians with

Epidaurus  and  the  neighbouring  sea-board,  said  that  they  had  stripped

themselves of their travelling money for the journey of war. Peitholaus called

the  state-galley  ‘the  people’s  big  stick’,  and  Sestos  ‘the  corn-bin  of  the

Peiraeus’. Pericles bade his countrymen remove Aegina, ‘that eyesore of the

Peiraeus.’ And Moerocles said he was no more a rascal than was a certain

respectable citizen he named, ‘whose rascality was worth over thirty per cent

per annum to him, instead of a mere ten like his own’.There is also the iambic

line of Anaxandrides about the way his daughters put off marrying—


My daughters’ marriage-bonds are overdue.


  Polyeuctus said of a paralytic man named Speusippus that he could not

keep  quiet,  ‘though  fortune  had  fastened  him  in  the  pillory  of  disease’.

Cephisodotus called warships ‘painted millstones’. Diogenes the Dog called

taverns  ‘the  mess-rooms  of  Attica’.  Aesion  said  that  the  Athenians  had

‘emptied’ their town into Sicily: this is a graphic metaphor. ‘Till all Hellas

shouted aloud’ may be regarded as a metaphor, and a graphic one again.

Cephisodotus bade the Athenians take care not to hold too many ‘parades’.

Isocrates used the same word of those who ‘parade at the national festivals.’

Another  example  occurs  in  the  Funeral  Speech:  ‘It  is  fitting  that  Greece

should cut off her hair beside the tomb of those who fell at Salamis, since her

freedom and their valour are buried in the same grave.’ Even if the speakerhere had only said that it was right to weep when valour was being buried in

their  grave,  it  would  have  been  a  metaphor,  and  a  graphic  one;  but  the

coupling of ‘their valour’ and ‘her freedom’ presents a kind of antithesis as

well. ‘The course of my words’, said Iphicrates, ‘lies straight through the

middle of Chares’ deeds’: this is a proportional metaphor, and the phrase

‘straight through the middle’ makes it graphic. The expression ‘to call in one

danger  to  rescue  us  from  another’  is  a  graphic  metaphor.  Lycoleon  said,

defending Chabrias, ‘They did not respect even that bronze statue of his that

intercedes for him yonder’.This was a metaphor for the moment, though it

would not always apply; a vivid metaphor, however; Chabrias is in danger,

and his statue intercedes for him-that lifeless yet living thing which records

his services to his country. ‘Practising in every way littleness of mind’ is

metaphorical, for practising a quality implies increasing it. So is ‘God kindled

our reason to be a lamp within our soul’, for both reason and light reveal

things. So is ‘we are not putting an end to our wars, but only postponing

them’, for both literal postponement and the making of such a peace as this

apply to future action. So is such a saying as ‘This treaty is a far nobler

trophy than those we set up on fields of battle; they celebrate small gains and

single successes; it celebrates our triumph in the war as a whole’; for both

trophy  and  treaty  are  signs  of  victory.  So  is  ‘A  country  pays  a  heavy

reckoning  in  being  condemned  by  the  judgement  of  mankind’,  for  a

reckoning is damage deservedly incurred.


11


It  has  already  been  mentioned  that  liveliness  is  got  by  using  the

proportional type of metaphor and being making (ie. making your hearers see

things). We have still to explain what we mean by their ‘seeing things’, and

what must be done to effect this. By ‘making them see things’ I mean using

expressions that represent things as in a state of activity. Thus, to say that a

good man is ‘four-square’ is certainly a metaphor; both the good man and the

square are perfect; but the metaphor does not suggest activity. On the other

hand, in the expression ‘with his vigour in full bloom’ there is a notion of

activity; and so in ‘But you must roam as free as a sacred victim’; and in


  Thereas up sprang the Hellenes to their feet,  where ‘up sprang’ gives us activity as well as metaphor, for it at once

suggests  swiftness.  So  with  Homer’s  common  practice  of  giving

metaphorical life to lifeless things: all such passages are distinguished by the

effect of activity they convey. Thus,


  Downward anon to the valley rebounded the boulder remorseless;


and


The (bitter) arrow flew;


and


  Flying on eagerly;


and


  Stuck in the earth, still panting to feed on the flesh of the heroes;


and


And the point of the spear in its fury drove

full through his breastbone.


In all these examples the things have the effect of being active because

they are made into living beings; shameless behaviour and fury and so on are

all forms of activity. And the poet has attached these ideas to the things by

means  of  proportional  metaphors:  as  the  stone  is  to  Sisyphus,  so  is  the

shameless man to his victim. In his famous similes, too, he treats inanimate

things in the same way:


  Curving and crested with white, host following

  host without ceasing.


Here  he  represents  everything  as  moving  and  living;  and  activity  is

movement.

  Metaphors must be drawn, as has been said already, from things that are

related  to  the  original  thing,  and  yet  not  obviously  so  related-just  as  in

philosophy also an acute mind will perceive resemblances even in things farapart. Thus Archytas said that an arbitrator and an altar were the same, since

the injured fly to both for refuge. Or you might say that an anchor and an

overhead hook were the same, since both are in a way the same, only the one

secures things from below and the other from above. And to speak of states

as  ‘levelled’  is  to  identify  two  widely  different  things,  the  equality  of  a

physical surface and the equality of political powers.

  Liveliness is specially conveyed by metaphor, and by the further power of

surprising the hearer; because the hearer expected something different, his

acquisition of the new idea impresses him all the more. His mind seems to

say, ‘Yes, to be sure; I never thought of that’. The liveliness of epigrammatic

remarks is due to the meaning not being just what the words say: as in the

saying  of  Stesichorus  that  ‘the  cicalas  will  chirp  to  themselves  on  the

ground’. Well-constructed riddles are attractive for the same reason; a new

idea  is  conveyed,  and  there  is  metaphorical  expression.  So  with  the

‘novelties’ of Theodorus. In these the thought is startling, and, as Theodorus

puts it, does not fit in with the ideas you already have. They are like the

burlesque words that one finds in the comic writers. The effect is produced

even by jokes depending upon changes of the letters of a word; this too is a

surprise. You find this in verse as well as in prose. The word which comes is

not what the hearer imagined: thus


  Onward he came, and his feet were shod with his-chilblains,


  where one imagined the word would be ‘sandals’. But the point should be

clear the moment the words are uttered. Jokes made by altering the letters of

a word consist in meaning, not just what you say, but something that gives a

twist to the word used; e.g. the remark of Theodorus about Nicon the harpist

Thratt’ ei su (’you Thracian slavey’), where he pretends to mean Thratteis su

(’you harpplayer’), and surprises us when we find he means something else.

So you enjoy the point when you see it, though the remark will fall flat unless

you are aware that Nicon is Thracian. Or again: Boulei auton persai. In both

these  cases  the  saying  must  fit  the  facts.  This  is  also  true  of  such  lively

remarks as the one to the effect that to the Athenians their empire (arche) of

the sea was not the beginning (arche) of their troubles, since they gained by

it.  Or  the  opposite  one  of  Isocrates,  that  their  empire  (arche)  was  the

beginning (arche) of their troubles. Either way, the speaker says something

unexpected, the soundness of which is thereupon recognized. There would benothing clever is saying ‘empire is empire’. Isocrates means more than that,

and uses the word with a new meaning. So too with the former saying, which

denies that arche in one sense was arche in another sense. In all these jokes,

whether a word is used in a second sense or metaphorically, the joke is good

if it fits the facts. For instance, Anaschetos (proper name) ouk anaschetos:

where you say that what is so-and-so in one sense is not so-and-so in another;

well, if the man is unpleasant, the joke fits the facts. Again, take—


  Thou must not be a stranger stranger than Thou should’st.


Do  not  the  words  ‘thou  must  not  be’,  &c.,  amount  to  saying  that  the

stranger must not always be strange? Here again is the use of one word in

different  senses.  Of  the  same  kind  also  is  the  much-praised  verse  of

Anaxandrides:


  Death is most fit before you do

Deeds that would make death fit for you.


This amounts to saying ‘it is a fit thing to die when you are not fit to die’,

or ‘it is a fit thing to die when death is not fit for you’, i.e. when death is not

the fit return for what you are doing. The type of language employed-is the

same  in  all  these  examples;  but  the  more  briefly  and  antithetically  such

sayings can be expressed, the more taking they are, for antithesis impresses

the new idea more firmly and brevity more quickly. They should always have

either some personal application or some merit of expression, if they are to be

true  without  being  commonplace-two  requirements  not  always  satisfied

simultaneously. Thus ‘a man should die having done no wrong’ is true but

dull: ‘the right man should marry the right woman’ is also true but dull. No,

there must be both good qualities together, as in ‘it is fitting to die when you

are not fit for death’. The more a saying has these qualitis, the livelier it

appears: if, for instance, its wording is metaphorical, metaphorical in the right

way,  antithetical,  and  balanced,  and  at  the  same  time  it  gives  an  idea  of

activity.

  Successful similes also, as has been said above, are in a sense metaphors,

since they always involve two relations like the proportional metaphor. Thus:

a shield, we say, is the ‘drinking-bowl of Ares’, and a bow is the ‘chordless

lyre’. This way of putting a metaphor is not ‘simple’, as it would be if we

called the bow a lyre or the shield a drinking-bowl. There are ‘simple’ similesalso: we may say that a flute-player is like a monkey, or that a short-sighted

man’s eyes are like a lamp-flame with water dropping on it, since both eyes

and  flame  keep  winking.  A  simile  succeeds  best  when  it  is  a  converted

metaphor, for it is possible to say that a shield is like the drinking-bowl of

Ares, or that a ruin is like a house in rags, and to say that Niceratus is like a

Philoctetes stung by Pratys-the simile made by Thrasyniachus when he saw

Niceratus, who had been beaten by Pratys in a recitation competition, still

going about unkempt and unwashed. It is in these respects that poets fail

worst when they fail, and succeed best when they succeed, i.e. when they

give the resemblance pat, as in


  Those legs of his curl just like parsley leaves;


and


Just like Philammon struggling with his punchball.


  These are all similes; and that similes are metaphors has been stated often

already.

  Proverbs, again, are metaphors from one species to another. Suppose, for

instance, a man to start some undertaking in hope of gain and then to lose by

it later on, ‘Here we have once more the man of Carpathus and his hare’, says

he. For both alike went through the said experience.

It has now been explained fairly completely how liveliness is secured and

why it has the effect it has. Successful hyperboles are also metaphors, e.g. the

one about the man with a black eye, ‘you would have thought he was a basket

of mulberries’; here the ‘black eye’ is compared to a mulberry because of its

colour, the exaggeration lying in the quantity of mulberries suggested. The

phrase ‘like so-and-so’ may introduce a hyperbole under the form of a simile.

Thus


Just like Philammon struggling with his punchball


is equivalent to ‘you would have thought he was Philammon struggling

with his punchball’; and


  Those legs of his curl just like parsley leavesis equivalent to ‘his legs are so curly that you would have thought they

were not legs but parsley leaves’. Hyperboles are for young men to use; they

show vehemence of character; and this is why angry people use them more

than other people.


  Not though he gave me as much as the dust

or the sands of the sea…

But her, the daughter of Atreus’ son, I never will marry,

  Nay, not though she were fairer than Aphrodite the Golden,

  Defter of hand than Athene…


  (The  Attic  orators  are  particularly  fond  of  this  method  of  speech.)

Consequently it does not suit an elderly speaker.


12


It should be observed that each kind of rhetoric has its own appropriate

style. The style of written prose is not that of spoken oratory, nor are those of

political and forensic speaking the same. Both written and spoken have to be

known. To know the latter is to know how to speak good Greek. To know the

former means that you are not obliged, as otherwise you are, to hold your

tongue when you wish to communicate something to the general public.

The written style is the more finished: the spoken better admits of dramatic

delivery-like  the  kind  of  oratory  that  reflects  character  and  the  kind  that

reflects emotion. Hence actors look out for plays written in the latter style,

and poets for actors competent to act in such plays. Yet poets whose plays are

meant to be read are read and circulated: Chaeremon, for instance, who is as

finished  as  a  professional  speech-writer;  and  Licymnius  among  the

dithyrambic  poets.  Compared  with  those  of  others,  the  speeches  of

professional writers sound thin in actual contests. Those of the orators, on the

other hand, are good to hear spoken, but look amateurish enough when they

pass into the hands of a reader. This is just because they are so well suited for

an actual tussle, and therefore contain many dramatic touches, which, being

robbed  of  all  dramatic  rendering,  fail  to  do  their  own  proper  work,  and

consequently  look  silly.  Thus  strings  of  unconnected  words,  and  constant

repetitions of words and phrases, are very properly condemned in written

speeches: but not in spoken speeches-speakers use them freely, for they havea dramatic effect. In this repetition there must be variety of tone, paving the

way, as it were, to dramatic effect; e.g. ‘This is the villain among you who

deceived you, who cheated you, who meant to betray you completely’. This

is the sort of thing that Philemon the actor used to do in the Old Men’s

Madness of Anaxandrides whenever he spoke the words ‘Rhadamanthus and

Palamedes’, and also in the prologue to the Saints whenever he pronounced

the pronoun ‘I’. If one does not deliver such things cleverly, it becomes a

case of ‘the man who swallowed a poker’. So too with strings of unconnected

words, e.g.’I came to him; I met him; I besought him’. Such passages must be

acted, not delivered with the same quality and pitch of voice, as though they

had only one idea in them. They have the further peculiarity of suggesting

that a number of separate statements have been made in the time usually

occupied by one. Just as the use of conjunctions makes many statements into

a single one, so the omission of conjunctions acts in the reverse way and

makes a single one into many. It thus makes everything more important: e.g.

‘I came to him; I talked to him; I entreated him’-what a lot of facts! the hearer

thinks-’he  paid  no  attention  to  anything  I  said’.  This  is  the  effect  which

Homer seeks when he writes,


  Nireus likewise from Syme (three well-fashioned ships did bring),

  Nireus, the son of Aglaia (and Charopus, bright-faced king),

  Nireus, the comeliest man (of all that to Ilium’s strand).


If many things are said about a man, his name must be mentioned many

times; and therefore people think that, if his name is mentioned many times,

many things have been said about him. So that Homer, by means of this

illusion, has made a great deal of though he has mentioned him only in this

one passage, and has preserved his memory, though he nowhere says a word

about him afterwards.

Now the style of oratory addressed to public assemblies is really just like

scene-painting. The bigger the throng, the more distant is the point of view:

so that, in the one and the other, high finish in detail is superfluous and seems

better away. The forensic style is more highly finished; still more so is the

style of language addressed to a single judge, with whom there is very little

room for rhetorical artifices, since he can take the whole thing in better, and

judge of what is to the point and what is not; the struggle is less intense and

so  the  judgement  is  undisturbed.  This  is  why  the  same  speakers  do  notdistinguish themselves in all these branches at once; high finish is wanted

least where dramatic delivery is wanted most, and here the speaker must have

a good voice, and above all, a strong one. It is ceremonial oratory that is most

literary, for it is meant to be read; and next to it forensic oratory.

To  analyse  style  still  further,  and  add  that  it  must  be  agreeable  or

magnificent, is useless; for why should it have these traits any more than

‘restraint’,  ‘liberality’,  or  any  other  moral  excellence?  Obviously

agreeableness will be produced by the qualities already mentioned, if our

definition  of  excellence  of  style  has  been  correct.  For  what  other  reason

should style be ‘clear’, and ‘not mean’ but ‘appropriate’? If it is prolix, it is

not clear; nor yet if it is curt. Plainly the middle way suits best. Again, style

will  be  made  agreeable  by  the  elements  mentioned,  namely  by  a  good

blending  of  ordinary  and  unusual  words,  by  the  rhythm,  and  by-the

persuasiveness that springs from appropriateness.

This concludes our discussion of style, both in its general aspects and in its

special applications to the various branches of rhetoric. We have now to deal

with Arrangement.


13


A speech has two parts. You must state your case, and you must prove it.

You cannot either state your case and omit to prove it, or prove it without

having first stated it; since any proof must be a proof of something, and the

only use of a preliminary statement is the proof that follows it. Of these two

parts the first part is called the Statement of the case, the second part the

Argument, just as we distinguish between Enunciation and Demonstration.

The current division is absurd. For ‘narration’ surely is part of a forensic

speech only: how in a political speech or a speech of display can there be

‘narration’ in the technical sense? or a reply to a forensic opponent? or an

epilogue in closely-reasoned speeches? Again, introduction, comparison of

conflicting arguments, and recapitulation are only found in political speeches

when there is a struggle between two policies. They may occur then; so may

even accusation and defence, often enough; but they form no essential part of

a political speech. Even forensic speeches do not always need epilogues; not,

for instance, a short speech, nor one in which the facts are easy to remember,

the effect of an epilogue being always a reduction in the apparent length. It

follows, then, that the only necessary parts of a speech are the Statement andthe Argument. These are the essential features of a speech; and it cannot in

any case have more than Introduction, Statement, Argument, and Epilogue.

‘Refutation of the Opponent’ is part of the arguments: so is ‘Comparison’ of

the opponent’s case with your own, for that process is a magnifying of your

own case and therefore a part of the arguments, since one who does this

proves  something.  The  Introduction  does  nothing  like  this;  nor  does  the

Epilogue-it merely reminds us of what has been said already. If we make

such  distinctions  we  shall  end,  like  Theodorus  and  his  followers,  by

distinguishing  ‘narration’  proper  from  ‘post-narration’  and  ‘pre-narration’,

and ‘refutation’ from ‘final refutation’. But we ought only to bring in a new

name if it indicates a real species with distinct specific qualities; otherwise

the practice is pointless and silly, like the way Licymnius invented names in

his Art of Rhetoric-’Secundation’, ‘Divagation’, ‘Ramification’.


14


The  Introduction  is  the  beginning  of  a  speech,  corresponding  to  the

prologue in poetry and the prelude in flute-music; they are all beginnings,

paving  the  way,  as  it  were,  for  what  is  to  follow.  The  musical  prelude

resembles the introduction to speeches of display; as flute players play first

some brilliant passage they know well and then fit it on to the opening notes

of the piece itself, so in speeches of display the writer should proceed in the

same way; he should begin with what best takes his fancy, and then strike up

his theme and lead into it; which is indeed what is always done. (Take as an

example  the  introduction  to  the  Helen  of  Isocrates-there  is  nothing  in

common between the ‘eristics’ and Helen.) And here, even if you travel far

from your subject, it is fitting, rather than that there should be sameness in

the entire speech.

The usual subject for the introductions to speeches of display is some piece

of  praise  or  censure.  Thus  Gorgias  writes  in  his  Olympic  Speech,  ‘You

deserve  widespread  admiration,  men  of  Greece’,  praising  thus  those  who

start,ed the festival gatherings.’ Isocrates, on the other hand, censures them

for awarding distinctions to fine athletes but giving no prize for intellectual

ability. Or one may begin with a piece of advice, thus: ‘We ought to honour

good men and so I myself am praising Aristeides’ or ‘We ought to honour

those who are unpopular but not bad men, men whose good qualities have

never  been  noticed,  like  Alexander  son  of  Priam.’  Here  the  orator  givesadvice. Or we may begin as speakers do in the law-courts; that is to say, with

appeals  to  the  audience  to  excuse  us  if  our  speech  is  about  something

paradoxical, difficult, or hackneyed; like Choerilus in the lines—


But now when allotment of all has been made…


  Introductions to speeches of display, then, may be composed of some piece

of praise or censure, of advice to do or not to do something, or of appeals to

the  audience;  and  you  must  choose  between  making  these  preliminary

passages connected or disconnected with the speech itself.

  Introductions  to  forensic  speeches,  it  must  be  observed,  have  the  same

value as the prologues of dramas and the introductions to epic poems; the

dithyrambic prelude resembling the introduction to a speech of display, as


For thee, and thy gilts, and thy battle-spoils… .


In prologues, and in epic poetry, a foretaste of the theme is given, intended

to  inform  the  hearers  of  it  in  advance  instead  of  keeping  their  minds  in

suspense.  Anything  vague  puzzles  them:  so  give  them  a  grasp  of  the

beginning, and they can hold fast to it and follow the argument. So we find—


Sing, O goddess of song, of the Wrath…

  Tell me, O Muse, of the hero…

Lead me to tell a new tale, how there came great warfare to Europe

  Out of the Asian land…


The tragic poets, too, let us know the pivot of their play; if not at the outset

like Euripides, at least somewhere in the preface to a speech like Sophocles—


  Polybus was my father… ;


and so in Comedy. This, then, is the most essential function and distinctive

property  of  the  introduction,  to  show  what  the  aim  of  the  speech  is;  and

therefore no introduction ought to be employed where the subject is not long

or intricate.

The other kinds of introduction employed are remedial in purpose, and

may be used in any type of speech. They are concerned with the speaker, the

hearer,  the  subject,  or  the  speaker’s  opponent.  Those  concerned  with  thespeaker himself or with his opponent are directed to removing or exciting

prejudice. But whereas the defendant will begin by dealing with this sort of

thing, the prosecutor will take quite another line and deal with such matters in

the closing part of his speech. The reason for this is not far to seek. The

defendant, when he is going to bring himself on the stage, must clear away

any  obstacles,  and  therefore  must  begin  by  removing  any  prejudice  felt

against him. But if you are to excite prejudice, you must do so at the close, so

that the judges may more easily remember what you have said.

The appeal to the hearer aims at securing his goodwill, or at arousing his

resentment, or sometimes at gaining his serious attention to the case, or even

at distracting it-for gaining it is not always an advantage, and speakers will

often for that reason try to make him laugh.

You may use any means you choose to make your hearer receptive; among

others, giving him a good impression of your character, which always helps

to secure his attention. He will be ready to attend to anything that touches

himself and to anything that is important, surprising, or agreeable; and you

should accordingly convey to him the impression that what you have to say is

of this nature. If you wish to distract his attention, you should imply that the

subject does not affect him, or is trivial or disagreeable. But observe, all this

has nothing to do with the speech itself. It merely has to do with the weak-

minded tendency of the hearer to listen to what is beside the point. Where this

tendency is absent, no introduction wanted beyond a summary statement of

your  subject,  to  put  a  sort  of  head  on  the  main  body  of  your  speech.

Moreover, calls for attention, when required, may come equally well in any

part  of  a  speech;  in  fact,  the  beginning  of  it  is  just  where  there  is  least

slackness of interest; it is therefore ridiculous to put this kind of thing at the

beginning, when every one is listening with most attention. Choose therefore

any point in the speech where such an appeal is needed, and then say ‘Now I

beg you to note this point-it concerns you quite as much as myself’; or


I will tell you that whose like you have never yet


  heard for terror, or for wonder. This is what Prodicus called ‘slipping in a

bit of the fifty-drachma show-lecture for the audience whenever they began

to nod’. It is plain that such introductions are addressed not to ideal hearers,

but to hearers as we find them. The use of introductions to excite prejudice or

to dispel misgivings is universal—My lord, I will not say that eagerly…


or


Why all this preface?


  Introductions are popular with those whose case is weak, or looks weak; it

pays them to dwell on anything rather than the actual facts of it. That is why

slaves, instead of answering the questions put to them, make indirect replies

with long preambles. The means of exciting in your hearers goodwill and

various other feelings of the same kind have already been described. The poet

finely  says  May  I  find  in  Phaeacian  hearts,  at  my  coming,  goodwill  and

compassion; and these are the two things we should aim at. In speeches of

display we must make the hearer feel that the eulogy includes either himself

or his family or his way of life or something or other of the kind. For it is

true, as Socrates says in the Funeral Speech, that ‘the difficulty is not to

praise the Athenians at Athens but at Sparta’.

The  introductions  of  political  oratory  will  be  made  out  of  the  same

materials as those of the forensic kind, though the nature of political oratory

makes them very rare. The subject is known already, and therefore the facts

of the case need no introduction; but you may have to say something on

account of yourself or to your opponents; or those present may be inclined to

treat the matter either more or less seriously than you wish them to. You may

accordingly have to excite or dispel some prejudice, or to make the matter

under discussion seem more or less important than before: for either of which

purposes  you  will  want  an  introduction.  You  may  also  want  one  to  add

elegance to your remarks, feeling that otherwise they will have a casual air,

like  Gorgias’  eulogy  of  the  Eleans,  in  which,  without  any  preliminary

sparring or fencing, he begins straight off with ‘Happy city of Elis!’


15


In dealing with prejudice, one class of argument is that whereby you can

dispel  objectionable  suppositions  about  yourself.  It  makes  no  practical

difference whether such a supposition has been put into words or not, so that

this distinction may be ignored. Another way is to meet any of the issues

directly: to deny the alleged fact; or to say that you have done no harm, ornone  to  him,  or  not  as  much  as  he  says;  or  that  you  have  done  him  no

injustice, or not much; or that you have done nothing disgraceful, or nothing

disgraceful enough to matter: these are the sort of questions on which the

dispute hinges. Thus Iphicrates replying to Nausicrates, admitted that he had

done the deed alleged, and that he had done Nausicrates harm, but not that he

had done him wrong. Or you may admit the wrong, but balance it with other

facts, and say that, if the deed harmed him, at any rate it was honourable; or

that, if it gave him pain, at least it did him good; or something else like that.

Another way is to allege that your action was due to mistake, or bad luck, or

necessity as Sophocles said he was not trembling, as his traducer maintained,

in order to make people think him an old man, but because he could not help

it; he would rather not be eighty years old. You may balance your motive

against your actual deed; saying, for instance, that you did not mean to injure

him but to do so-and-so; that you did not do what you are falsely charged

with  doing-the  damage  was  accidental-’I  should  indeed  be  a  detestable

person if I had deliberately intended this result.’ Another way is open when

your calumniator, or any of his connexions, is or has been subject to the same

grounds  for  suspicion.  Yet  another,  when  others  are  subject  to  the  same

grounds for suspicion but are admitted to be in fact innocent of the charge:

e.g. ‘Must I be a profligate because I am well-groomed? Then so-and-so must

be one too.’ Another, if other people have been calumniated by the same man

or some one else, or, without being calumniated, have been suspected, like

yourself now, and yet have been proved innocent. Another way is to return

calumny for calumny and say, ‘It is monstrous to trust the man’s statements

when you cannot trust the man himself.’ Another is when the question has

been already decided. So with Euripides’ reply to Hygiaenon, who, in the

action  for  an  exchange  of  properties,  accused  him  of  impiety  in  having

written a line encouraging perjury—


My tongue hath sworn: no oath is on my soul.


  Euripides said that his opponent himself was guilty in bringing into the

law-courts cases whose decision belonged to the Dionysiac contests. ‘If I

have not already answered for my words there, I am ready to do so if you

choose  to  prosecute  me  there.’  Another  method  is  to  denounce  calumny,

showing what an enormity it is, and in particular that it raises false issues,

and that it means a lack of confidence in the merits of his case. The argumentfrom evidential circumstances is available for both parties: thus in the Teucer

Odysseus  says  that  Teucer  is  closely  bound  to  Priam,  since  his  mother

Hesione  was  Priam’s  sister.  Teucer  replies  that  Telamon  his  father  was

Priam’s enemy, and that he himself did not betray the spies to Priam. Another

method, suitable for the calumniator, is to praise some trifling merit at great

length, and then attack some important failing concisely; or after mentioning

a number of good qualities to attack one bad one that really bears on the

question.  This  is  the  method  of  thoroughly  skilful  and  unscrupulous

prosecutors. By mixing up the man’s merits with what is bad, they do their

best to make use of them to damage him.

  There is another method open to both calumniator and apologist. Since a

given  action  can  be  done  from  many  motives,  the  former  must  try  to

disparage it by selecting the worse motive of two, the latter to put the better

construction on it. Thus one might argue that Diomedes chose Odysseus as

his companion because he supposed Odysseus to be the best man for the

purpose; and you might reply to this that it was, on the contrary, because he

was the only hero so worthless that Diomedes need not fear his rivalry.


16


We may now pass from the subject of calumny to that of Narration.

  Narration in ceremonial oratory is not continuous but intermittent. There

must, of course, be some survey of the actions that form the subject-matter of

the speech. The speech is a composition containing two parts. One of these is

not provided by the orator’s art, viz. the actions themselves, of which the

orator is in no sense author. The other part is provided by his namely, the

proof (where proof is needed) that the actions were done, the description of

their quality or of their extent, or even all these three things together. Now the

reason  why  sometimes  it  is  not  desirable  to  make  the  whole  narrative

continuous is that the case thus expounded is hard to keep in mind. Show,

therefore, from one set of facts that your hero is, e.g. brave, and from other

sets of facts that he is able, just, &c. A speech thus arranged is comparatively

simple, instead of being complicated and elaborate. You will have to recall

well-known  deeds  among  others;  and  because  they  are  well-known,  the

hearer usually needs no narration of them; none, for instance, if your object is

the praise of Achilles; we all know the facts of his life-what you have to do is

to apply those facts. But if your object is the praise of Critias, you mustnarrate his deeds, which not many people know of…

  Nowadays it is said, absurdly enough, that the narration should be rapid.

Remember what the man said to the baker who asked whether he was to

make the cake hard or soft: ‘What, can’t you make it right?’ Just so here. We

are not to make long narrations, just as we are not to make long introductions

or long arguments. Here, again, rightness does not consist either in rapidity or

in conciseness, but in the happy mean; that is, in saying just so much as will

make the facts plain, or will lead the hearer to believe that the thing has

happened, or that the man has caused injury or wrong to some one, or that the

facts are really as important as you wish them to be thought: or the opposite

facts to establish the opposite arguments.

You may also narrate as you go anything that does credit to yourself, e.g. ‘I

kept telling him to do his duty and not abandon his children’; or discredit to

your  adversary,  e.g.  ‘But  he  answered  me  that,  wherever  he  might  find

himself, there he would find other children’, the answer Herodotus’ records

of the Egyptian mutineers. Slip in anything else that the judges will enjoy.

The defendant will make less of the narration. He has to maintain that the

thing has not happened, or did no harm, or was not unjust, or not so bad as is

alleged. He must therefor snot waste time about what is admitted fact, unless

this bears on his own contention; e.g. that the thing was done, but was not

wrong. Further, we must speak of events as past and gone, except where they

excite pity or indignation by being represented as present. The Story told to

Alcinous is an example of a brief chronicle, when it is repeated to Penelope

in sixty lines. Another instance is the Epic Cycle as treated by Phayllus, and

the prologue to the Oeneus.

The narration should depict character; to which end you must know what

makes it do so. One such thing is the indication of moral purpose; the quality

of purpose indicated determines the quality of character depicted and is itself

determined by the end pursued. Thus it is that mathematical discourses depict

no character; they have nothing to do with moral purpose, for they represent

nobody as pursuing any end. On the other hand, the Socratic dialogues do

depict character, being concerned with moral questions. This end will also be

gained by describing the manifestations of various types of character, e.g. ‘he

kept walking along as he talked’, which shows the man’s recklessness and

rough manners. Do not let your words seem inspired so much by intelligence,

in the manner now current, as by moral purpose: e.g. ‘I willed this; aye, it

was my moral purpose; true, I gained nothing by it, still it is better thus.’ Forthe other way shows good sense, but this shows good character; good sense

making us go after what is useful, and good character after what is noble.

Where any detail may appear incredible, then add the cause of it; of this

Sophocles provides an example in the Antigone, where Antigone says she

had cared more for her brother than for husband or children, since if the latter

perished they might be replaced,


But since my father and mother in their graves

Lie dead, no brother can be born to me.


If you have no such cause to suggest, just say that you are aware that no

one will believe your words, but the fact remains that such is our nature,

however hard the world may find it to believe that a man deliberately does

anything except what pays him.

  Again,  you  must  make  use  of  the  emotions.  Relate  the  familiar

manifestations  of  them,  and  those  that  distinguish  yourself  and  your

opponent;  for  instance,  ‘he  went  away  scowling  at  me’.  So  Aeschines

described Cratylus as ‘hissing with fury and shaking his fists’. These details

carry conviction: the audience take the truth of what they know as so much

evidence for the truth of what they do not. Plenty of such details may be

found in Homer:


  Thus did she say: but the old woman buried her face in her hands:


a true touch-people beginning to cry do put their hands over their eyes.

  Bring yourself on the stage from the first in the right character, that people

may regard you in that light; and the same with your adversary; but do not let

them see what you are about. How easily such impressions may be conveyed

we can see from the way in which we get some inkling of things we know

nothing of by the mere look of the messenger bringing news of them. Have

some narrative in many different parts of your speech; and sometimes let

there be none at the beginning of it.

In political oratory there is very little opening for narration; nobody can

‘narrate’ what has not yet happened. If there is narration at all, it will be of

past events, the recollection of which is to help the hearers to make better

plans for the future. Or it may be employed to attack some one’s character, or

to eulogize him-only then you will not be doing what the political speaker, as

such, has to do.If any statement you make is hard to believe, you must guarantee its truth,

and at once offer an explanation, and then furnish it with such particulars as

will be expected. Thus Carcinus’ Jocasta, in his Oedipus, keeps guaranteeing

the truth of her answers to the inquiries of the man who is seeking her son;

and so with Haemon in Sophocles.


17


The  duty  of  the  Arguments  is  to  attempt  demonstrative  proofs.  These

proofs must bear directly upon the question in dispute, which must fall under

one of four heads. (1) If you maintain that the act was not committed, your

main task in court is to prove this. (2) If you maintain that the act did no

harm, prove this. If you maintain that (3) the act was less than is alleged, or

(4) justified, prove these facts, just as you would prove the act not to have

been committed if you were maintaining that.

It should be noted that only where the question in dispute falls under the

first of these heads can it be true that one of the two parties is necessarily a

rogue. Here ignorance cannot be pleaded, as it might if the dispute were

whether the act was justified or not. This argument must therefore be used in

this case only, not in the others.

In ceremonial speeches you will develop your case mainly by arguing that

what has been done is, e.g., noble and useful. The facts themselves are to be

taken on trust; proof of them is only submitted on those rare occasions when

they are not easily credible or when they have been set down to some one

else.

In political speeches you may maintain that a proposal is impracticable; or

that, though practicable, it is unjust, or will do no good, or is not so important

as its proposer thinks. Note any falsehoods about irrelevant matters-they will

look  like  proof  that  his  other  statements  also  are  false.  Argument  by

‘example’ is highly suitable for political oratory, argument by ‘enthymeme’

better suits forensic. Political oratory deals with future events, of which it can

do no more than quote past events as examples. Forensic oratory deals with

what is or is not now true, which can better be demonstrated, because not

contingent-there is no contingency in what has now already happened. Do not

use  a  continuous  succession  of  enthymemes:  intersperse  them  with  other

matter,  or  they  will  spoil  one  another’s  effect.  There  are  limits  to  their

number—  Friend, you have spoken as much as a sensible man would have spoken. ,as

much’ says Homer, not ‘as well’. Nor should you try to make enthymemes on

every  point;  if  you  do,  you  will  be  acting  just  like  some  students  of

philosophy,  whose  conclusions  are  more  familiar  and  believable  than  the

premisses from which they draw them. And avoid the enthymeme form when

you are trying to rouse feeling; for it will either kill the feeling or will itself

fall flat: all simultaneous motions tend to cancel each other either completely

or partially. Nor should you go after the enthymeme form in a passage where

you are depicting character-the process of demonstration can express neither

moral  character  nor  moral  purpose.  Maxims  should  be  employed  in  the

Arguments-and in the Narration too-since these do express character: ‘I have

given him this, though I am quite aware that one should “Trust no man”.’ Or

if you are appealing to the emotions: ‘I do not regret it, though I have been

wronged; if he has the profit on his side, I have justice on mine.’

  Political oratory is a more difficult task than forensic; and naturally so,

since it deals with the future, whereas the pleader deals with the past, which,

as Epimenides of Crete said, even the diviners already know. (Epimenides

did not practise divination about the future; only about the obscurities of the

past.) Besides, in forensic oratory you have a basis in the law; and once you

have a starting-point, you can prove anything with comparative ease. Then

again, political oratory affords few chances for those leisurely digressions in

which you may attack your adversary, talk about yourself, or work on your

hearers’ emotions; fewer chances indeed, than any other affords, unless your

set  purpose  is  to  divert  your  hearers’  attention.  Accordingly,  if  you  find

yourself in difficulties, follow the lead of the Athenian speakers, and that of

Isocrates, who makes regular attacks upon people in the course of a political

speech, e.g. upon the Lacedaemonians in the Panegyricus, and upon Chares

in the speech about the allies. In ceremonial oratory, intersperse your speech

with bits of episodic eulogy, like Isocrates, who is always bringing some one

forward for this purpose. And this is what Gorgias meant by saying that he

always found something to talk about. For if he speaks of Achilles, he praises

Peleus,  then  Aeacus,  then  Zeus;  and  in  like  manner  the  virtue  of  valour,

describing its good results, and saying what it is like.

Now if you have proofs to bring forward, bring them forward, and your

moral discourse as well; if you have no enthymemes, then fall back upon

moral discourse: after all, it is more fitting for a good man to display himself

as an honest fellow than as a subtle reasoner. Refutative enthymemes aremore popular than demonstrative ones: their logical cogency is more striking:

the facts about two opposites always stand out clearly when the two are nut

side by side.

The ‘Reply to the Opponent’ is not a separate division of the speech; it is

part  of  the  Arguments  to  break  down  the  opponent’s  case,  whether  by

objection  or  by  counter-syllogism.  Both  in  political  speaking  and  when

pleading  in  court,  if  you  are  the  first  speaker  you  should  put  your  own

arguments forward first, and then meet the arguments on the other side by

refuting them and pulling them to pieces beforehand. If, however, the case for

the other side contains a great variety of arguments, begin with these, like

Callistratus in the Messenian assembly, when he demolished the arguments

likely to be used against him before giving his own. If you speak later, you

must  first,  by  means  of  refutation  and  counter-syllogism,  attempt  some

answer to your opponent’s speech, especially if his arguments have been well

received. For just as our minds refuse a favourable reception to a person

against whom they are prejudiced, so they refuse it to a speech when they

have been favourably impressed by the speech on the other side. You should,

therefore, make room in the minds of the audience for your coming speech;

and this will be done by getting your opponent’s speech out of the way. So

attack that first-either the whole of it, or the most important, successful, or

vulnerable points in it, and thus inspire confidence in what you have to say

yourself—


First, champion will I be of Goddesses…

  Never, I ween, would Hera…


  where the speaker has attacked the silliest argument first. So much for the

Arguments.

  With regard to the element of moral character: there are assertions which,

if made about yourself, may excite dislike, appear tedious, or expose you to

the risk of contradiction; and other things which you cannot say about your

opponent without seeming abusive or ill-bred. Put such remarks, therefore,

into  the  mouth  of  some  third  person.  This  is  what  Isocrates  does  in  the

Philippus  and  in  the  Antidosis,  and  Archilochus  in  his  satires.  The  latter

represents the father himself as attacking his daughter in the lampoon


  Think nought impossible at all,Nor swear that it shall not befall…


and puts into the mouth of Charon the carpenter the lampoon which begins


  Not for the wealth of Gyes…


So  too  Sophocles  makes  Haemon  appeal  to  his  father  on  behalf  of

Antigone as if it were others who were speaking.

  Again,  sometimes  you  should  restate  your  enthymemes  in  the  form  of

maxims; e.g. ‘Wise men will come to terms in the hour of success; for they

will gain most if they do’. Expressed as an enthymeme, this would run, ‘If we

ought to come to terms when doing so will enable us to gain the greatest

advantage, then we ought to come to terms in the hour of success.’


18


Next as to Interrogation. The best moment to a employ this is when your

opponent has so answered one question that the putting of just one more

lands him in absurdity. Thus Pericles questioned Lampon about the way of

celebrating  the  rites  of  the  Saviour  Goddess.  Lampon  declared  that  no

uninitiated person could be told of them. Pericles then asked, ‘Do you know

them yourself?’ ‘Yes’, answered Lampon. ‘Why,’ said Pericles, ‘how can

that be, when you are uninitiated?’

  Another good moment is when one premiss of an argument is obviously

true,  and  you  can  see  that  your  opponent  must  say  ‘yes’  if  you  ask  him

whether the other is true. Having first got this answer about the other, do not

go on to ask him about the obviously true one, but just state the conclusion

yourself. Thus, when Meletus denied that Socrates believed in the existence

of  gods  but  admitted  that  he  talked  about  a  supernatural  power,  Socrates

proceeded to to ask whether ‘supernatural beings were not either children of

the  gods  or  in  some  way  divine?’  ‘Yes’,  said  Meletus.  ‘Then’,  replied

Socrates, ‘is there any one who believes in the existence of children of the

gods and yet not in the existence of the gods themselves?’ Another good

occasion is when you expect to show that your opponent is contradicting

either  his  own  words  or  what  every  one  believes.  A  fourth  is  when  it  is

impossible for him to meet your question except by an evasive answer. If he

answers ‘True, and yet not true’, or ‘Partly true and partly not true’, or ‘Truein one sense but not in another’, the audience thinks he is in difficulties, and

applauds his discomfiture. In other cases do not attempt interrogation; for if

your opponent gets in an objection, you are felt to have been worsted. You

cannot ask a series of questions owing to the incapacity of the audience to

follow them; and for this reason you should also make your enthymemes as

compact as possible.

In replying, you must meet ambiguous questions by drawing reasonable

distinctions, not by a curt answer. In meeting questions that seem to involve

you in a contradiction, offer the explanation at the outset of your answer,

before your opponent asks the next question or draws his conclusion. For it is

not difficult to see the drift of his argument in advance. This point, however,

as well as the various means of refutation, may be regarded as known to us

from the Topics.

  When your opponent in drawing his conclusion puts it in the form of a

question, you must justify your answer. Thus when Sophocles was asked by

Peisander whether he had, like the other members of the Board of Safety,

voted for setting up the Four Hundred, he said ‘Yes.’-’Why, did you not think

it  wicked?’-’Yes.’-’So  you  committed  this  wickedness?’  ‘Yes’,  said

Sophocles, ‘for there was nothing better to do.’ Again, the Lacedaemonian,

when he was being examined on his conduct as ephor, was asked whether he

thought that the other ephors had been justly put to death. ‘Yes’, he said.

‘Well then’, asked his opponent, ‘did not you propose the same measures as

they?’-’Yes.’-’Well then, would not you too be justly put to death?’-’Not at

all’, said he; ‘they were bribed to do it, and I did it from conviction’. Hence

you should not ask any further questions after drawing the conclusion, nor

put the conclusion itself in the form of a further question, unless there is a

large balance of truth on your side.

As  to  jests.  These  are  supposed  to  be  of  some  service  in  controversy.

Gorgias said that you should kill your opponents’ earnestness with jesting

and their jesting with earnestness; in which he was right. jests have been

classified in the Poetics. Some are becoming to a gentleman, others are not;

see that you choose such as become you. Irony better befits a gentleman than

buffoonery; the ironical man jokes to amuse himself, the buffoon to amuse

other people.


19The  Epilogue  has  four  parts.  You  must  (1)  make  the  audience  well-

disposed  towards  yourself  and  ill-disposed  towards  your  opponent  (2)

magnify  or  minimize  the  leading  facts,  (3)  excite  the  required  state  of

emotion in your hearers, and (4) refresh their memories.

(1) Having shown your own truthfulness and the untruthfulness of your

opponent,  the  natural  thing  is  to  commend  yourself,  censure  him,  and

hammer in your points. You must aim at one of two objects-you must make

yourself out a good man and him a bad one either in yourselves or in relation

to your hearers. How this is to be managed-by what lines of argument you are

to represent people as good or bad-this has been already explained.

(2) The facts having been proved, the natural thing to do next is to magnify

or minimize their importance. The facts must be admitted before you can

discuss how important they are; just as the body cannot grow except from

something already present. The proper lines of argument to be used for this

purpose of amplification and depreciation have already been set forth.

(3) Next, when the facts and their importance are clearly understood, you

must excite your hearers’ emotions. These emotions are pity, indignation,

anger, hatred, envy, emulation, pugnacity. The lines of argument to be used

for these purposes also have been previously mentioned.

(4) Finally you have to review what you have already said. Here you may

properly do what some wrongly recommend doing in the introduction-repeat

your  points  frequently  so  as  to  make  them  easily  understood.  What  you

should do in your introduction is to state your subject, in order that the point

to be judged may be quite plain; in the epilogue you should summarize the

arguments  by  which  your  case  has  been  proved.  The  first  step  in  this

reviewing process is to observe that you have done what you undertook to do.

You must, then, state what you have said and why you have said it. Your

method may be a comparison of your own case with that of your opponent;

and you may compare either the ways you have both handled the same point

or make your comparison less direct: ‘My opponent said so-and-so on this

point; I said so-and-so, and this is why I said it’. Or with modest irony, e.g.

‘He certainly said so-and-so, but I said so-and-so’. Or ‘How vain he would

have been if he had proved all this instead of that!’ Or put it in the form of a

question. ‘What has not been proved by me?’ or ‘What has my opponent

proved?’ You may proceed then, either in this way by setting point against

point, or by following the natural order of the arguments as spoken, first

giving your own, and then separately, if you wish, those of your opponent.For the conclusion, the disconnected style of language is appropriate, and

will mark the difference between the oration and the peroration. ‘I have done.

You have heard me. The facts are before you. I ask for your judgement.’                                        Poetics


Translated by S. H. Butcher


<

div class="chapter">


I


I propose to treat of Poetry in itself and of its various kinds, noting the

essential quality of each, to inquire into the structure of the plot as requisite to

a good poem; into the number and nature of the parts of which a poem is

composed; and similarly into whatever else falls within the same inquiry.

Following, then, the order of nature, let us begin with the principles which

come first.

Epic poetry and Tragedy, Comedy also and Dithyrambic poetry, and the

music of the flute and of the lyre in most of their forms, are all in their

general  conception  modes  of  imitation.  They  differ,  however,  from  one

another in three respects—the medium, the objects, the manner or mode of

imitation, being in each case distinct.

For as there are persons who, by conscious art or mere habit, imitate and

represent various objects through the medium of color and form, or again by

the voice; so in the arts above mentioned, taken as a whole, the imitation is

produced by rhythm, language, or ‘harmony,’ either singly or combined.

  Thus in the music of the flute and of the lyre, ‘harmony’ and rhythm alone

are employed; also in other arts, such as that of the shepherd’s pipe, which

are  essentially  similar  to  these.  In  dancing,  rhythm  alone  is  used  without

‘harmony’;  for  even  dancing  imitates  character,  emotion,  and  action,  by

rhythmical movement.

  There is another art which imitates by means of language alone, and that

either in prose or verse—which verse, again, may either combine different

meters or consist of but one kind—but this has hitherto been without a name.

For there is no common term we could apply to the mimes of Sophron and

Xenarchus and the Socratic dialogues on the one hand; and, on the other, to

poetic imitations in iambic, elegiac, or any similar meter. People do, indeed,add the word ‘maker’ or ‘poet’ to the name of the meter, and speak of elegiac

poets, or epic (that is, hexameter) poets, as if it were not the imitation that

makes the poet, but the verse that entitles them all to the name. Even when a

treatise on medicine or natural science is brought out in verse, the name of

poet is by custom given to the author; and yet Homer and Empedocles have

nothing in common but the meter, so that it would be right to call the one

poet, the other physicist rather than poet. On the same principle, even if a

writer in his poetic imitation were to combine all meters, as Chaeremon did in

his Centaur, which is a medley composed of meters of all kinds, we should

bring him too under the general term poet.

So much then for these distinctions.

  There are, again, some arts which employ all the means above mentioned

—namely, rhythm, tune, and meter. Such are Dithyrambic and Nomic poetry,

and also Tragedy and Comedy; but between them originally the difference is,

that in the first two cases these means are all employed in combination, in the

latter, now one means is employed, now another.

  Such, then, are the differences of the arts with respect to the medium of

imitation


II


  Since the objects of imitation are men in action, and these men must be

either of a higher or a lower type (for moral character mainly answers to these

divisions,  goodness  and  badness  being  the  distinguishing  marks  of  moral

differences), it follows that we must represent men either as better than in real

life,  or  as  worse,  or  as  they  are.  It  is  the  same  in  painting.  Polygnotus

depicted men as nobler than they are, Pauson as less noble, Dionysius drew

them true to life.

Now it is evident that each of the modes of imitation above mentioned will

exhibit these differences, and become a distinct kind in imitating objects that

are  thus  distinct.  Such  diversities  may  be  found  even  in  dancing,  flute-

playing,  and  lyre-playing.  So  again  in  language,  whether  prose  or  verse

unaccompanied by music. Homer, for example, makes men better than they

are; Cleophon as they are; Hegemon the Thasian, the inventor of parodies,

and Nicochares, the author of the Deiliad, worse than they are. The same

thing  holds  good  of  Dithyrambs  and  Nomes;  here  too  one  may  portray

different types, as Timotheus and Philoxenus differed in representing theirCyclopes.  The  same  distinction  marks  off  Tragedy  from  Comedy;  for

Comedy aims at representing men as worse, Tragedy as better than in actual

life.


III


  There is still a third difference—the manner in which each of these objects

may be imitated. For the medium being the same, and the objects the same,

the poet may imitate by narration—in which case he can either take another

personality as Homer does, or speak in his own person, unchanged—or he

may present all his characters as living and moving before us.

These, then, as we said at the beginning, are the three differences which

distinguish artistic imitation—the medium, the objects, and the manner. So

that from one point of view, Sophocles is an imitator of the same kind as

Homer—for both imitate higher types of character; from another point of

view, of the same kind as Aristophanes—for both imitate persons acting and

doing. Hence, some say, the name of ‘drama’ is given to such poems, as

representing action. For the same reason the Dorians claim the invention both

of  Tragedy  and  Comedy.  The  claim  to  Comedy  is  put  forward  by  the

Megarians—not only by those of Greece proper, who allege that it originated

under  their  democracy,  but  also  by  the  Megarians  of  Sicily,  for  the  poet

Epicharmus, who is much earlier than Chionides and Magnes, belonged to

that country. Tragedy too is claimed by certain Dorians of the Peloponnese.

In each case they appeal to the evidence of language. The outlying villages,

they say, are by them called komai, by the Athenians demoi: and they assume

that comedians were so named not from komazein, ‘to revel,’ but because

they  wandered  from  village  to  village  (kata  komas),  being  excluded

contemptuously from the city. They add also that the Dorian word for ‘doing’

is dran, and the Athenian, prattein.

This may suffice as to the number and nature of the various modes of

imitation.


IV


  Poetry in general seems to have sprung from two causes, each of them

lying deep in our nature. First, the instinct of imitation is implanted in manfrom childhood, one difference between him and other animals being that he

is  the  most  imitative  of  living  creatures,  and  through  imitation  learns  his

earliest lessons; and no less universal is the pleasure felt in things imitated.

We  have  evidence  of  this  in  the  facts  of  experience.  Objects  which  in

themselves we view with pain, we delight to contemplate when reproduced

with minute fidelity: such as the forms of the most ignoble animals and of

dead  bodies.  The  cause  of  this  again  is,  that  to  learn  gives  the  liveliest

pleasure, not only to philosophers but to men in general; whose capacity,

however, of learning is more limited. Thus the reason why men enjoy seeing

a  likeness  is,  that  in  contemplating  it  they  find  themselves  learning  or

inferring, and saying perhaps, ‘Ah, that is he.’ For if you happen not to have

seen the original, the pleasure will be due not to the imitation as such, but to

the execution, the coloring, or some such other cause.

  Imitation, then, is one instinct of our nature. Next, there is the instinct for

‘harmony’ and rhythm, meters being manifestly sections of rhythm. Persons,

therefore, starting with this natural gift developed by degrees their special

aptitudes, till their rude improvisations gave birth to Poetry.

  Poetry  now  diverged  in  two  directions,  according  to  the  individual

character of the writers. The graver spirits imitated noble actions, and the

actions of good men. The more trivial sort imitated the actions of meaner

persons, at first composing satires, as the former did hymns to the gods and

the praises of famous men. A poem of the satirical kind cannot indeed be put

down to any author earlier than Homer; though many such writers probably

there  were.  But  from  Homer  onward,  instances  can  be  cited—his  own

Margites, for example, and other similar compositions. The appropriate meter

was  also  here  introduced;  hence  the  measure  is  still  called  the  iambic  or

lampooning  measure,  being  that  in  which  people  lampooned  one  another.

Thus the older poets were distinguished as writers of heroic or of lampooning

verse.

As, in the serious style, Homer is pre-eminent among poets, for he alone

combined  dramatic  form  with  excellence  of  imitation  so  he  too  first  laid

down  the  main  lines  of  comedy,  by  dramatizing  the  ludicrous  instead  of

writing personal satire. His Margites bears the same relation to comedy that

the Iliad and Odyssey do to tragedy. But when Tragedy and Comedy came to

light, the two classes of poets still followed their natural bent: the lampooners

became  writers  of  Comedy,  and  the  Epic  poets  were  succeeded  by

Tragedians, since the drama was a larger and higher form of art.  Whether Tragedy has as yet perfected its proper types or not; and whether

it is to be judged in itself, or in relation also to the audience—this raises

another question. Be that as it may, Tragedy—as also Comedy—was at first

mere improvisation. The one originated with the authors of the Dithyramb,

the other with those of the phallic songs, which are still in use in many of our

cities. Tragedy advanced by slow degrees; each new element that showed

itself was in turn developed. Having passed through many changes, it found

its natural form, and there it stopped.

  Aeschylus first introduced a second actor; he diminished the importance of

the Chorus, and assigned the leading part to the dialogue. Sophocles raised

the number of actors to three, and added scene-painting. Moreover, it was not

till late that the short plot was discarded for one of greater compass, and the

grotesque  diction  of  the  earlier  satyric  form  for  the  stately  manner  of

Tragedy. The iambic measure then replaced the trochaic tetrameter, which

was originally employed when the poetry was of the satyric order, and had

greater with dancing. Once dialogue had come in, Nature herself discovered

the  appropriate  measure.  For  the  iambic  is,  of  all  measures,  the  most

colloquial we see it in the fact that conversational speech runs into iambic

lines  more  frequently  than  into  any  other  kind  of  verse;  rarely  into

hexameters, and only when we drop the colloquial intonation. The additions

to  the  number  of  ‘episodes’  or  acts,  and  the  other  accessories  of  which

tradition tells, must be taken as already described; for to discuss them in

detail would, doubtless, be a large undertaking.


V


  Comedy is, as we have said, an imitation of characters of a lower type—

not, however, in the full sense of the word bad, the ludicrous being merely a

subdivision of the ugly. It consists in some defect or ugliness which is not

painful or destructive. To take an obvious example, the comic mask is ugly

and distorted, but does not imply pain.

The successive changes through which Tragedy passed, and the authors of

these changes, are well known, whereas Comedy has had no history, because

it was not at first treated seriously. It was late before the Archon granted a

comic chorus to a poet; the performers were till then voluntary. Comedy had

already taken definite shape when comic poets, distinctively so called, are

heard of. Who furnished it with masks, or prologues, or increased the numberof actors—these and other similar details remain unknown. As for the plot, it

came originally from Sicily; but of Athenian writers Crates was the first who

abandoning the ‘iambic’ or lampooning form, generalized his themes and

plots.

Epic poetry agrees with Tragedy in so far as it is an imitation in verse of

characters of a higher type. They differ in that Epic poetry admits but one

kind of meter and is narrative in form. They differ, again, in their length: for

Tragedy endeavors, as far as possible, to confine itself to a single revolution

of the sun, or but slightly to exceed this limit, whereas the Epic action has no

limits of time. This, then, is a second point of difference; though at first the

same freedom was admitted in Tragedy as in Epic poetry.

Of  their  constituent  parts  some  are  common  to  both,  some  peculiar  to

Tragedy: whoever, therefore knows what is good or bad Tragedy, knows also

about Epic poetry. All the elements of an Epic poem are found in Tragedy,

but the elements of a Tragedy are not all found in the Epic poem.


VI


Of the poetry which imitates in hexameter verse, and of Comedy, we will

speak hereafter. Let us now discuss Tragedy, resuming its formal definition,

as resulting from what has been already said.

  Tragedy, then, is an imitation of an action that is serious, complete, and of

a  certain  magnitude;  in  language  embellished  with  each  kind  of  artistic

ornament, the several kinds being found in separate parts of the play; in the

form of action, not of narrative; through pity and fear effecting the proper

purgation of these emotions. By ‘language embellished,’ I mean language

into  which  rhythm,  ‘harmony’  and  song  enter.  By  ‘the  several  kinds  in

separate parts,’ I mean, that some parts are rendered through the medium of

verse alone, others again with the aid of song.

Now as tragic imitation implies persons acting, it necessarily follows in the

first place, that Spectacular equipment will be a part of Tragedy. Next, Song

and Diction, for these are the media of imitation. By ‘Diction’ I mean the

mere metrical arrangement of the words: as for ‘Song,’ it is a term whose

sense every one understands.

  Again, Tragedy is the imitation of an action; and an action implies personal

agents, who necessarily possess certain distinctive qualities both of character

and thought; for it is by these that we qualify actions themselves, and these—thought and character—are the two natural causes from which actions spring,

and on actions again all success or failure depends. Hence, the Plot is the

imitation  of  the  action—for  by  plot  I  here  mean  the  arrangement  of  the

incidents. By Character I mean that in virtue of which we ascribe certain

qualities to the agents. Thought is required wherever a statement is proved,

or, it may be, a general truth enunciated. Every Tragedy, therefore, must have

six parts, which parts determine its quality—namely, Plot, Character, Diction,

Thought,  Spectacle,  Song.  Two  of  the  parts  constitute  the  medium  of

imitation,  one  the  manner,  and  three  the  objects  of  imitation.  And  these

complete the fist. These elements have been employed, we may say, by the

poets to a man; in fact, every play contains Spectacular elements as well as

Character, Plot, Diction, Song, and Thought.

But most important of all is the structure of the incidents. For Tragedy is

an imitation, not of men, but of an action and of life, and life consists in

action,  and  its  end  is  a  mode  of  action,  not  a  quality.  Now  character

determines men’s qualities, but it is by their actions that they are happy or the

reverse. Dramatic action, therefore, is not with a view to the representation of

character: character comes in as subsidiary to the actions. Hence the incidents

and the plot are the end of a tragedy; and the end is the chief thing of all.

Again,  without  action  there  cannot  be  a  tragedy;  there  may  be  without

character. The tragedies of most of our modern poets fail in the rendering of

character; and of poets in general this is often true. It is the same in painting;

and  here  lies  the  difference  between  Zeuxis  and  Polygnotus.  Polygnotus

delineates character well; the style of Zeuxis is devoid of ethical quality.

Again, if you string together a set of speeches expressive of character, and

well  finished  in  point  of  diction  and  thought,  you  will  not  produce  the

essential tragic effect nearly so well as with a play which, however deficient

in these respects, yet has a plot and artistically constructed incidents. Besides

which,  the  most  powerful  elements  of  emotional  interest  in  Tragedy—

Peripeteia or Reversal of the Situation, and Recognition scenes—are parts of

the plot. A further proof is, that novices in the art attain to finish of diction

and precision of portraiture before they can construct the plot. It is the same

with almost all the early poets.

The plot, then, is the first principle, and, as it were, the soul of a tragedy;

Character holds the second place. A similar fact is seen in painting. The most

beautiful colors, laid on confusedly, will not give as much pleasure as the

chalk outline of a portrait. Thus Tragedy is the imitation of an action, and ofthe agents mainly with a view to the action.

  Third in order is Thought—that is, the faculty of saying what is possible

and  pertinent  in  given  circumstances.  In  the  case  of  oratory,  this  is  the

function of the political art and of the art of rhetoric: and so indeed the older

poets make their characters speak the language of civic life; the poets of our

time, the language of the rhetoricians. Character is that which reveals moral

purpose, showing what kind of things a man chooses or avoids. Speeches,

therefore, which do not make this manifest, or in which the speaker does not

choose or avoid anything whatever, are not expressive of character. Thought,

on the other hand, is found where something is proved to be or not to be, or a

general maxim is enunciated.

  Fourth among the elements enumerated comes Diction; by which I mean,

as has been already said, the expression of the meaning in words; and its

essence is the same both in verse and prose.

Of  the  remaining  elements  Song  holds  the  chief  place  among  the

embellishments

The Spectacle has, indeed, an emotional attraction of its own, but, of all the

parts, it is the least artistic, and connected least with the art of poetry. For the

power of Tragedy, we may be sure, is felt even apart from representation and

actors. Besides, the production of spectacular effects depends more on the art

of the stage machinist than on that of the poet.


VII


  These principles being established, let us now discuss the proper structure

of the Plot, since this is the first and most important thing in Tragedy.

Now, according to our definition Tragedy is an imitation of an action that

is complete, and whole, and of a certain magnitude; for there may be a whole

that  is  wanting  in  magnitude.  A  whole  is  that  which  has  a  beginning,  a

middle, and an end. A beginning is that which does not itself follow anything

by causal necessity, but after which something naturally is or comes to be. An

end, on the contrary, is that which itself naturally follows some other thing,

either by necessity, or as a rule, but has nothing following it. A middle is that

which follows something as some other thing follows it. A well constructed

plot, therefore, must neither begin nor end at haphazard, but conform to these

principles.

  Again, a beautiful object, whether it be a living organism or any wholecomposed of parts, must not only have an orderly arrangement of parts, but

must also be of a certain magnitude; for beauty depends on magnitude and

order. Hence a very small animal organism cannot be beautiful; for the view

of it is confused, the object being seen in an almost imperceptible moment of

time. Nor, again, can one of vast size be beautiful; for as the eye cannot take

it all in at once, the unity and sense of the whole is lost for the spectator; as

for instance if there were one a thousand miles long. As, therefore, in the case

of animate bodies and organisms a certain magnitude is necessary, and a

magnitude  which  may  be  easily  embraced  in  one  view;  so  in  the  plot,  a

certain length is necessary, and a length which can be easily embraced by the

memory. The limit of length in relation to dramatic competition and sensuous

presentment is no part of artistic theory. For had it been the rule for a hundred

tragedies to compete together, the performance would have been regulated by

the water-clock—as indeed we are told was formerly done. But the limit as

fixed by the nature of the drama itself is this: the greater the length, the more

beautiful will the piece be by reason of its size, provided that the whole be

perspicuous. And to define the matter roughly, we may say that the proper

magnitude  is  comprised  within  such  limits,  that  the  sequence  of  events,

according to the law of probability or necessity, will admit of a change from

bad fortune to good, or from good fortune to bad.


VIII


  Unity of plot does not, as some persons think, consist in the unity of the

hero. For infinitely various are the incidents in one man’s life which cannot

be reduced to unity; and so, too, there are many actions of one man out of

which we cannot make one action. Hence the error, as it appears, of all poets

who have composed a Heracleid, a Theseid, or other poems of the kind. They

imagine that as Heracles was one man, the story of Heracles must also be a

unity. But Homer, as in all else he is of surpassing merit, here too—whether

from art or natural genius—seems to have happily discerned the truth. In

composing the Odyssey he did not include all the adventures of Odysseus—

such as his wound on Parnassus, or his feigned madness at the mustering of

the  host—incidents  between  which  there  was  no  necessary  or  probable

connection: but he made the Odyssey, and likewise the Iliad, to center round

an action that in our sense of the word is one. As therefore, in the other

imitative arts, the imitation is one when the object imitated is one, so the plot,being an imitation of an action, must imitate one action and that a whole, the

structural union of the parts being such that, if any one of them is displaced

or removed, the whole will be disjointed and disturbed. For a thing whose

presence or absence makes no visible difference, is not an organic part of the

whole.


IX


It is, moreover, evident from what has been said, that it is not the function

of  the  poet  to  relate  what  has  happened,  but  what  may  happen—what  is

possible according to the law of probability or necessity. The poet and the

historian differ not by writing in verse or in prose. The work of Herodotus

might be put into verse, and it would still be a species of history, with meter

no  less  than  without  it.  The  true  difference  is  that  one  relates  what  has

happened,  the  other  what  may  happen.  Poetry,  therefore,  is  a  more

philosophical and a higher thing than history: for poetry tends to express the

universal, history the particular. By the universal I mean how a person of a

certain type on occasion speak or act, according to the law of probability or

necessity; and it is this universality at which poetry aims in the names she

attaches to the personages. The particular is—for example—what Alcibiades

did or suffered. In Comedy this is already apparent: for here the poet first

constructs the plot on the lines of probability, and then inserts characteristic

names—unlike the lampooners who write about particular individuals. But

tragedians still keep to real names, the reason being that what is possible is

credible: what has not happened we do not at once feel sure to be possible;

but what has happened is manifestly possible: otherwise it would not have

happened. Still there are even some tragedies in which there are only one or

two  well-known  names,  the  rest  being  fictitious.  In  others,  none  are  well

known—as  in  Agathon’s  Antheus,  where  incidents  and  names  alike  are

fictitious, and yet they give none the less pleasure. We must not, therefore, at

all  costs  keep  to  the  received  legends,  which  are  the  usual  subjects  of

Tragedy. Indeed, it would be absurd to attempt it; for even subjects that are

known  are  known  only  to  a  few,  and  yet  give  pleasure  to  all.  It  clearly

follows that the poet or ‘maker’ should be the maker of plots rather than of

verses;  since  he  is  a  poet  because  he  imitates,  and  what  he  imitates  are

actions. And even if he chances to take a historical subject, he is none the less

a poet; for there is no reason why some events that have actually happenedshould not conform to the law of the probable and possible, and in virtue of

that quality in them he is their poet or maker.

Of all plots and actions the episodic are the worst. I call a plot ‘episodic’ in

which the episodes or acts succeed one another without probable or necessary

sequence. Bad poets compose such pieces by their own fault, good poets, to

please the players; for, as they write show pieces for competition, they stretch

the  plot  beyond  its  capacity,  and  are  often  forced  to  break  the  natural

continuity.

But again, Tragedy is an imitation not only of a complete action, but of

events inspiring fear or pity. Such an effect is best produced when the events

come on us by surprise; and the effect is heightened when, at the same time,

they follows as cause and effect. The tragic wonder will then be greater than

if they happened of themselves or by accident; for even coincidences are

most striking when they have an air of design. We may instance the statue of

Mitys at Argos, which fell upon his murderer while he was a spectator at a

festival, and killed him. Such events seem not to be due to mere chance.

Plots, therefore, constructed on these principles are necessarily the best.


X


  Plots are either Simple or Complex, for the actions in real life, of which the

plots are an imitation, obviously show a similar distinction. An action which

is one and continuous in the sense above defined, I call Simple, when the

change of fortune takes place without Reversal of the Situation and without

Recognition

A Complex action is one in which the change is accompanied by such

Reversal, or by Recognition, or by both. These last should arise from the

internal structure of the plot, so that what follows should be the necessary or

probable result of the preceding action. It makes all the difference whether

any given event is a case of propter hoc or post hoc.


XI


  Reversal of the Situation is a change by which the action veers round to its

opposite, subject always to our rule of probability or necessity. Thus in the

Oedipus, the messenger comes to cheer Oedipus and free him from his alarmsabout his mother, but by revealing who he is, he produces the opposite effect.

Again in the Lynceus, Lynceus is being led away to his death, and Danaus

goes  with  him,  meaning  to  slay  him;  but  the  outcome  of  the  preceding

incidents is that Danaus is killed and Lynceus saved.

  Recognition,  as  the  name  indicates,  is  a  change  from  ignorance  to

knowledge, producing love or hate between the persons destined by the poet

for good or bad fortune. The best form of recognition is coincident with a

Reversal of the Situation, as in the Oedipus. There are indeed other forms.

Even inanimate things of the most trivial kind may in a sense be objects of

recognition. Again, we may recognize or discover whether a person has done

a thing or not. But the recognition which is most intimately connected with

the  plot  and  action  is,  as  we  have  said,  the  recognition  of  persons.  This

recognition, combined with Reversal, will produce either pity or fear; and

actions producing these effects are those which, by our definition, Tragedy

represents. Moreover, it is upon such situations that the issues of good or bad

fortune  will  depend.  Recognition,  then,  being  between  persons,  it  may

happen that one person only is recognized by the other—when the latter is

already known—or it may be necessary that the recognition should be on

both sides. Thus Iphigenia is revealed to Orestes by the sending of the letter;

but  another  act  of  recognition  is  required  to  make  Orestes  known  to

Iphigenia.

Two parts, then, of the Plot—Reversal of the Situation and Recognition—

turn upon surprises. A third part is the Scene of Suffering. The Scene of

Suffering is a destructive or painful action, such as death on the stage, bodily

agony, wounds, and the like.


XII


The parts of Tragedy which must be treated as elements of the whole have

been  already  mentioned.  We  now  come  to  the  quantitative  parts—the

separate parts into which Tragedy is divided—namely, Prologue, Episode,

Exode, Choric song; this last being divided into Parode and Stasimon. These

are common to all plays: peculiar to some are the songs of actors from the

stage and the Commoi.

The Prologue is that entire part of a tragedy which precedes the Parode of

the Chorus. The Episode is that entire part of a tragedy which is between

complete choric songs. The Exode is that entire part of a tragedy which hasno choric song after it. Of the Choric part the Parode is the first undivided

utterance of the Chorus: the Stasimon is a Choric ode without anapaests or

trochaic tetrameters: the Commos is a joint lamentation of Chorus and actors.

The parts of Tragedy which must be treated as elements of the whole have

been already mentioned. The quantitative parts—the separate parts into which

it is divided—are here enumerated.


XIII


As the sequel to what has already been said, we must proceed to consider

what the poet should aim at, and what he should avoid, in constructing his

plots; and by what means the specific effect of Tragedy will be produced.

A perfect tragedy should, as we have seen, be arranged not on the simple

but on the complex plan. It should, moreover, imitate actions which excite

pity and fear, this being the distinctive mark of tragic imitation. It follows

plainly, in the first place, that the change of fortune presented must not be the

spectacle of a virtuous man brought from prosperity to adversity: for this

moves neither pity nor fear; it merely shocks us. Nor, again, that of a bad

man passing from adversity to prosperity: for nothing can be more alien to

the spirit of Tragedy; it possesses no single tragic quality; it neither satisfies

the moral sense nor calls forth pity or fear. Nor, again, should the downfall of

the utter villain be exhibited. A plot of this kind would, doubtless, satisfy the

moral sense, but it would inspire neither pity nor fear; for pity is aroused by

unmerited misfortune, fear by the misfortune of a man like ourselves. Such

an event, therefore, will be neither pitiful nor terrible. There remains, then,

the  character  between  these  two  extremes—that  of  a  man  who  is  not

eminently good and just, yet whose misfortune is brought about not by vice

or depravity, but by some error or frailty. He must be one who is highly

renowned  and  prosperous—a  personage  like  Oedipus,  Thyestes,  or  other

illustrious men of such families.

A well-constructed plot should, therefore, be single in its issue, rather than

double as some maintain. The change of fortune should be not from bad to

good, but, reversely, from good to bad. It should come about as the result not

of vice, but of some great error or frailty, in a character either such as we

have described, or better rather than worse. The practice of the stage bears

out our view. At first the poets recounted any legend that came in their way.

Now, the best tragedies are founded on the story of a few houses—on thefortunes of Alcmaeon, Oedipus, Orestes, Meleager, Thyestes, Telephus, and

those others who have done or suffered something terrible. A tragedy, then,

to be perfect according to the rules of art should be of this construction.

Hence they are in error who censure Euripides just because he follows this

principle in his plays, many of which end unhappily. It is, as we have said,

the  right  ending.  The  best  proof  is  that  on  the  stage  and  in  dramatic

competition, such plays, if well worked out, are the most tragic in effect; and

Euripides, faulty though he may be in the general management of his subject,

yet is felt to be the most tragic of the poets.

In the second rank comes the kind of tragedy which some place first. Like

the Odyssey, it has a double thread of plot, and also an opposite catastrophe

for the good and for the bad. It is accounted the best because of the weakness

of the spectators; for the poet is guided in what he writes by the wishes of his

audience.  The  pleasure,  however,  thence  derived  is  not  the  true  tragic

pleasure. It is proper rather to Comedy, where those who, in the piece, are the

deadliest enemies—like Orestes and Aegisthus—quit the stage as friends at

the close, and no one slays or is slain.


XIV


Fear and pity may be aroused by spectacular means; but they may also

result from the inner structure of the piece, which is the better way, and

indicates a superior poet. For the plot ought to be so constructed that, even

without the aid of the eye, he who hears the tale told will thrill with horror

and melt to pity at what takes Place. This is the impression we should receive

from hearing the story of the Oedipus. But to produce this effect by the mere

spectacle is a less artistic method, and dependent on extraneous aids. Those

who employ spectacular means to create a sense not of the terrible but only of

the  monstrous,  are  strangers  to  the  purpose  of  Tragedy;  for  we  must  not

demand of Tragedy any and every kind of pleasure, but only that which is

proper to it. And since the pleasure which the poet should afford is that which

comes from pity and fear through imitation, it is evident that this quality must

be impressed upon the incidents.

Let  us  then  determine  what  are  the  circumstances  which  strike  us  as

terrible or pitiful.

  Actions capable of this effect must happen between persons who are either

friends or enemies or indifferent to one another. If an enemy kills an enemy,there is nothing to excite pity either in the act or the intention—except so far

as the suffering in itself is pitiful. So again with indifferent persons. But when

the tragic incident occurs between those who are near or dear to one another

—if, for example, a brother kills, or intends to kill, a brother, a son his father,

a mother her son, a son his mother, or any other deed of the kind is done—

these are the situations to be looked for by the poet. He may not indeed

destroy the framework of the received legends—the fact, for instance, that

Clytemnestra was slain by Orestes and Eriphyle by Alcmaeon—but he ought

to  show  of  his  own,  and  skilfully  handle  the  traditional.  material.  Let  us

explain more clearly what is meant by skilful handling.

The action may be done consciously and with knowledge of the persons, in

the manner of the older poets. It is thus too that Euripides makes Medea slay

her  children.  Or,  again,  the  deed  of  horror  may  be  done,  but  done  in

ignorance, and the tie of kinship or friendship be discovered afterwards. The

Oedipus of Sophocles is an example. Here, indeed, the incident is outside the

drama proper; but cases occur where it falls within the action of the play: one

may  cite  the  Alcmaeon  of  Astydamas,  or  Telegonus  in  the  Wounded

Odysseus. Again, there is a third case—[to be about to act with knowledge of

the persons and then not to act. The fourth case] is when some one is about to

do an irreparable deed through ignorance, and makes the discovery before it

is done. These are the only possible ways. For the deed must either be done

or not done—and that wittingly or unwittingly. But of all these ways, to be

about to act knowing the persons, and then not to act, is the worst. It is

shocking without being tragic, for no disaster follows It is, therefore, never,

or very rarely, found in poetry. One instance, however, is in the Antigone,

where Haemon threatens to kill Creon. The next and better way is that the

deed  should  be  perpetrated.  Still  better,  that  it  should  be  perpetrated  in

ignorance, and the discovery made afterwards. There is then nothing to shock

us, while the discovery produces a startling effect. The last case is the best, as

when in the Cresphontes Merope is about to slay her son, but, recognizing

who he is, spares his life. So in the Iphigenia, the sister recognizes the brother

just in time. Again in the Helle, the son recognizes the mother when on the

point of giving her up. This, then, is why a few families only, as has been

already observed, furnish the subjects of tragedy. It was not art, but happy

chance, that led the poets in search of subjects to impress the tragic quality

upon their plots. They are compelled, therefore, to have recourse to those

houses whose history contains moving incidents like these.  Enough has now been said concerning the structure of the incidents, and

the right kind of plot.


XV


In respect of Character there are four things to be aimed at. First, and most

important, it must be good. Now any speech or action that manifests moral

purpose of any kind will be expressive of character: the character will be

good if the purpose is good. This rule is relative to each class. Even a woman

may be good, and also a slave; though the woman may be said to be an

inferior being, and the slave quite worthless. The second thing to aim at is

propriety.  There  is  a  type  of  manly  valor;  but  valor  in  a  woman,  or

unscrupulous cleverness is inappropriate. Thirdly, character must be true to

life:  for  this  is  a  distinct  thing  from  goodness  and  propriety,  as  here

described.  The  fourth  point  is  consistency:  for  though  the  subject  of  the

imitation,  who  suggested  the  type,  be  inconsistent,  still  he  must  be

consistently  inconsistent.  As  an  example  of  motiveless  degradation  of

character,  we  have  Menelaus  in  the  Orestes;  of  character  indecorous  and

inappropriate,  the  lament  of  Odysseus  in  the  Scylla,  and  the  speech  of

Melanippe;  of  inconsistency,  the  Iphigenia  at  Aulis—for  Iphigenia  the

suppliant in no way resembles her later self.

As in the structure of the plot, so too in the portraiture of character, the

poet should always aim either at the necessary or the probable. Thus a person

of a given character should speak or act in a given way, by the rule either of

necessity or of probability; just as this event should follow that by necessary

or probable sequence. It is therefore evident that the unraveling of the plot, no

less than the complication, must arise out of the plot itself, it must not be

brought about by the Deus ex Machina—as in the Medea, or in the return of

the Greeks in the Iliad. The Deus ex Machina should be employed only for

events external to the drama—for antecedent or subsequent events, which lie

beyond the range of human knowledge, and which require to be reported or

foretold; for to the gods we ascribe the power of seeing all things. Within the

action there must be nothing irrational. If the irrational cannot be excluded, it

should be outside the scope of the tragedy. Such is the irrational element the

Oedipus of Sophocles.

  Again,  since  Tragedy  is  an  imitation  of  persons  who  are  above  the

common  level,  the  example  of  good  portrait  painters  should  be  followed.They, while reproducing the distinctive form of the original, make a likeness

which is true to life and yet more beautiful. So too the poet, in representing

men who are irascible or indolent, or have other defects of character, should

preserve the type and yet ennoble it. In this way Achilles is portrayed by

Agathon and Homer.

  These then are rules the poet should observe. Nor should he neglect those

appeals  to  the  senses,  which,  though  not  among  the  essentials,  are  the

concomitants of poetry; for here too there is much room for error. But of this

enough has been said in our published treatises.


XVI


  What Recognition is has been already explained. We will now enumerate

its kinds.

First, the least artistic form, which, from poverty of wit, is most commonly

employed—recognition by signs. Of these some are congenital—such as ‘the

spear which the earth-born race bear on their bodies,’ or the stars introduced

by Carcinus in his Thyestes. Others are acquired after birth; and of these

some are bodily marks, as scars; some external tokens, as necklaces, or the

little ark in the Tyro by which the discovery is effected. Even these admit of

more or less skilful treatment. Thus in the recognition of Odysseus by his

scar,  the  discovery  is  made  in  one  way  by  the  nurse,  in  another  by  the

swineherds. The use of tokens for the express purpose of proof—and, indeed,

any  formal  proof  with  or  without  tokens—is  a  less  artistic  mode  of

recognition. A better kind is that which comes about by a turn of incident, as

in the Bath Scene in the Odyssey.

Next  come  the  recognitions  invented  at  will  by  the  poet,  and  on  that

account wanting in art. For example, Orestes in the Iphigenia reveals the fact

that he is Orestes. She, indeed, makes herself known by the letter; but he, by

speaking himself, and saying what the poet, not what the plot requires. This,

therefore, is nearly allied to the fault above mentioned—for Orestes might as

well have brought tokens with him. Another similar instance is the ‘voice of

the shuttle’ in the Tereus of Sophocles.

The third kind depends on memory when the sight of some object awakens

a feeling: as in the Cyprians of Dicaeogenes, where the hero breaks into tears

on  seeing  the  picture;  or  again  in  the  Lay  of  Alcinous,  where  Odysseus,

hearing the minstrel play the lyre, recalls the past and weeps; and hence therecognition.

The fourth kind is by process of reasoning. Thus in the Choephori: ‘Some

one resembling me has come: no one resembles me but Orestes: therefore

Orestes has come.’ Such too is the discovery made by Iphigenia in the play of

Polyidus the Sophist. It was a natural reflection for Orestes to make, ‘So I too

must die at the altar like my sister.’ So, again, in the Tydeus of Theodectes,

the father says, ‘I came to find my son, and I lose my own life.’ So too in the

Phineidae: the women, on seeing the place, inferred their fate—‘Here we are

doomed to die, for here we were cast forth.’ Again, there is a composite kind

of recognition involving false inference on the part of one of the characters,

as in the Odysseus Disguised as a Messenger. A said [that no one else was

able to bend the bow; … hence B (the disguised Odysseus) imagined that A

would] recognize the bow which, in fact, he had not seen; and to bring about

a recognition by this means—the expectation that A would recognize the bow

—is false inference.

But, of all recognitions, the best is that which arises from the incidents

themselves, where the startling discovery is made by natural means. Such is

that in the Oedipus of Sophocles, and in the Iphigenia; for it was natural that

Iphigenia should wish to dispatch a letter. These recognitions alone dispense

with the artificial aid of tokens or amulets. Next come the recognitions by

process of reasoning.


XVII


In constructing the plot and working it out with the proper diction, the poet

should place the scene, as far as possible, before his eyes. In this way, seeing

everything with the utmost vividness, as if he were a spectator of the action,

he will discover what is in keeping with it, and be most unlikely to overlook

inconsistencies.  The  need  of  such  a  rule  is  shown  by  the  fault  found  in

Carcinus. Amphiaraus was on his way from the temple. This fact escaped the

observation of one who did not see the situation. On the stage, however, the

Piece failed, the audience being offended at the oversight.

  Again, the poet should work out his play, to the best of his power, with

appropriate gestures; for those who feel emotion are most convincing through

natural sympathy with the characters they represent; and one who is agitated

storms, one who is angry rages, with the most lifelike reality. Hence poetry

implies either a happy gift of nature or a strain of madness. In the one case aman can take the mould of any character; in the other, he is lifted out of his

proper self.

As for the story, whether the poet takes it ready made or constructs it for

himself, he should first sketch its general outline, and then fill in the episodes

and amplify in detail. The general plan may be illustrated by the Iphigenia. A

young girl is sacrificed; she disappears mysteriously from the eyes of those

who sacrificed her; she is transported to another country, where the custom is

to offer up an strangers to the goddess. To this ministry she is appointed.

Some time later her own brother chances to arrive. The fact that the oracle for

some reason ordered him to go there, is outside the general plan of the play.

The purpose, again, of his coming is outside the action proper. However, he

comes, he is seized, and, when on the point of being sacrificed, reveals who

he is. The mode of recognition may be either that of Euripides or of Polyidus,

in whose play he exclaims very naturally: ‘So it was not my sister only, but I

too, who was doomed to be sacrificed’; and by that remark he is saved.

  After this, the names being once given, it remains to fill in the episodes.

We must see that they are relevant to the action. In the case of Orestes, for

example, there is the madness which led to his capture, and his deliverance

by means of the purificatory rite. In the drama, the episodes are short, but it is

these that give extension to Epic poetry. Thus the story of the Odyssey can be

stated  briefly.  A  certain  man  is  absent  from  home  for  many  years;  he  is

jealously watched by Poseidon, and left desolate. Meanwhile his home is in a

wretched plight—suitors are wasting his substance and plotting against his

son. At length, tempest-tost, he himself arrives; he makes certain persons

acquainted with him; he attacks the suitors with his own hand, and is himself

preserved while he destroys them. This is the essence of the plot; the rest is

episode.


XVIII


  Every  tragedy  falls  into  two  parts—Complication  and  Unraveling  or

Denouement. Incidents extraneous to the action are frequently combined with

a  portion  of  the  action  proper,  to  form  the  Complication;  the  rest  is  the

Unraveling. By the Complication I mean all that extends from the beginning

of the action to the part which marks the turning-point to good or bad fortune.

The Unraveling is that which extends from the beginning of the change to the

end. Thus, in the Lynceus of Theodectes, the Complication consists of theincidents  presupposed  in  the  drama,  the  seizure  of  the  child,  and  then

again … [the Unraveling] extends from the accusation of murder to the end.

  There  are  four  kinds  of  Tragedy:  the  Complex,  depending  entirely  on

Reversal of the Situation and Recognition; the Pathetic (where the motive is

passion)—such as the tragedies on Ajax and Ixion; the Ethical (where the

motives are ethical)—such as the Phthiotides and the Peleus. The fourth kind

is the Simple. [We here exclude the purely spectacular element], exemplified

by the Phorcides, the Prometheus, and scenes laid in Hades. The poet should

endeavor,  if  possible,  to  combine  all  poetic  elements;  or  failing  that,  the

greatest number and those the most important; the more so, in face of the

caviling  criticism  of  the  day.  For  whereas  there  have  hitherto  been  good

poets, each in his own branch, the critics now expect one man to surpass all

others in their several lines of excellence.

In speaking of a tragedy as the same or different, the best test to take is the

plot. Identity exists where the Complication and Unraveling are the same.

Many  poets  tie  the  knot  well,  but  unravel  it  Both  arts,  however,  should

always be mastered.

  Again, the poet should remember what has been often said, and not make

an Epic structure into a tragedy—by an Epic structure I mean one with a

multiplicity of plots—as if, for instance, you were to make a tragedy out of

the entire story of the Iliad. In the Epic poem, owing to its length, each part

assumes its proper magnitude. In the drama the result is far from answering

to the poet’s expectation. The proof is that the poets who have dramatized the

whole story of the Fall of Troy, instead of selecting portions, like Euripides;

or who have taken the whole tale of Niobe, and not a part of her story, like

Aeschylus, either fail utterly or meet with poor success on the stage. Even

Agathon has been known to fail from this one defect. In his Reversals of the

Situation, however, he shows a marvelous skill in the effort to hit the popular

taste—to produce a tragic effect that satisfies the moral sense. This effect is

produced when the clever rogue, like Sisyphus, is outwitted, or the brave

villain defeated. Such an event is probable in Agathon’s sense of the word:

‘is  probable,’  he  says,  ‘that  many  things  should  happen  contrary  to

probability.’

The Chorus too should be regarded as one of the actors; it should be an

integral  part  of  the  whole,  and  share  in  the  action,  in  the  manner  not  of

Euripides but of Sophocles. As for the later poets, their choral songs pertain

as little to the subject of the piece as to that of any other tragedy. They are,therefore, sung as mere interludes—a practice first begun by Agathon. Yet

what  difference  is  there  between  introducing  such  choral  interludes,  and

transferring a speech, or even a whole act, from one play to another.


XIX


It remains to speak of Diction and Thought, the other parts of Tragedy

having been already discussed. concerning Thought, we may assume what is

said in the Rhetoric, to which inquiry the subject more strictly belongs. Under

Thought is included every effect which has to be produced by speech, the

subdivisions being: proof and refutation; the excitation of the feelings, such

as pity, fear, anger, and the like; the suggestion of importance or its opposite.

Now, it is evident that the dramatic incidents must be treated from the same

points of view as the dramatic speeches, when the object is to evoke the sense

of  pity,  fear,  importance,  or  probability.  The  only  difference  is  that  the

incidents  should  speak  for  themselves  without  verbal  exposition;  while

effects aimed at in should be produced by the speaker, and as a result of the

speech.  For  what  were  the  business  of  a  speaker,  if  the  Thought  were

revealed quite apart from what he says?

Next, as regards Diction. One branch of the inquiry treats of the Modes of

Utterance. But this province of knowledge belongs to the art of Delivery and

to the masters of that science. It includes, for instance—what is a command, a

prayer, a statement, a threat, a question, an answer, and so forth. To know or

not to know these things involves no serious censure upon the poet’s art. For

who can admit the fault imputed to Homer by Protagoras—that in the words,

‘Sing, goddess, of the wrath, he gives a command under the idea that he

utters a prayer? For to tell some one to do a thing or not to do it is, he says, a

command. We may, therefore, pass this over as an inquiry that belongs to

another art, not to poetry.


XX


  Language  in  general  includes  the  following  parts:  Letter,  Syllable,

Connecting Word, Noun, Verb, Inflection or Case, Sentence or Phrase.

A Letter is an indivisible sound, yet not every such sound, but only one

which can form part of a group of sounds. For even brutes utter indivisiblesounds, none of which I call a letter. The sound I mean may be either a

vowel, a semivowel, or a mute. A vowel is that which without impact of

tongue or lip has an audible sound. A semivowel that which with such impact

has an audible sound, as S and R. A mute, that which with such impact has by

itself no sound, but joined to a vowel sound becomes audible, as G and D.

These are distinguished according to the form assumed by the mouth and the

place where they are produced; according as they are aspirated or smooth,

long or short; as they are acute, grave, or of an intermediate tone; which

inquiry belongs in detail to the writers on meter.

A Syllable is a nonsignificant sound, composed of a mute and a vowel: for

GR without A is a syllable, as also with A—GRA. But the investigation of

these differences belongs also to metrical science.

A Connecting Word is a nonsignificant sound, which neither causes nor

hinders  the  union  of  many  sounds  into  one  significant  sound;  it  may  be

placed  at  either  end  or  in  the  middle  of  a  sentence.  Or,  a  nonsignificant

sound, which out of several sounds, each of them significant, is capable of

forming  one  significant  sound—as  amphi,  peri,  and  the  like.  Or,  a

nonsignificant  sound,  which  marks  the  beginning,  end,  or  division  of  a

sentence;  such,  however,  that  it  cannot  correctly  stand  by  itself  at  the

beginning of a sentence—as men, etoi, de.

A Noun is a composite significant sound, not marking time, of which no

part  is  in  itself  significant:  for  in  double  or  compound  words  we  do  not

employ  the  separate  parts  as  if  each  were  in  itself  significant.  Thus  in

Theodorus, ‘god-given,’ the doron or ‘gift’ is not in itself significant.

A Verb is a composite significant sound, marking time, in which, as in the

noun, no part is in itself significant. For ‘man’ or ‘white’ does not express the

idea of ‘when’; but ‘he walks’ or ‘he has walked’ does connote time, present

or past.

  Inflection  belongs  both  to  the  noun  and  verb,  and  expresses  either  the

relation ‘of,’ ‘to,’ or the like; or that of number, whether one or many, as

‘man’ or ‘men’; or the modes or tones in actual delivery, e.g., a question or a

command. ‘Did he go?’ and ‘go’ are verbal inflections of this kind.

A Sentence or Phrase is a composite significant sound, some at least of

whose parts are in themselves significant; for not every such group of words

consists of verbs and nouns—‘the definition of man,’ for example—but it

may dispense even with the verb. Still it will always have some significant

part, as ‘in walking,’ or ‘Cleon son of Cleon.’ A sentence or phrase may forma  unity  in  two  ways—either  as  signifying  one  thing,  or  as  consisting  of

several parts linked together. Thus the Iliad is one by the linking together of

parts, the definition of man by the unity of the thing signified.


XXI


  Words  are  of  two  kinds,  simple  and  double.  By  simple  I  mean  those

composed  of  nonsignificant  elements,  such  as  ge,  ‘earth.’  By  double  or

compound, those composed either of a significant and nonsignificant element

(though within the whole word no element is significant), or of elements that

are both significant. A word may likewise be triple, quadruple, or multiple in

form, like so many Massilian expressions, e.g., ‘Hermo-caico-xanthus [who

prayed to Father Zeus].’

  Every word is either current, or strange, or metaphorical, or ornamental, or

newly-coined, or lengthened, or contracted, or altered.

By a current or proper word I mean one which is in general use among a

people; by a strange word, one which is in use in another country. Plainly,

therefore,  the  same  word  may  be  at  once  strange  and  current,  but  not  in

relation to the same people. The word sigynon, ‘lance,’ is to the Cyprians a

current term but to us a strange one.

  Metaphor is the application of an alien name by transference either from

genus to species, or from species to genus, or from species to species, or by

analogy, that is, proportion. Thus from genus to species, as: ‘There lies my

ship’; for lying at anchor is a species of lying. From species to genus, as:

‘Verily ten thousand noble deeds hath Odysseus wrought’; for ten thousand is

a species of large number, and is here used for a large number generally.

From species to species, as: ‘With blade of bronze drew away the life,’ and

‘Cleft the water with the vessel of unyielding bronze.’ Here arusai, ‘to draw

away’ is used for tamein, ‘to cleave,’ and tamein, again for arusai—each

being a species of taking away. Analogy or proportion is when the second

term is to the first as the fourth to the third. We may then use the fourth for

the  second,  or  the  second  for  the  fourth.  Sometimes  too  we  qualify  the

metaphor by adding the term to which the proper word is relative. Thus the

cup is to Dionysus as the shield to Ares. The cup may, therefore, be called

‘the shield of Dionysus,’ and the shield ‘the cup of Ares.’ Or, again, as old

age is to life, so is evening to day. Evening may therefore be called, ‘the old

age  of  the  day,’  and  old  age,  ‘the  evening  of  life,’  or,  in  the  phrase  ofEmpedocles, ‘life’s setting sun.’ For some of the terms of the proportion

there is at times no word in existence; still the metaphor may be used. For

instance,  to  scatter  seed  is  called  sowing:  but  the  action  of  the  sun  in

scattering his rays is nameless. Still this process bears to the sun the same

relation as sowing to the seed. Hence the expression of the poet ‘sowing the

god-created light.’ There is another way in which this kind of metaphor may

be employed. We may apply an alien term, and then deny of that term one of

its proper attributes; as if we were to call the shield, not ‘the cup of Ares,’ but

‘the wineless cup’.

A newly-coined word is one which has never been even in local use, but is

adopted by the poet himself. Some such words there appear to be: as ernyges,

‘sprouters,’ for kerata, ‘horns’; and areter, ‘supplicator’, for hiereus, ‘priest.’

A word is lengthened when its own vowel is exchanged for a longer one,

or when a syllable is inserted. A word is contracted when some part of it is

removed.  Instances  of  lengthening  are:  poleos  for  poleos,  Peleiadeo  for

Peleidou; of contraction: kri, do, and ops, as in mia ginetai amphoteron ops,

‘the appearance of both is one.’

An  altered  word  is  one  in  which  part  of  the  ordinary  form  is  left

unchanged,  and  part  is  recast:  as  in  dexiteron  kata  mazon,  ‘on  the  right

breast,’ dexiteron is for dexion.

  Nouns in themselves are either masculine, feminine, or neuter. Masculine

are such as end in N, R, S, or in some letter compounded with S—these being

two, PS and X. Feminine, such as end in vowels that are always long, namely

E and O, and—of vowels that admit of lengthening—those in A. Thus the

number of letters in which nouns masculine and feminine end is the same; for

PS and X are equivalent to endings in S. No noun ends in a mute or a vowel

short by nature. Three only end in I—meli, ‘honey’; kommi, ‘gum’; peperi,

‘pepper’; five end in U. Neuter nouns end in these two latter vowels; also in

N and S.


XXII


The perfection of style is to be clear without being mean. The clearest style

is that which uses only current or proper words; at the same time it is mean—

witness the poetry of Cleophon and of Sthenelus. That diction, on the other

hand, is lofty and raised above the commonplace which employs unusual

words. By unusual, I mean strange (or rare) words, metaphorical, lengthened—anything, in short, that differs from the normal idiom. Yet a style wholly

composed of such words is either a riddle or a jargon; a riddle, if it consists of

metaphors; a jargon, if it consists of strange (or rare) words. For the essence

of a riddle is to express true facts under impossible combinations. Now this

cannot be done by any arrangement of ordinary words, but by the use of

metaphor it can. Such is the riddle: ‘A man I saw who on another man had

glued the bronze by aid of fire,’ and others of the same kind. A diction that is

made up of strange (or rare) terms is a jargon. A certain infusion, therefore,

of these elements is necessary to style; for the strange (or rare) word, the

metaphorical, the ornamental, and the other kinds above mentioned, will raise

it above the commonplace and mean, while the use of proper words will

make it perspicuous. But nothing contributes more to produce a cleanness of

diction that is remote from commonness than the lengthening, contraction,

and  alteration  of  words.  For  by  deviating  in  exceptional  cases  from  the

normal idiom, the language will gain distinction; while, at the same time, the

partial conformity with usage will give perspicuity. The critics, therefore, are

in  error  who  censure  these  licenses  of  speech,  and  hold  the  author  up  to

ridicule. Thus Eucleides, the elder, declared that it would be an easy matter to

be a poet if you might lengthen syllables at will. He caricatured the practice

in the very form of his diction, as in the verse:

<

div class="quote">

  Epicharen eidon Marathonade badizonta,

I saw Epichares walking to Marathon,

or,

ouk an g’eramenos ton ekeinou elleboron.

Not if you desire his hellebore.

To employ such license at all obtrusively is, no doubt, grotesque; but in

any  mode  of  poetic  diction  there  must  be  moderation.  Even  metaphors,

strange (or rare) words, or any similar forms of speech, would produce the

like effect if used without propriety and with the express purpose of being

ludicrous.  How  great  a  difference  is  made  by  the  appropriate  use  of

lengthening, may be seen in Epic poetry by the insertion of ordinary forms in

the verse. So, again, if we take a strange (or rare) word, a metaphor, or any

similar mode of expression, and replace it by the current or proper term, the

truth  of  our  observation  will  be  manifest.  For  example,  Aeschylus  and

Euripides each composed the same iambic line. But the alteration of a singleword by Euripides, who employed the rarer term instead of the ordinary one,

makes  one  verse  appear  beautiful  and  the  other  trivial.  Aeschylus  in  his

Philoctetes says:

<

div class="quote">

  phagedaina d’he mou sarkas esthiei podos.

The tumor which is eating the flesh of my foot.

  Euripides substitutes thoinatai, ‘feasts on,’ for esthiei, ‘feeds on.’ Again, in

the line,

<

div class="quote">

  nun de m’eon oligos te kai outidanos kai aeikes,

Yet a small man, worthless and unseemly,

the difference will be felt if we substitute the common words,

<

div class="quote">

  nun de m’eon mikros te kai asthenikos kai aeides.

Yet a little fellow, weak and ugly.

Or, if for the line,

diphron aeikelion katatheis oligen te trapezan,

Setting an unseemly couch and a meager table,

we read,

diphron mochtheron katatheis mikran te trapezan.

Setting a wretched couch and a puny table.

Or, for eiones booosin, ‘the sea shores roar,’ eiones krazousin, ‘the sea

shores screech.’

  Again, Ariphrades ridiculed the tragedians for using phrases which no one

would  employ  in  ordinary  speech:  for  example,  domaton  apo,  ‘from  the

house away,’ instead of apo domaton, ‘away from the house;’ sethen, ego de

nin, ‘to thee, and I to him;’ Achilleos peri, ‘Achilles about,’ instead of peri

Achilleos, ‘about Achilles;’ and the like. It is precisely because such phrases

are not part of the current idiom that they give distinction to the style. This,

however, he failed to see.

It  is  a  great  matter  to  observe  propriety  in  these  several  modes  of

expression, as also in compound words, strange (or rare) words, and so forth.

But the greatest thing by far is to have a command of metaphor. This alone

cannot be imparted by another; it is the mark of genius, for to make goodmetaphors implies an eye for resemblances.

Of  the  various  kinds  of  words,  the  compound  are  best  adapted  to

dithyrambs,  rare  words  to  heroic  poetry,  metaphors  to  iambic.  In  heroic

poetry, indeed, all these varieties are serviceable. But in iambic verse, which

reproduces, as far as may be, familiar speech, the most appropriate words are

those which are found even in prose. These are the current or proper, the

metaphorical, the ornamental.

  Concerning Tragedy and imitation by means of action this may suffice.


XXIII


As to that poetic imitation which is narrative in form and employs a single

meter,  the  plot  manifestly  ought,  as  in  a  tragedy,  to  be  constructed  on

dramatic principles. It should have for its subject a single action, whole and

complete, with a beginning, a middle, and an end. It will thus resemble a

living organism in all its unity, and produce the pleasure proper to it. It will

differ in structure from historical compositions, which of necessity present

not a single action, but a single period, and all that happened within that

period to one person or to many, little connected together as the events may

be. For as the sea-fight at Salamis and the battle with the Carthaginians in

Sicily took place at the same time, but did not tend to any one result, so in the

sequence of events, one thing sometimes follows another, and yet no single

result is thereby produced. Such is the practice, we may say, of most poets.

Here again, then, as has been already observed, the transcendent excellence

of Homer is manifest. He never attempts to make the whole war of Troy the

subject of his poem, though that war had a beginning and an end. It would

have been too vast a theme, and not easily embraced in a single view. If,

again,  he  had  kept  it  within  moderate  limits,  it  must  have  been  over-

complicated by the variety of the incidents. As it is, he detaches a single

portion, and admits as episodes many events from the general story of the

war—such as the Catalogue of the ships and others—thus diversifying the

poem. All other poets take a single hero, a single period, or an action single

indeed, but with a multiplicity of parts. Thus did the author of the Cypria and

of the Little Iliad. For this reason the Iliad and the Odyssey each furnish the

subject  of  one  tragedy,  or,  at  most,  of  two;  while  the  Cypria  supplies

materials for many, and the Little Iliad for eight—the Award of the Arms, the

Philoctetes, the Neoptolemus, the Eurypylus, the Mendicant Odysseus, theLaconian Women, the Fall of Ilium, the Departure of the Fleet.


XXIV


  Again, Epic poetry must have as many kinds as Tragedy: it must be simple,

or complex, or ‘ethical,’or ‘pathetic.’ The parts also, with the exception of

song and spectacle, are the same; for it requires Reversals of the Situation,

Recognitions,  and  Scenes  of  Suffering.  Moreover,  the  thoughts  and  the

diction  must  be  artistic.  In  all  these  respects  Homer  is  our  earliest  and

sufficient model. Indeed each of his poems has a twofold character. The Iliad

is at once simple and ‘pathetic,’ and the Odyssey complex (for Recognition

scenes run through it), and at the same time ‘ethical.’ Moreover, in diction

and thought they are supreme.

Epic poetry differs from Tragedy in the scale on which it is constructed,

and in its meter. As regards scale or length, we have already laid down an

adequate limit: the beginning and the end must be capable of being brought

within a single view. This condition will be satisfied by poems on a smaller

scale than the old epics, and answering in length to the group of tragedies

presented at a single sitting.

Epic poetry has, however, a great—a special—capacity for enlarging its

dimensions, and we can see the reason. In Tragedy we cannot imitate several

lines  of  actions  carried  on  at  one  and  the  same  time;  we  must  confine

ourselves to the action on the stage and the part taken by the players. But in

Epic  poetry,  owing  to  the  narrative  form,  many  events  simultaneously

transacted can be presented; and these, if relevant to the subject, add mass

and  dignity  to  the  poem.  The  Epic  has  here  an  advantage,  and  one  that

conduces  to  grandeur  of  effect,  to  diverting  the  mind  of  the  hearer,  and

relieving  the  story  with  varying  episodes.  For  sameness  of  incident  soon

produces satiety, and makes tragedies fail on the stage.

As for the meter, the heroic measure has proved its fitness by hexameter

test of experience. If a narrative poem in any other meter or in many meters

were now composed, it would be found incongruous. For of all measures the

heroic is the stateliest and the most massive; and hence it most readily admits

rare words and metaphors, which is another point in which the narrative form

of imitation stands alone. On the other hand, the iambic and the trochaic

tetrameter are stirring measures, the latter being akin to dancing, the former

expressive of action. Still more absurd would it be to mix together differentmeters, as was done by Chaeremon. Hence no one has ever composed a poem

on a great scale in any other than heroic verse. Nature herself, as we have

said, teaches the choice of the proper measure.

  Homer, admirable in all respects, has the special merit of being the only

poet who rightly appreciates the part he should take himself. The poet should

speak as little as possible in his own person, for it is not this that makes him

an imitator. Other poets appear themselves upon the scene throughout, and

imitate  but  little  and  rarely.  Homer,  after  a  few  prefatory  words,  at  once

brings in a man, or woman, or other personage; none of them wanting in

characteristic qualities, but each with a character of his own.

The element of the wonderful is required in Tragedy. The irrational, on

which the wonderful depends for its chief effects, has wider scope in Epic

poetry,  because  there  the  person  acting  is  not  seen.  Thus,  the  pursuit  of

Hector would be ludicrous if placed upon the stage—the Greeks standing still

and not joining in the pursuit, and Achilles waving them back. But in the

Epic poem the absurdity passes unnoticed. Now the wonderful is pleasing, as

may be inferred from the fact that every one tells a story with some addition

of his knowing that his hearers like it. It is Homer who has chiefly taught

other poets the art of telling lies skilfully. The secret of it lies in a fallacy For,

assuming  that  if  one  thing  is  or  becomes,  a  second  is  or  becomes,  men

imagine that, if the second is, the first likewise is or becomes. But this is a

false inference. Hence, where the first thing is untrue, it is quite unnecessary,

provided the second be true, to add that the first is or has become. For the

mind, knowing the second to be true, falsely infers the truth of the first. There

is an example of this in the Bath Scene of the Odyssey.

  Accordingly, the poet should prefer probable impossibilities to improbable

possibilities.  The  tragic  plot  must  not  be  composed  of  irrational  parts.

Everything  irrational  should,  if  possible,  be  excluded;  or,  at  all  events,  it

should  lie  outside  the  action  of  the  play  (as,  in  the  Oedipus,  the  hero’s

ignorance as to the manner of Laius’ death); not within the drama—as in the

Electra, the messenger’s account of the Pythian games; or, as in the Mysians,

the man who has come from Tegea to Mysia and is still speechless. The plea

that otherwise the plot would have been ruined, is ridiculous; such a plot

should not in the first instance be constructed. But once the irrational has

been introduced and an air of likelihood imparted to it, we must accept it in

spite  of  the  absurdity.  Take  even  the  irrational  incidents  in  the  Odyssey,

where Odysseus is left upon the shore of Ithaca. How intolerable even thesemight  have  been  would  be  apparent  if  an  inferior  poet  were  to  treat  the

subject. As it is, the absurdity is veiled by the poetic charm with which the

poet invests it.

The diction should be elaborated in the pauses of the action, where there is

no expression of character or thought. For, conversely, character and thought

are merely obscured by a diction that is over-brilliant


XXV


  With  respect  to  critical  difficulties  and  their  solutions,  the  number  and

nature of the sources from which they may be drawn may be thus exhibited.

The  poet  being  an  imitator,  like  a  painter  or  any  other  artist,  must  of

necessity imitate one of three objects—things as they were or are, things as

they are said or thought to be, or things as they ought to be. The vehicle of

expression is language—either current terms or, it may be, rare words or

metaphors.  There  are  also  many  modifications  of  language,  which  we

concede to the poets. Add to this, that the standard of correctness is not the

same in poetry and politics, any more than in poetry and any other art. Within

the art of poetry itself there are two kinds of faults—those which touch its

essence,  and  those  which  are  accidental.  If  a  poet  has  chosen  to  imitate

something,  [but  has  imitated  it  incorrectly]  through  want  of  capacity,  the

error is inherent in the poetry. But if the failure is due to a wrong choice—if

he  has  represented  a  horse  as  throwing  out  both  his  off  legs  at  once,  or

introduced technical inaccuracies in medicine, for example, or in any other

art—the error is not essential to the poetry. These are the points of view from

which we should consider and answer the objections raised by the critics.

First as to matters which concern the poet’s own art. If he describes the

impossible, he is guilty of an error; but the error may be justified, if the end

of the art be thereby attained (the end being that already mentioned)—if, that

is, the effect of this or any other part of the poem is thus rendered more

striking. A case in point is the pursuit of Hector. if, however, the end might

have been as well, or better, attained without violating the special rules of the

poetic art, the error is not justified: for every kind of error should, if possible,

be avoided.

  Again,  does  the  error  touch  the  essentials  of  the  poetic  art,  or  some

accident of it? For example, not to know that a hind has no horns is a less

serious matter than to paint it inartistically.  Further, if it be objected that the description is not true to fact, the poet

may  perhaps  reply,  ‘But  the  objects  are  as  they  ought  to  be’;  just  as

Sophocles said that he drew men as they ought to be; Euripides, as they are.

In this way the objection may be met. If, however, the representation be of

neither kind, the poet may answer, ‘This is how men say the thing is.’ applies

to tales about the gods. It may well be that these stories are not higher than

fact nor yet true to fact: they are, very possibly, what Xenophanes says of

them. But anyhow, ‘this is what is said.’ Again, a description may be no

better than the fact: ‘Still, it was the fact’; as in the passage about the arms:

‘Upright upon their butt-ends stood the spears.’ This was the custom then, as

it now is among the Illyrians.

  Again, in examining whether what has been said or done by some one is

poetically  right  or  not,  we  must  not  look  merely  to  the  particular  act  or

saying, and ask whether it is poetically good or bad. We must also consider

by whom it is said or done, to whom, when, by what means, or for what end;

whether, for instance, it be to secure a greater good, or avert a greater evil.

  Other difficulties may be resolved by due regard to the usage of language.

We  may  note  a  rare  word,  as  in  oureas  men  proton,  ‘the  mules  first  [he

killed],’ where the poet perhaps employs oureas not in the sense of mules, but

of sentinels. So, again, of Dolon: ‘ill-favored indeed he was to look upon.’ It

is not meant that his body was ill-shaped but that his face was ugly; for the

Cretans use the word eueides, ‘well-flavored’ to denote a fair face. Again,

zoroteron de keraie, ‘mix the drink livelier’ does not mean ‘mix it stronger’

as for hard drinkers, but ‘mix it quicker.’

  Sometimes an expression is metaphorical, as ‘Now all gods and men were

sleeping through the night,’ while at the same time the poet says: ‘Often

indeed as he turned his gaze to the Trojan plain, he marveled at the sound of

flutes and pipes.’ ‘All’ is here used metaphorically for ‘many,’ all being a

species of many. So in the verse, ‘alone she hath no part… , oie, ‘alone’ is

metaphorical; for the best known may be called the only one.

  Again, the solution may depend upon accent or breathing. Thus Hippias of

Thasos solved the difficulties in the lines, didomen (didomen) de hoi, and to

men hou (ou) kataputhetai ombro.

Or again, the question may be solved by punctuation, as in Empedocles:

‘Of a sudden things became mortal that before had learnt to be immortal, and

things unmixed before mixed.’

Or again, by ambiguity of meaning, as parocheken de pleo nux, where theword pleo is ambiguous.

Or by the usage of language. Thus any mixed drink is called oinos, ‘wine’.

Hence Ganymede is said ‘to pour the wine to Zeus,’ though the gods do not

drink  wine.  So  too  workers  in  iron  are  called  chalkeas,  or  ‘workers  in

bronze.’ This, however, may also be taken as a metaphor.

  Again, when a word seems to involve some inconsistency of meaning, we

should consider how many senses it may bear in the particular passage. For

example:  ‘there  was  stayed  the  spear  of  bronze’—we  should  ask  in  how

many  ways  we  may  take  ‘being  checked  there.’  The  true  mode  of

interpretation is the precise opposite of what Glaucon mentions. Critics, he

says, jump at certain groundless conclusions; they pass adverse judgement

and  then  proceed  to  reason  on  it;  and,  assuming  that  the  poet  has  said

whatever they happen to think, find fault if a thing is inconsistent with their

own fancy.

The question about Icarius has been treated in this fashion. The critics

imagine  he  was  a  Lacedaemonian.  They  think  it  strange,  therefore,  that

Telemachus should not have met him when he went to Lacedaemon. But the

Cephallenian story may perhaps be the true one. They allege that Odysseus

took a wife from among themselves, and that her father was Icadius, not

Icarius. It is merely a mistake, then, that gives plausibility to the objection.

In  general,  the  impossible  must  be  justified  by  reference  to  artistic

requirements, or to the higher reality, or to received opinion. With respect to

the requirements of art, a probable impossibility is to be preferred to a thing

improbable and yet possible. Again, it may be impossible that there should be

men such as Zeuxis painted. ‘Yes,’ we say, ‘but the impossible is the higher

thing; for the ideal type must surpass the realty.’ To justify the irrational, we

appeal to what is commonly said to be. In addition to which, we urge that the

irrational sometimes does not violate reason; just as ‘it is probable that a

thing may happen contrary to probability.’

  Things that sound contradictory should be examined by the same rules as

in  dialectical  refutation—whether  the  same  thing  is  meant,  in  the  same

relation, and in the same sense. We should therefore solve the question by

reference to what the poet says himself, or to what is tacitly assumed by a

person of intelligence.

The element of the irrational, and, similarly, depravity of character, are

justly censured when there is no inner necessity for introducing them. Such is

the irrational element in the introduction of Aegeus by Euripides and thebadness of Menelaus in the Orestes.

  Thus,  there  are  five  sources  from  which  critical  objections  are  drawn.

Things are censured either as impossible, or irrational, or morally hurtful, or

contradictory,  or  contrary  to  artistic  correctness.  The  answers  should  be

sought under the twelve heads above mentioned.


XXVI


The question may be raised whether the Epic or Tragic mode of imitation

is the higher. If the more refined art is the higher, and the more refined in

every case is that which appeals to the better sort of audience, the art which

imitates anything and everything is manifestly most unrefined. The audience

is supposed to be too dull to comprehend unless something of their own is

thrown by the performers, who therefore indulge in restless movements. Bad

flute-players twist and twirl, if they have to represent ‘the quoit-throw,’ or

hustle the coryphaeus when they perform the Scylla. Tragedy, it is said, has

this  same  defect.  We  may  compare  the  opinion  that  the  older  actors

entertained of their successors. Mynniscus used to call Callippides ‘ape’ on

account of the extravagance of his action, and the same view was held of

Pindarus. Tragic art, then, as a whole, stands to Epic in the same relation as

the younger to the elder actors. So we are told that Epic poetry is addressed to

a  cultivated  audience,  who  do  not  need  gesture;  Tragedy,  to  an  inferior

public. Being then unrefined, it is evidently the lower of the two.

Now, in the first place, this censure attaches not to the poetic but to the

histrionic art; for gesticulation may be equally overdone in epic recitation, as

by  Sosistratus,  or  in  lyrical  competition,  as  by  Mnasitheus  the  Opuntian.

Next, all action is not to be condemned—any more than all dancing—but

only that of bad performers. Such was the fault found in Callippides, as also

in  others  of  our  own  day,  who  are  censured  for  representing  degraded

women. Again, Tragedy like Epic poetry produces its effect even without

action; it reveals its power by mere reading. If, then, in all other respects it is

superior, this fault, we say, is not inherent in it.

And superior it is, because it has an the epic elements—it may even use the

epic meter—with the music and spectacular effects as important accessories;

and these produce the most vivid of pleasures. Further, it has vividness of

impression in reading as well as in representation. Moreover, the art attains

its end within narrower limits for the concentrated effect is more pleasurable