thing in respect of the same thing may be at the same time both hot and not

hot. So, too, in every other case where the movent must be described by the

same name in the same sense as the moved. Therefore when a thing moves

itself it is one part of it that is the movent and another part that is moved. But

it is not self-moving in the sense that each of the two parts is moved by the

other part: the following considerations make this evident. In the first place, if

each of the two parts is to move the other, there will be no first movent. If a

thing is moved by a series of movents, that which is earlier in the series is

more the cause of its being moved than that which comes next, and will be

more truly the movent: for we found that there are two kinds of movent, that

which is itself moved by something else and that which derives its motion

from itself: and that which is further from the thing that is moved is nearer to

the principle of motion than that which is intermediate. In the second place,

there is no necessity for the movent part to be moved by anything but itself:

so it can only be accidentally that the other part moves it in return. I take then

the possible case of its not moving it: then there will be a part that is moved

and a part that is an unmoved movent. In the third place, there is no necessity

for the movent to be moved in return: on the contrary the necessity that there

should  always  be  motion  makes  it  necessary  that  there  should  be  some

movent that is either unmoved or moved by itself. In the fourth place we

should then have a thing undergoing the same motion that it is causing-that

which is producing heat, therefore, being heated. But as a matter of fact that

which primarily moves itself cannot contain either a single part that moves

itself or a number of parts each of which moves itself. For, if the whole is

moved by itself, it must be moved either by some part of itself or as a whole

by itself as a whole. If, then, it is moved in virtue of some part of it being

moved by that part itself, it is this part that will be the primary self-movent,

since, if this part is separated from the whole, the part will still move itself,

but the whole will do so no longer. If on the other hand the whole is moved

by itself as a whole, it must be accidentally that the parts move themselves:

and therefore, their self-motion not being necessary, we may take the case of

their not being moved by themselves. Therefore in the whole of the thing we

may distinguish that which imparts motion without itself being moved and

that which is moved: for only in this way is it possible for a thing to be self-

moved. Further, if the whole moves itself we may distinguish in it that which

imparts the motion and that which is moved: so while we say that AB is

moved by itself, we may also say that it is moved by A. And since that whichimparts motion may be either a thing that is moved by something else or a

thing that is unmoved, and that which is moved may be either a thing that

imparts motion to something else or a thing that does not, that which moves

itself must be composed of something that is unmoved but imparts motion

and also of something that is moved but does not necessarily impart motion

but may or may not do so. Thus let A be something that imparts motion but is

unmoved, B something that is moved by A and moves G, G something that is

moved by B but moves nothing (granted that we eventually arrive at G we

may take it that there is only one intermediate term, though there may be

more). Then the whole ABG moves itself. But if I take away G, AB will

move itself, A imparting motion and B being moved, whereas G will not

move itself or in fact be moved at all. Nor again will BG move itself apart

from A: for B imparts motion only through being moved by something else,

not through being moved by any part of itself. So only AB moves itself. That

which moves itself, therefore, must comprise something that imparts motion

but is unmoved and something that is moved but does not necessarily move

anything else: and each of these two things, or at any rate one of them, must

be  in  contact  with  the  other.  If,  then,  that  which  imparts  motion  is  a

continuous substance-that which is moved must of course be so-it is clear that

it is not through some part of the whole being of such a nature as to be

capable of moving itself that the whole moves itself: it moves itself as a

whole, both being moved and imparting motion through containing a part that

imparts motion and a part that is moved. It does not impart motion as a whole

nor is it moved as a whole: it is A alone that imparts motion and B alone that

is moved. It is not true, further, that G is moved by A, which is impossible.

Here a difficulty arises: if something is taken away from A (supposing that

that which imparts motion but is unmoved is a continuous substance), or from

B the part that is moved, will the remainder of A continue to impart motion

or the remainder of B continue to be moved? If so, it will not be AB primarily

that is moved by itself, since, when something is taken away from AB, the

remainder of AB will still continue to move itself. Perhaps we may state the

case thus: there is nothing to prevent each of the two parts, or at any rate one

of them, that which is moved, being divisible though actually undivided, so

that if it is divided it will not continue in the possession of the same capacity:

and so there is nothing to prevent self-motion residing primarily in things that

are potentially divisible.

  From  what  has  been  said,  then,  it  is  evident  that  that  which  primarilyimparts motion is unmoved: for, whether the series is closed at once by that

which is in motion but moved by something else deriving its motion directly

from the first unmoved, or whether the motion is derived from what is in

motion but moves itself and stops its own motion, on both suppositions we

have the result that in all cases of things being in motion that which primarily

imparts motion is unmoved.

<

div id="section67" class="section" title="6">


6


  Since  there  must  always  be  motion  without  intermission,  there  must

necessarily be something, one thing or it may be a plurality, that first imparts

motion, and this first movent must be unmoved. Now the question whether

each of the things that are unmoved but impart motion is eternal is irrelevant

to our present argument: but the following considerations will make it clear

that  there  must  necessarily  be  some  such  thing,  which,  while  it  has  the

capacity of moving something else, is itself unmoved and exempt from all

change, which can affect it neither in an unqualified nor in an accidental

sense. Let us suppose, if any one likes, that in the case of certain things it is

possible for them at different times to be and not to be, without any process

of becoming and perishing (in fact it would seem to be necessary, if a thing

that has not parts at one time is and at another time is not, that any such thing

should  without  undergoing  any  process  of  change  at  one  time  be  and  at

another  time  not  be).  And  let  us  further  suppose  it  possible  that  some

principles that are unmoved but capable of imparting motion at one time are

and at another time are not. Even so, this cannot be true of all such principles,

since  there  must  clearly  be  something  that  causes  things  that  move

themselves at one time to be and at another not to be. For, since nothing that

has not parts can be in motion, that which moves itself must as a whole have

magnitude, though nothing that we have said makes this necessarily true of

every movent. So the fact that some things become and others perish, and that

this is so continuously, cannot be caused by any one of those things that,

though they are unmoved, do not always exist: nor again can it be caused by

any of those which move certain particular things, while others move other

things. The eternity and continuity of the process cannot be caused either by

any one of them singly or by the sum of them, because this causal relationmust be eternal and necessary, whereas the sum of these movents is infinite

and they do not all exist together. It is clear, then, that though there may be

countless instances of the perishing of some principles that are unmoved but

impart motion, and though many things that move themselves perish and are

succeeded  by  others  that  come  into  being,  and  though  one  thing  that  is

unmoved moves one thing while another moves another, nevertheless there is

something that comprehends them all, and that as something apart from each

one of them, and this it is that is the cause of the fact that some things are and

others are not and of the continuous process of change: and this causes the

motion of the other movents, while they are the causes of the motion of other

things. Motion, then, being eternal, the first movent, if there is but one, will

be eternal also: if there are more than one, there will be a plurality of such

eternal movents. We ought, however, to suppose that there is one rather than

many, and a finite rather than an infinite number. When the consequences of

either assumption are the same, we should always assume that things are

finite rather than infinite in number, since in things constituted by nature that

which is finite and that which is better ought, if possible, to be present rather

than the reverse: and here it is sufficient to assume only one movent, the first

of unmoved things, which being eternal will be the principle of motion to

everything else.

The following argument also makes it evident that the first movent must be

something that is one and eternal. We have shown that there must always be

motion.  That  being  so,  motion  must  also  be  continuous,  because  what  is

always is continuous, whereas what is merely in succession is not continuous.

But further, if motion is continuous, it is one: and it is one only if the movent

and the moved that constitute it are each of them one, since in the event of a

thing’s being moved now by one thing and now by another the whole motion

will not be continuous but successive.

  Moreover a conviction that there is a first unmoved something may be

reached not only from the foregoing arguments, but also by considering again

the principles operative in movents. Now it is evident that among existing

things there are some that are sometimes in motion and sometimes at rest.

This fact has served above to make it clear that it is not true either that all

things are in motion or that all things are at rest or that some things are

always at rest and the remainder always in motion: on this matter proof is

supplied by things that fluctuate between the two and have the capacity of

being sometimes in motion and sometimes at rest. The existence of things ofthis kind is clear to all: but we wish to explain also the nature of each of the

other two kinds and show that there are some things that are always unmoved

and some things that are always in motion. In the course of our argument

directed to this end we established the fact that everything that is in motion is

moved by something, and that the movent is either unmoved or in motion,

and that, if it is in motion, it is moved either by itself or by something else

and so on throughout the series: and so we proceeded to the position that the

first principle that directly causes things that are in motion to be moved is

that  which  moves  itself,  and  the  first  principle  of  the  whole  series  is  the

unmoved. Further it is evident from actual observation that there are things

that have the characteristic of moving themselves, e.g. the animal kingdom

and  the  whole  class  of  living  things.  This  being  so,  then,  the  view  was

suggested that perhaps it may be possible for motion to come to be in a thing

without having been in existence at all before, because we see this actually

occurring in animals: they are unmoved at one time and then again they are in

motion, as it seems. We must grasp the fact, therefore, that animals move

themselves  only  with  one  kind  of  motion,  and  that  this  is  not  strictly

originated by them. The cause of it is not derived from the animal itself: it is

connected  with  other  natural  motions  in  animals,  which  they  do  not

experience  through  their  own  instrumentality,  e.g.  increase,  decrease,  and

respiration: these are experienced by every animal while it is at rest and not in

motion in respect of the motion set up by its own agency: here the motion is

caused by the atmosphere and by many things that enter into the animal: thus

in some cases the cause is nourishment: when it is being digested animals

sleep, and when it is being distributed through the system they awake and

move  themselves,  the  first  principle  of  this  motion  being  thus  originally

derived from outside. Therefore animals are not always in continuous motion

by their own agency: it is something else that moves them, itself being in

motion and changing as it comes into relation with each several thing that

moves itself. (Moreover in all these self-moving things the first movent and

cause of their self-motion is itself moved by itself, though in an accidental

sense: that is to say, the body changes its place, so that that which is in the

body  changes  its  place  also  and  is  a  self-movent  through  its  exercise  of

leverage.) Hence we may confidently conclude that if a thing belongs to the

class of unmoved movents that are also themselves moved accidentally, it is

impossible that it should cause continuous motion. So the necessity that there

should be motion continuously requires that there should be a first moventthat is unmoved even accidentally, if, as we have said, there is to be in the

world of things an unceasing and undying motion, and the world is to remain

permanently  self-contained  and  within  the  same  limits:  for  if  the  first

principle  is  permanent,  the  universe  must  also  be  permanent,  since  it  is

continuous with the first principle. (We must distinguish, however, between

accidental motion of a thing by itself and such motion by something else, the

former being confined to perishable things, whereas the latter belongs also to

certain first principles of heavenly bodies, of all those, that is to say, that

experience more than one locomotion.)

And further, if there is always something of this nature, a movent that is

itself  unmoved  and  eternal,  then  that  which  is  first  moved  by  it  must  be

eternal.  Indeed  this  is  clear  also  from  the  consideration  that  there  would

otherwise be no becoming and perishing and no change of any kind in other

things,  which  require  something  that  is  in  motion  to  move  them:  for  the

motion imparted by the unmoved will always be imparted in the same way

and be one and the same, since the unmoved does not itself change in relation

to that which is moved by it. But that which is moved by something that,

though it is in motion, is moved directly by the unmoved stands in varying

relations to the things that it moves, so that the motion that it causes will not

be always the same: by reason of the fact that it occupies contrary positions

or assumes contrary forms at different times it will produce contrary motions

in each several thing that it moves and will cause it to be at one time at rest

and at another time in motion.

The foregoing argument, then, has served to clear up the point about which

we raised a difficulty at the outset-why is it that instead of all things being

either in motion or at rest, or some things being always in motion and the

remainder always at rest, there are things that are sometimes in motion and

sometimes not? The cause of this is now plain: it is because, while some

things are moved by an eternal unmoved movent and are therefore always in

motion, other things are moved by a movent that is in motion and changing,

so that they too must change. But the unmoved movent, as has been said,

since it remains permanently simple and unvarying and in the same state, will

cause motion that is one and simple.

<

div id="section68" class="section" title="7">


7This matter will be made clearer, however, if we start afresh from another

point. We must consider whether it is or is not possible that there should be a

continuous motion, and, if it is possible, which this motion is, and which is

the primary motion: for it is plain that if there must always be motion, and a

particular motion is primary and continuous, then it is this motion that is

imparted by the first movent, and so it is necessarily one and the same and

continuous and primary.

Now  of  the  three  kinds  of  motion  that  there  are-motion  in  respect  of

magnitude, motion in respect of affection, and motion in respect of place-it is

this last, which we call locomotion, that must be primary. This may be shown

as follows. It is impossible that there should be increase without the previous

occurrence of alteration: for that which is increased, although in a sense it is

increased by what is like itself, is in a sense increased by what is unlike itself:

thus it is said that contrary is nourishment to contrary: but growth is effected

only by things becoming like to like. There must be alteration, then, in that

there is this change from contrary to contrary. But the fact that a thing is

altered requires that there should be something that alters it, something e.g.

that makes the potentially hot into the actually hot: so it is plain that the

movent does not maintain a uniform relation to it but is at one time nearer to

and at another farther from that which is altered: and we cannot have this

without locomotion. If, therefore, there must always be motion, there must

also always be locomotion as the primary motion, and, if there is a primary as

distinguished from a secondary form of locomotion, it must be the primary

form. Again, all affections have their origin in condensation and rarefaction:

thus heavy and light, soft and hard, hot and cold, are considered to be forms

of density and rarity. But condensation and rarefaction are nothing more than

combination and separation, processes in accordance with which substances

are said to become and perish: and in being combined and separated things

must change in respect of place. And further, when a thing is increased or

decreased its magnitude changes in respect of place.

  Again, there is another point of view from which it will be clearly seen that

locomotion is primary. As in the case of other things so too in the case of

motion the word ‘primary’ may be used in several senses. A thing is said to

be prior to other things when, if it does not exist, the others will not exist,

whereas it can exist without the others: and there is also priority in time and

priority in perfection of existence. Let us begin, then, with the first sense.

Now  there  must  be  motion  continuously,  and  there  may  be  continuouslyeither continuous motion or successive motion, the former, however, in a

higher degree than the latter: moreover it is better that it should be continuous

rather than successive motion, and we always assume the presence in nature

of the better, if it be possible: since, then, continuous motion is possible (this

will be proved later: for the present let us take it for granted), and no other

motion can be continuous except locomotion, locomotion must be primary.

For there is no necessity for the subject of locomotion to be the subject either

of increase or of alteration, nor need it become or perish: on the other hand

there  cannot  be  any  one  of  these  processes  without  the  existence  of  the

continuous motion imparted by the first movent.

  Secondly, locomotion must be primary in time: for this is the only motion

possible for things. It is true indeed that, in the case of any individual thing

that has a becoming, locomotion must be the last of its motions: for after its

becoming it first experiences alteration and increase, and locomotion is a

motion that belongs to such things only when they are perfected. But there

must previously be something else that is in process of locomotion to be the

cause even of the becoming of things that become, without itself being in

process  of  becoming,  as  e.g.  the  begotten  is  preceded  by  what  begot  it:

otherwise becoming might be thought to be the primary motion on the ground

that the thing must first become. But though this is so in the case of any

individual  thing  that  becomes,  nevertheless  before  anything  becomes,

something else must be in motion, not itself becoming but being, and before

this  there  must  again  be  something  else.  And  since  becoming  cannot  be

primary-for, if it were, everything that is in motion would be perishable-it is

plain that no one of the motions next in order can be prior to locomotion. By

the motions next in order I mean increase and then alteration, decrease, and

perishing.  All  these  are  posterior  to  becoming:  consequently,  if  not  even

becoming is prior to locomotion, then no one of the other processes of change

is so either.

  Thirdly,  that  which  is  in  process  of  becoming  appears  universally  as

something  imperfect  and  proceeding  to  a  first  principle:  and  so  what  is

posterior in the order of becoming is prior in the order of nature. Now all

things that go through the process of becoming acquire locomotion last. It is

this that accounts for the fact that some living things, e.g. plants and many

kinds of animals, owing to lack of the requisite organ, are entirely without

motion,  whereas  others  acquire  it  in  the  course  of  their  being  perfected.

Therefore, if the degree in which things possess locomotion corresponds tothe degree in which they have realized their natural development, then this

motion must be prior to all others in respect of perfection of existence: and

not only for this reason but also because a thing that is in motion loses its

essential character less in the process of locomotion than in any other kind of

motion: it is the only motion that does not involve a change of being in the

sense in which there is a change in quality when a thing is altered and a

change in quantity when a thing is increased or decreased. Above all it is

plain that this motion, motion in respect of place, is what is in the strictest

sense produced by that which moves itself; but it is the self-movent that we

declare to be the first principle of things that are moved and impart motion

and the primary source to which things that are in motion are to be referred.

It  is  clear,  then,  from  the  foregoing  arguments  that  locomotion  is  the

primary motion. We have now to show which kind of locomotion is primary.

The same process of reasoning will also make clear at the same time the truth

of the assumption we have made both now and at a previous stage that it is

possible that there should be a motion that is continuous and eternal. Now it

is clear from the following considerations that no other than locomotion can

be continuous. Every other motion and change is from an opposite to an

opposite: thus for the processes of becoming and perishing the limits are the

existent  and  the  non-existent,  for  alteration  the  various  pairs  of  contrary

affections, and for increase and decrease either greatness and smallness or

perfection  and  imperfection  of  magnitude:  and  changes  to  the  respective

contraries are contrary changes. Now a thing that is undergoing any particular

kind of motion, but though previously existent has not always undergone it,

must previously have been at rest so far as that motion is concerned. It is

clear, then, that for the changing thing the contraries will be states of rest.

And we have a similar result in the case of changes that are not motions: for

becoming  and  perishing,  whether  regarded  simply  as  such  without

qualification or as affecting something in particular, are opposites: therefore

provided it is impossible for a thing to undergo opposite changes at the same

time, the change will not be continuous, but a period of time will intervene

between the opposite processes. The question whether these contradictory

changes  are  contraries  or  not  makes  no  difference,  provided  only  it  is

impossible for them both to be present to the same thing at the same time: the

point is of no importance to the argument. Nor does it matter if the thing need

not rest in the contradictory state, or if there is no state of rest as a contrary to

the process of change: it may be true that the non-existent is not at rest, andthat  perishing  is  a  process  to  the  non-existent.  All  that  matters  is  the

intervention  of  a  time:  it  is  this  that  prevents  the  change  from  being

continuous: so, too, in our previous instances the important thing was not the

relation of contrariety but the impossibility of the two processes being present

to a thing at the same time. And there is no need to be disturbed by the fact

that on this showing there may be more than one contrary to the same thing,

that a particular motion will be contrary both to rest and to motion in the

contrary direction. We have only to grasp the fact that a particular motion is

in a sense the opposite both of a state of rest and of the contrary motion, in

the same way as that which is of equal or standard measure is the opposite

both of that which surpasses it and of that which it surpasses, and that it is

impossible for the opposite motions or changes to be present to a thing at the

same time. Furthermore, in the case of becoming and perishing it would seem

to  be  an  utterly  absurd  thing  if  as  soon  as  anything  has  become  it  must

necessarily perish and cannot continue to exist for any time: and, if this is

true of becoming and perishing, we have fair grounds for inferring the same

to be true of the other kinds of change, since it would be in the natural order

of things that they should be uniform in this respect.

<

div id="section69" class="section" title="8">


8


Let us now proceed to maintain that it is possible that there should be an

infinite motion that is single and continuous, and that this motion is rotatory

motion. The motion of everything that is in process of locomotion is either

rotatory or rectilinear or a compound of the two: consequently, if one of the

former two is not continuous, that which is composed of them both cannot be

continuous  either.  Now  it  is  plain  that  if  the  locomotion  of  a  thing  is

rectilinear and finite it is not continuous locomotion: for the thing must turn

back, and that which turns back in a straight line undergoes two contrary

locomotions, since, so far as motion in respect of place is concerned, upward

motion is the contrary of downward motion, forward motion of backward

motion, and motion to the left of motion to the right, these being the pairs of

contraries in the sphere of place. But we have already defined single and

continuous motion to be motion of a single thing in a single period of time

and operating within a sphere admitting of no further specific differentiation(for we have three things to consider, first that which is in motion, e.g. a man

or a god, secondly the ‘when’ of the motion, that is to say, the time, and

thirdly the sphere within which it operates, which may be either place or

affection or essential form or magnitude): and contraries are specifically not

one and the same but distinct: and within the sphere of place we have the

above-mentioned distinctions. Moreover we have an indication that motion

from A to B is the contrary of motion from B to A in the fact that, if they

occur at the same time, they arrest and stop each other. And the same is true

in the case of a circle: the motion from A towards B is the contrary of the

motion from A towards G: for even if they are continuous and there is no

turning back they arrest each other, because contraries annihilate or obstruct

one another. On the other hand lateral motion is not the contrary of upward

motion.  But  what  shows  most  clearly  that  rectilinear  motion  cannot  be

continuous is the fact that turning back necessarily implies coming to a stand,

not only when it is a straight line that is traversed, but also in the case of

locomotion in a circle (which is not the same thing as rotatory locomotion:

for, when a thing merely traverses a circle, it may either proceed on its course

without a break or turn back again when it has reached the same point from

which it started). We may assure ourselves of the necessity of this coming to

a  stand  not  only  on  the  strength  of  observation,  but  also  on  theoretical

grounds.  We  may  start  as  follows:  we  have  three  points,  starting-point,

middle-point, and finishing-point, of which the middle-point in virtue of the

relations in which it stands severally to the other two is both a starting-point

and a finishing-point, and though numerically one is theoretically two. We

have further the distinction between the potential and the actual. So in the

straight line in question any one of the points lying between the two extremes

is potentially a middle-point: but it is not actually so unless that which is in

motion divides the line by coming to a stand at that point and beginning its

motion again: thus the middle-point becomes both a starting-point and a goal,

the starting-point of the latter part and the finishing-point of the first part of

the motion. This is the case e.g. when A in the course of its locomotion

comes to a stand at B and starts again towards G: but when its motion is

continuous A cannot either have come to be or have ceased to be at the point

B: it can only have been there at the moment of passing, its passage not being

contained within any period of time except the whole of which the particular

moment is a dividing-point. To maintain that it has come to be and ceased to

be there will involve the consequence that A in the course of its locomotionwill  always  be  coming  to  a  stand:  for  it  is  impossible  that  A  should

simultaneously have come to be at B and ceased to be there, so that the two

things must have happened at different points of time, and therefore there will

be the intervening period of time: consequently A will be in a state of rest at

B, and similarly at all other points, since the same reasoning holds good in

every case. When to A, that which is in process of locomotion, B, the middle-

point, serves both as a finishing-point and as a starting-point for its motion, A

must come to a stand at B, because it makes it two just as one might do in

thought. However, the point A is the real starting-point at which the moving

body has ceased to be, and it is at G that it has really come to be when its

course is finished and it comes to a stand. So this is how we must meet the

difficulty that then arises, which is as follows. Suppose the line E is equal to

the line Z, that A proceeds in continuous locomotion from the extreme point

of E to G, and that, at the moment when A is at the point B, D is proceeding

in uniform locomotion and with the same velocity as A from the extremity of

Z to H: then, says the argument, D will have reached H before A has reached

G for that which makes an earlier start and departure must make an earlier

arrival:  the  reason,  then,  for  the  late  arrival  of  A  is  that  it  has  not

simultaneously come to be and ceased to be at B: otherwise it will not arrive

later: for this to happen it will be necessary that it should come to a stand

there. Therefore we must not hold that there was a moment when A came to

be at B and that at the same moment D was in motion from the extremity of

Z: for the fact of A’s having come to be at B will involve the fact of its also

ceasing to be there, and the two events will not be simultaneous, whereas the

truth is that A is at B at a sectional point of time and does not occupy time

there. In this case, therefore, where the motion of a thing is continuous, it is

impossible to use this form of expression. On the other hand in the case of a

thing that turns back in its course we must do so. For suppose H in the course

of its locomotion proceeds to D and then turns back and proceeds downwards

again: then the extreme point D has served as finishing-point and as starting-

point for it, one point thus serving as two: therefore H must have come to a

stand  there:  it  cannot  have  come  to  be  at  D  and  departed  from  D

simultaneously, for in that case it would simultaneously be there and not be

there at the same moment. And here we cannot apply the argument used to

solve the difficulty stated above: we cannot argue that H is at D at a sectional

point of time and has not come to be or ceased to be there. For here the goal

that is reached is necessarily one that is actually, not potentially, existent.Now the point in the middle is potential: but this one is actual, and regarded

from below it is a finishing-point, while regarded from above it is a starting-

point,  so  that  it  stands  in  these  same  two  respective  relations  to  the  two

motions. Therefore that which turns back in traversing a rectilinear course

must in so doing come to a stand. Consequently there cannot be a continuous

rectilinear motion that is eternal.

The same method should also be adopted in replying to those who ask, in

the terms of Zeno’s argument, whether we admit that before any distance can

be traversed half the distance must be traversed, that these half-distances are

infinite in number, and that it is impossible to traverse distances infinite in

number-or  some  on  the  lines  of  this  same  argument  put  the  questions  in

another form, and would have us grant that in the time during which a motion

is in progress it should be possible to reckon a half-motion before the whole

for every half-distance that we get, so that we have the result that when the

whole distance is traversed we have reckoned an infinite number, which is

admittedly impossible. Now when we first discussed the question of motion

we put forward a solution of this difficulty turning on the fact that the period

of time occupied in traversing the distance contains within itself an infinite

number of units: there is no absurdity, we said, in supposing the traversing of

infinite distances in infinite time, and the element of infinity is present in the

time no less than in the distance. But, although this solution is adequate as a

reply to the questioner (the question asked being whether it is possible in a

finite time to traverse or reckon an infinite number of units), nevertheless as

an account of the fact and explanation of its true nature it is inadequate. For

suppose the distance to be left out of account and the question asked to be no

longer whether it is possible in a finite time to traverse an infinite number of

distances, and suppose that the inquiry is made to refer to the time taken by

itself (for the time contains an infinite number of divisions): then this solution

will no longer be adequate, and we must apply the truth that we enunciated in

our recent discussion, stating it in the following way. In the act of dividing

the continuous distance into two halves one point is treated as two, since we

make it a starting-point and a finishing-point: and this same result is also

produced by the act of reckoning halves as well as by the act of dividing into

halves. But if divisions are made in this way, neither the distance nor the

motion will be continuous: for motion if it is to be continuous must relate to

what  is  continuous:  and  though  what  is  continuous  contains  an  infinite

number of halves, they are not actual but potential halves. If the halves aremade actual, we shall get not a continuous but an intermittent motion. In the

case of reckoning the halves, it is clear that this result follows: for then one

point must be reckoned as two: it will be the finishing-point of the one half

and the starting-point of the other, if we reckon not the one continuous whole

but the two halves. Therefore to the question whether it is possible to pass

through an infinite number of units either of time or of distance we must

reply that in a sense it is and in a sense it is not. If the units are actual, it is not

possible: if they are potential, it is possible. For in the course of a continuous

motion the traveller has traversed an infinite number of units in an accidental

sense  but  not  in  an  unqualified  sense:  for  though  it  is  an  accidental

characteristic of the distance to be an infinite number of half-distances, this is

not its real and essential character. It is also plain that unless we hold that the

point of time that divides earlier from later always belongs only to the later so

far as the thing is concerned, we shall be involved in the consequence that the

same thing is at the same moment existent and not existent, and that a thing is

not existent at the moment when it has become. It is true that the point is

common  to  both  times,  the  earlier  as  well  as  the  later,  and  that,  while

numerically one and the same, it is theoretically not so, being the finishing-

point of the one and the starting-point of the other: but so far as the thing is

concerned it belongs to the later stage of what happens to it. Let us suppose a

time ABG and a thing D, D being white in the time A and not-white in the

time B. Then D is at the moment G white and not-white: for if we were right

in saying that it is white during the whole time A, it is true to call it white at

any moment of A, and not-white in B, and G is in both A and B. We must not

allow, therefore, that it is white in the whole of A, but must say that it is so in

all of it except the last moment G. G belongs already to the later period, and

if in the whole of A not-white was in process of becoming and white of

perishing, at G the process is complete. And so G is the first moment at

which it is true to call the thing white or not white respectively. Otherwise a

thing may be non-existent at the moment when it has become and existent at

the moment when it has perished: or else it must be possible for a thing at the

same time to be white and not white and in fact to be existent and non-

existent. Further, if anything that exists after having been previously non-

existent must become existent and does not exist when it is becoming, time

cannot be divisible into time-atoms. For suppose that D was becoming white

in the time A and that at another time B, a time-atom consecutive with the

last atom of A, D has already become white and so is white at that moment:then, inasmuch as in the time A it was becoming white and so was not white

and at the moment B it is white, there must have been a becoming between A

and B and therefore also a time in which the becoming took place. On the

other hand, those who deny atoms of time (as we do) are not affected by this

argument: according to them D has become and so is white at the last point of

the actual time in which it was becoming white: and this point has no other

point  consecutive  with  or  in  succession  to  it,  whereas  time-atoms  are

conceived as successive. Moreover it is clear that if D was becoming white in

the whole time A, the time occupied by it in having become white in addition

to  having  been  in  process  of  becoming  white  is  no  more  than  all  that  it

occupied in the mere process of becoming white.

  These and such-like, then, are the arguments for our conclusion that derive

cogency from the fact that they have a special bearing on the point at issue. If

we look at the question from the point of view of general theory, the same

result  would  also  appear  to  be  indicated  by  the  following  arguments.

Everything whose motion is continuous must, on arriving at any point in the

course of its locomotion, have been previously also in process of locomotion

to that point, if it is not forced out of its path by anything: e.g. on arriving at

B a thing must also have been in process of locomotion to B, and that not

merely when it was near to B, but from the moment of its starting on its

course, since there can be, no reason for its being so at any particular stage

rather than at an earlier one. So, too, in the case of the other kinds of motion.

Now we are to suppose that a thing proceeds in locomotion from A to G and

that at the moment of its arrival at G the continuity of its motion is unbroken

and will remain so until it has arrived back at A. Then when it is undergoing

locomotion from A to G it is at the same time undergoing also its locomotion

to  A  from  G:  consequently  it  is  simultaneously  undergoing  two  contrary

motions, since the two motions that follow the same straight line are contrary

to each other. With this consequence there also follows another: we have a

thing that is in process of change from a position in which it has not yet been:

so, inasmuch as this is impossible, the thing must come to a stand at G.

Therefore the motion is not a single motion, since motion that is interrupted

by stationariness is not single.

  Further, the following argument will serve better to make this point clear

universally in respect of every kind of motion. If the motion undergone by

that which is in motion is always one of those already enumerated, and the

state of rest that it undergoes is one of those that are the opposites of themotions  (for  we  found  that  there  could  be  no  other  besides  these),  and

moreover that which is undergoing but does not always undergo a particular

motion (by this I mean one of the various specifically distinct motions, not

some  particular  part  of  the  whole  motion)  must  have  been  previously

undergoing the state of rest that is the opposite of the motion, the state of rest

being privation of motion; then, inasmuch as the two motions that follow the

same straight line are contrary motions, and it is impossible for a thing to

undergo  simultaneously  two  contrary  motions,  that  which  is  undergoing

locomotion  from  A  to  G  cannot  also  simultaneously  be  undergoing

locomotion from G to A: and since the latter locomotion is not simultaneous

with the former but is still to be undergone, before it is undergone there must

occur a state of rest at G: for this, as we found, is the state of rest that is the

opposite of the motion from G. The foregoing argument, then, makes it plain

that the motion in question is not continuous.

Our next argument has a more special bearing than the foregoing on the

point  at  issue.  We  will  suppose  that  there  has  occurred  in  something

simultaneously a perishing of not-white and a becoming of white. Then if the

alteration to white and from white is a continuous process and the white does

not remain any time, there must have occurred simultaneously a perishing of

not-white, a becoming of white, and a becoming of not-white: for the time of

the three will be the same.

  Again, from the continuity of the time in which the motion takes place we

cannot infer continuity in the motion, but only successiveness: in fact, how

could  contraries,  e.g.  whiteness  and  blackness,  meet  in  the  same  extreme

point?

On the other hand, in motion on a circular line we shall find singleness and

continuity: for here we are met by no impossible consequence: that which is

in  motion  from  A  will  in  virtue  of  the  same  direction  of  energy  be

simultaneously in motion to A (since it is in motion to the point at which it

will finally arrive), and yet will not be undergoing two contrary or opposite

motions: for a motion to a point and a motion from that point are not always

contraries  or  opposites:  they  are  contraries  only  if  they  are  on  the  same

straight line (for then they are contrary to one another in respect of place, as

e.g. the two motions along the diameter of the circle, since the ends of this

are at the greatest possible distance from one another), and they are opposites

only  if  they  are  along  the  same  line.  Therefore  in  the  case  we  are  now

considering there is nothing to prevent the motion being continuous and freefrom all intermission: for rotatory motion is motion of a thing from its place

to its place, whereas rectilinear motion is motion from its place to another

place.

  Moreover the progress of rotatory motion is never localized within certain

fixed  limits,  whereas  that  of  rectilinear  motion  repeatedly  is  so.  Now  a

motion that is always shifting its ground from moment to moment can be

continuous:  but  a  motion  that  is  repeatedly  localized  within  certain  fixed

limits  cannot  be  so,  since  then  the  same  thing  would  have  to  undergo

simultaneously two opposite motions. So, too, there cannot be continuous

motion in a semicircle or in any other arc of a circle, since here also the same

ground must be traversed repeatedly and two contrary processes of change

must occur. The reason is that in these motions the starting-point and the

termination  do  not  coincide,  whereas  in  motion  over  a  circle  they  do

coincide, and so this is the only perfect motion.

This differentiation also provides another means of showing that the other

kinds of motion cannot be continuous either: for in all of them we find that

there is the same ground to be traversed repeatedly; thus in alteration there

are the intermediate stages of the process, and in quantitative change there are

the intervening degrees of magnitude: and in becoming and perishing the

same thing is true. It makes no difference whether we take the intermediate

stages of the process to be few or many, or whether we add or subtract one:

for in either case we find that there is still the same ground to be traversed

repeatedly. Moreover it is plain from what has been said that those physicists

who assert that all sensible things are always in motion are wrong: for their

motion  must  be  one  or  other  of  the  motions  just  mentioned:  in  fact  they

mostly conceive it as alteration (things are always in flux and decay, they

say), and they go so far as to speak even of becoming and perishing as a

process of alteration. On the other hand, our argument has enabled us to

assert the fact, applying universally to all motions, that no motion admits of

continuity  except  rotatory  motion:  consequently  neither  alteration  nor

increase admits of continuity. We need now say no more in support of the

position that there is no process of change that admits of infinity or continuity

except rotatory locomotion.

<

div id="section70" class="section" title="9">


9It can now be shown plainly that rotation is the primary locomotion. Every

locomotion, as we said before, is either rotatory or rectilinear or a compound

of the two: and the two former must be prior to the last, since they are the

elements of which the latter consists. Moreover rotatory locomotion is prior

to rectilinear locomotion, because it is more simple and complete, which may

be shown as follows. The straight line traversed in rectilinear motion cannot

be infinite: for there is no such thing as an infinite straight line; and even if

there  were,  it  would  not  be  traversed  by  anything  in  motion:  for  the

impossible  does  not  happen  and  it  is  impossible  to  traverse  an  infinite

distance. On the other hand rectilinear motion on a finite straight line is if it

turns back a composite motion, in fact two motions, while if it does not turn

back it is incomplete and perishable: and in the order of nature, of definition,

and of time alike the complete is prior to the incomplete and the imperishable

to the perishable. Again, a motion that admits of being eternal is prior to one

that  does  not.  Now  rotatory  motion  can  be  eternal:  but  no  other  motion,

whether locomotion or motion of any other kind, can be so, since in all of

them rest must occur and with the occurrence of rest the motion has perished.

Moreover the result at which we have arrived, that rotatory motion is single

and  continuous,  and  rectilinear  motion  is  not,  is  a  reasonable  one.  In

rectilinear motion we have a definite starting-point, finishing-point, middle-

point, which all have their place in it in such a way that there is a point from

which that which is in motion can be said to start and a point at which it can

be said to finish its course (for when anything is at the limits of its course,

whether at the starting-point or at the finishing-point, it must be in a state of

rest). On the other hand in circular motion there are no such definite points:

for why should any one point on the line be a limit rather than any other?

Any one point as much as any other is alike starting-point, middle-point, and

finishing-point, so that we can say of certain things both that they are always

and that they never are at a starting-point and at a finishing-point (so that a

revolving  sphere,  while  it  is  in  motion,  is  also  in  a  sense  at  rest,  for  it

continues to occupy the same place). The reason of this is that in this case all

these characteristics belong to the centre: that is to say, the centre is alike

starting-point,  middle-point,  and  finishing-point  of  the  space  traversed;

consequently since this point is not a point on the circular line, there is no

point at which that which is in process of locomotion can be in a state of rest

as  having  traversed  its  course,  because  in  its  locomotion  it  is  proceeding

always about a central point and not to an extreme point: therefore it remainsstill, and the whole is in a sense always at rest as well as continuously in

motion. Our next point gives a convertible result: on the one hand, because

rotation is the measure of motions it must be the primary motion (for all

things are measured by what is primary): on the other hand, because rotation

is the primary motion it is the measure of all other motions. Again, rotatory

motion is also the only motion that admits of being regular. In rectilinear

locomotion the motion of things in leaving the starting-point is not uniform

with their motion in approaching the finishing-point, since the velocity of a

thing always increases proportionately as it removes itself farther from its

position of rest: on the other hand rotatory motion is the only motion whose

course is naturally such that it has no starting-point or finishing-point in itself

but is determined from elsewhere.

As to locomotion being the primary motion, this is a truth that is attested

by  all  who  have  ever  made  mention  of  motion  in  their  theories:  they  all

assign their first principles of motion to things that impart motion of this

kind. Thus ‘separation’ and ‘combination’ are motions in respect of place,

and the motion imparted by ‘Love’ and ‘Strife’ takes these forms, the latter

‘separating’ and the former ‘combining’. Anaxagoras, too, says that ‘Mind’,

his first movent, ‘separates’. Similarly those who assert no cause of this kind

but say that ‘void’ accounts for motion-they also hold that the motion of

natural  substance  is  motion  in  respect  of  place:  for  their  motion  that  is

accounted for by ‘void’ is locomotion, and its sphere of operation may be

said to be place. Moreover they are of opinion that the primary substances are

not subject to any of the other motions, though the things that are compounds

of these substances are so subject: the processes of increase and decrease and

alteration,  they  say,  are  effects  of  the  ‘combination’  and  ‘separation’  of

atoms. It is the same, too, with those who make out that the becoming or

perishing  of  a  thing  is  accounted  for  by  ‘density’  or  ‘rarity’:  for  it  is  by

‘combination’ and ‘separation’ that the place of these things in their systems

is determined. Moreover to these we may add those who make Soul the cause

of motion: for they say that things that undergo motion have as their first

principle ‘that which moves itself’: and when animals and all living things

move themselves, the motion is motion in respect of place. Finally it is to be

noted that we say that a thing ‘is in motion’ in the strict sense of the term

only when its motion is motion in respect of place: if a thing is in process of

increase or decrease or is undergoing some alteration while remaining at rest

in the same place, we say that it is in motion in some particular respect: wedo not say that it ‘is in motion’ without qualification.

Our present position, then, is this: We have argued that there always was

motion and always will be motion throughout all time, and we have explained

what is the first principle of this eternal motion: we have explained further

which is the primary motion and which is the only motion that can be eternal:

and we have pronounced the first movent to be unmoved.

<

div id="section71" class="section" title="10">


10


We have now to assert that the first movent must be without parts and

without  magnitude,  beginning  with  the  establishment  of  the  premisses  on

which this conclusion depends.

One of these premisses is that nothing finite can cause motion during an

infinite time. We have three things, the movent, the moved, and thirdly that in

which  the  motion  takes  place,  namely  the  time:  and  these  are  either  all

infinite or all finite or partly-that is to say two of them or one of them-finite

and partly infinite. Let A be the movement, B the moved, and G the infinite

time. Now let us suppose that D moves E, a part of B. Then the time occupied

by this motion cannot be equal to G: for the greater the amount moved, the

longer the time occupied. It follows that the time Z is not infinite. Now we

see that by continuing to add to D, I shall use up A and by continuing to add

to  E,  I  shall  use  up  B:  but  I  shall  not  use  up  the  time  by  continually

subtracting  a  corresponding  amount  from  it,  because  it  is  infinite.

Consequently the duration of the part of G which is occupied by all A in

moving the whole of B, will be finite. Therefore a finite thing cannot impart

to anything an infinite motion. It is clear, then, that it is impossible for the

finite to cause motion during an infinite time.

It has now to be shown that in no case is it possible for an infinite force to

reside in a finite magnitude. This can be shown as follows: we take it for

granted that the greater force is always that which in less time than another

does an equal amount of work when engaged in any activity-in heating, for

example, or sweetening or throwing; in fact, in causing any kind of motion.

Then that on which the forces act must be affected to some extent by our

supposed finite magnitude possessing an infinite force as well as by anything

else, in fact to a greater extent than by anything else, since the infinite force isgreater than any other. But then there cannot be any time in which its action

could take place. Suppose that A is the time occupied by the infinite power in

the performance of an act of heating or pushing, and that AB is the time

occupied  by  a  finite  power  in  the  performance  of  the  same  act:  then  by

adding  to  the  latter  another  finite  power  and  continually  increasing  the

magnitude of the power so added I shall at some time or other reach a point at

which the finite power has completed the motive act in the time A: for by

continual addition to a finite magnitude I must arrive at a magnitude that

exceeds any assigned limit, and in the same way by continual subtraction I

must arrive at one that falls short of any assigned limit. So we get the result

that the finite force will occupy the same amount of time in performing the

motive act as the infinite force. But this is impossible. Therefore nothing

finite can possess an infinite force. So it is also impossible for a finite force to

reside in an infinite magnitude. It is true that a greater force can reside in a

lesser magnitude: but the superiority of any such greater force can be still

greater if the magnitude in which it resides is greater. Now let AB be an

infinite magnitude. Then BG possesses a certain force that occupies a certain

time, let us say the time Z in moving D. Now if I take a magnitude twice as

great at BG, the time occupied by this magnitude in moving D will be half of

EZ (assuming this to be the proportion): so we may call this time ZH. That

being so, by continually taking a greater magnitude in this way I shall never

arrive at the full AB, whereas I shall always be getting a lesser fraction of the

time given. Therefore the force must be infinite, since it exceeds any finite

force. Moreover the time occupied by the action of any finite force must also

be finite: for if a given force moves something in a certain time, a greater

force  will  do  so  in  a  lesser  time,  but  still  a  definite  time,  in  inverse

proportion.  But  a  force  must  always  be  infinite-just  as  a  number  or  a

magnitude is-if it exceeds all definite limits. This point may also be proved in

another way-by taking a finite magnitude in which there resides a force the

same in kind as that which resides in the infinite magnitude, so that this force

will be a measure of the finite force residing in the infinite magnitude.

It is plain, then, from the foregoing arguments that it is impossible for an

infinite force to reside in a finite magnitude or for a finite force to reside in an

infinite magnitude. But before proceeding to our conclusion it will be well to

discuss a difficulty that arises in connexion with locomotion. If everything

that is in motion with the exception of things that move themselves is moved

by something else, how is it that some things, e.g. things thrown, continue tobe in motion when their movent is no longer in contact with them? If we say

that the movent in such cases moves something else at the same time, that the

thrower e.g. also moves the air, and that this in being moved is also a movent,

then it would be no more possible for this second thing than for the original

thing to be in motion when the original movent is not in contact with it or

moving it: all the things moved would have to be in motion simultaneously

and also to have ceased simultaneously to be in motion when the original

movent ceases to move them, even if, like the magnet, it makes that which it

has moved capable of being a movent. Therefore, while we must accept this

explanation to the extent of saying that the original movent gives the power

of being a movent either to air or to water or to something else of the kind,

naturally adapted for imparting and undergoing motion, we must say further

that this thing does not cease simultaneously to impart motion and to undergo

motion: it ceases to be in motion at the moment when its movent ceases to

move  it,  but  it  still  remains  a  movent,  and  so  it  causes  something  else

consecutive with it to be in motion, and of this again the same may be said.

The motion begins to cease when the motive force produced in one member

of  the  consecutive  series  is  at  each  stage  less  than  that  possessed  by  the

preceding member, and it finally ceases when one member no longer causes

the next member to be a movent but only causes it to be in motion. The

motion of these last two-of the one as movent and of the other as moved-must

cease simultaneously, and with this the whole motion ceases. Now the things

in which this motion is produced are things that admit of being sometimes in

motion and sometimes at rest, and the motion is not continuous but only

appears so: for it is motion of things that are either successive or in contact,

there being not one movent but a number of movents consecutive with one

another: and so motion of this kind takes place in air and water. Some say

that  it  is  ‘mutual  replacement’:  but  we  must  recognize  that  the  difficulty

raised cannot be solved otherwise than in the way we have described. So far

as they are affected by ‘mutual replacement’, all the members of the series

are moved and impart motion simultaneously, so that their motions also cease

simultaneously:  but  our  present  problem  concerns  the  appearance  of

continuous motion in a single thing, and therefore, since it cannot be moved

throughout its motion by the same movent, the question is, what moves it?

  Resuming our main argument, we proceed from the positions that there

must be continuous motion in the world of things, that this is a single motion,

that a single motion must be a motion of a magnitude (for that which iswithout magnitude cannot be in motion), and that the magnitude must be a

single magnitude moved by a single movent (for otherwise there will not be

continuous motion but a consecutive series of separate motions), and that if

the movement is a single thing, it is either itself in motion or itself unmoved:

if, then, it is in motion, it will have to be subject to the same conditions as

that which it moves, that is to say it will itself be in process of change and in

being so will also have to be moved by something: so we have a series that

must come to an end, and a point will be reached at which motion is imparted

by something that is unmoved. Thus we have a movent that has no need to

change  along  with  that  which  it  moves  but  will  be  able  to  cause  motion

always (for the causing of motion under these conditions involves no effort):

and this motion alone is regular, or at least it is so in a higher degree than any

other, since the movent is never subject to any change. So, too, in order that

the motion may continue to be of the same character, the moved must not be

subject  to  change  in  respect  of  its  relation  to  the  movent.  Moreover  the

movent must occupy either the centre or the circumference, since these are

the first principles from which a sphere is derived. But the things nearest the

movent are those whose motion is quickest, and in this case it is the motion

of the circumference that is the quickest: therefore the movent occupies the

circumference.

  There is a further difficulty in supposing it to be possible for anything that

is in motion to cause motion continuously and not merely in the way in which

it is caused by something repeatedly pushing (in which case the continuity

amounts to no more than successiveness). Such a movent must either itself

continue to push or pull or perform both these actions, or else the action must

be taken up by something else and be passed on from one movent to another

(the  process  that  we  described  before  as  occurring  in  the  case  of  things

thrown, since the air or the water, being divisible, is a movent only in virtue

of the fact that different parts of the air are moved one after another): and in

either case the motion cannot be a single motion, but only a consecutive

series of motions. The only continuous motion, then, is that which is caused

by the unmoved movent: and this motion is continuous because the movent

remains always invariable, so that its relation to that which it moves remains

also invariable and continuous.

Now that these points are settled, it is clear that the first unmoved movent

cannot have any magnitude. For if it has magnitude, this must be either a

finite or an infinite magnitude. Now we have already’proved in our course onPhysics that there cannot be an infinite magnitude: and we have now proved

that it is impossible for a finite magnitude to have an infinite force, and also

that it is impossible for a thing to be moved by a finite magnitude during an

infinite time. But the first movent causes a motion that is eternal and does

cause it during an infinite time. It is clear, therefore, that the first movent is

indivisible and is without parts and without magnitude.                            On the Heavens, Book I


Translated by J. L. Stocks


<

div id="section1" class="section" title="1">


1


The science which has to do with nature clearly concerns itself for the most

part with bodies and magnitudes and their properties and movements, but

also with the principles of this sort of substance, as many as they may be. For

of  things  constituted  by  nature  some  are  bodies  and  magnitudes,  some

possess body and magnitude, and some are principles of things which possess

these. Now a continuum is that which is divisible into parts always capable of

subdivision, and a body is that which is every way divisible. A magnitude if

divisible one way is a line, if two ways a surface, and if three a body. Beyond

these there is no other magnitude, because the three dimensions are all that

there are, and that which is divisible in three directions is divisible in all. For,

as the Pythagoreans say, the world and all that is in it is determined by the

number three, since beginning and middle and end give the number of an

‘all’, and the number they give is the triad. And so, having taken these three

from nature as (so to speak) laws of it, we make further use of the number

three in the worship of the Gods. Further, we use the terms in practice in this

way. Of two things, or men, we say ‘both’, but not ‘all’: three is the first

number to which the term ‘all’ has been appropriated. And in this, as we have

said, we do but follow the lead which nature gives. Therefore, since ‘every’

and ‘all’ and ‘complete’ do not differ from one another in respect of form, but

only, if at all, in their matter and in that to which they are applied, body alone

among magnitudes can be complete. For it alone is determined by the three

dimensions, that is, is an ‘all’. But if it is divisible in three dimensions it is

every  way  divisible,  while  the  other  magnitudes  are  divisible  in  one

dimension or in two alone: for the divisibility and continuity of magnitudes

depend upon the number of the dimensions, one sort being continuous in one

direction,  another  in  two,  another  in  all.  All  magnitudes,  then,  which  aredivisible  are  also  continuous.  Whether  we  can  also  say  that  whatever  is

continuous is divisible does not yet, on our present grounds, appear. One

thing, however, is clear. We cannot pass beyond body to a further kind, as we

passed from length to surface, and from surface to body. For if we could, it

would  cease  to  be  true  that  body  is  complete  magnitude.  We  could  pass

beyond it only in virtue of a defect in it; and that which is complete cannot be

defective, since it has being in every respect. Now bodies which are classed

as parts of the whole are each complete according to our formula, since each

possesses  every  dimension.  But  each  is  determined  relatively  to  that  part

which is next to it by contact, for which reason each of them is in a sense

many  bodies.  But  the  whole  of  which  they  are  parts  must  necessarily  be

complete, and thus, in accordance with the meaning of the word, have being,

not in some respect only, but in every respect.

<

div id="section2" class="section" title="2">


2


The question as to the nature of the whole, whether it is infinite in size or

limited in its total mass, is a matter for subsequent inquiry. We will now

speak of those parts of the whole which are specifically distinct. Let us take

this as our starting-point. All natural bodies and magnitudes we hold to be, as

such,  capable  of  locomotion;  for  nature,  we  say,  is  their  principle  of

movement. But all movement that is in place, all locomotion, as we term it, is

either straight or circular or a combination of these two, which are the only

simple movements. And the reason of this is that these two, the straight and

the circular line, are the only simple magnitudes. Now revolution about the

centre is circular motion, while the upward and downward movements are in

a  straight  line,  ‘upward’  meaning  motion  away  from  the  centre,  and

‘downward’  motion  towards  it.  All  simple  motion,  then,  must  be  motion

either away from or towards or about the centre. This seems to be in exact

accord  with  what  we  said  above:  as  body  found  its  completion  in  three

dimensions, so its movement completes itself in three forms.

  Bodies are either simple or compounded of such; and by simple bodies I

mean those which possess a principle of movement in their own nature, such

as fire and earth with their kinds, and whatever is akin to them. Necessarily,

then, movements also will be either simple or in some sort compound-simplein the case of the simple bodies, compound in that of the composite-and in

the latter case the motion will be that of the simple body which prevails in the

composition. Supposing, then, that there is such a thing as simple movement,

and that circular movement is an instance of it, and that both movement of a

simple body is simple and simple movement is of a simple body (for if it is

movement of a compound it will be in virtue of a prevailing simple element),

then there must necessarily be some simple body which revolves naturally

and in virtue of its own nature with a circular movement. By constraint, of

course,  it  may  be  brought  to  move  with  the  motion  of  something  else

different from itself, but it cannot so move naturally, since there is one sort of

movement  natural  to  each  of  the  simple  bodies.  Again,  if  the  unnatural

movement is the contrary of the natural and a thing can have no more than

one contrary, it will follow that circular movement, being a simple motion,

must be unnatural, if it is not natural, to the body moved. If then (1) the body,

whose movement is circular, is fire or some other element, its natural motion

must be the contrary of the circular motion. But a single thing has a single

contrary;  and  upward  and  downward  motion  are  the  contraries  of  one

another. If, on the other hand, (2) the body moving with this circular motion

which is unnatural to it is something different from the elements, there will be

some other motion which is natural to it. But this cannot be. For if the natural

motion is upward, it will be fire or air, and if downward, water or earth.

Further,  this  circular  motion  is  necessarily  primary.  For  the  perfect  is

naturally prior to the imperfect, and the circle is a perfect thing. This cannot

be said of any straight line:-not of an infinite line; for, if it were perfect, it

would have a limit and an end: nor of any finite line; for in every case there is

something beyond it, since any finite line can be extended. And so, since the

prior  movement  belongs  to  the  body  which  naturally  prior,  and  circular

movement is prior to straight, and movement in a straight line belongs to

simple  bodies-fire  moving  straight  upward  and  earthy  bodies  straight

downward  towards  the  centre-since  this  is  so,  it  follows  that  circular

movement  also  must  be  the  movement  of  some  simple  body.  For  the

movement of composite bodies is, as we said, determined by that simple

body which preponderates in the composition. These premises clearly give

the conclusion that there is in nature some bodily substance other than the

formations we know, prior to them all and more divine than they. But it may

also be proved as follows. We may take it that all movement is either natural

or unnatural, and that the movement which is unnatural to one body is naturalto  another-as,  for  instance,  is  the  case  with  the  upward  and  downward

movements, which are natural and unnatural to fire and earth respectively. It

necessarily follows that circular movement, being unnatural to these bodies,

is the natural movement of some other. Further, if, on the one hand, circular

movement is natural to something, it must surely be some simple and primary

body which is ordained to move with a natural circular motion, as fire is

ordained to fly up and earth down. If, on the other hand, the movement of the

rotating bodies about the centre is unnatural, it would be remarkable and

indeed quite inconceivable that this movement alone should be continuous

and eternal, being nevertheless contrary to nature. At any rate the evidence of

all other cases goes to show that it is the unnatural which quickest passes

away. And so, if, as some say, the body so moved is fire, this movement is

just as unnatural to it as downward movement; for any one can see that fire

moves in a straight line away from the centre. On all these grounds, therefore,

we may infer with confidence that there is something beyond the bodies that

are about us on this earth, different and separate from them; and that the

superior glory of its nature is proportionate to its distance from this world of

ours.

<

div id="section3" class="section" title="3">


3


In consequence of what has been said, in part by way of assumption and in

part by way of proof, it is clear that not every body either possesses lightness

or heaviness. As a preliminary we must explain in what sense we are using

the words ‘heavy’ and ‘light’, sufficiently, at least, for our present purpose:

we can examine the terms more closely later, when we come to consider their

essential nature. Let us then apply the term ‘heavy’ to that which naturally

moves towards the centre, and ‘light’ to that which moves naturally away

from the centre. The heaviest thing will be that which sinks to the bottom of

all things that move downward, and the lightest that which rises to the surface

of everything that moves upward. Now, necessarily, everything which moves

either  up  or  down  possesses  lightness  or  heaviness  or  both-but  not  both

relatively to the same thing: for things are heavy and light relatively to one

another; air, for instance, is light relatively to water, and water light relatively

to earth. The body, then, which moves in a circle cannot possibly possesseither  heaviness  or  lightness.  For  neither  naturally  nor  unnaturally  can  it

move either towards or away from the centre. Movement in a straight line

certainly does not belong to it naturally, since one sort of movement is, as we

saw, appropriate to each simple body, and so we should be compelled to

identify it with one of the bodies which move in this way. Suppose, then, that

the movement is unnatural. In that case, if it is the downward movement

which is unnatural, the upward movement will be natural; and if it is the

upward which is unnatural, the downward will be natural. For we decided

that of contrary movements, if the one is unnatural to anything, the other will

be natural to it. But since the natural movement of the whole and of its part of

earth, for instance, as a whole and of a small clod-have one and the same

direction, it results, in the first place, that this body can possess no lightness

or heaviness at all (for that would mean that it could move by its own nature

either from or towards the centre, which, as we know, is impossible); and,

secondly, that it cannot possibly move in the way of locomotion by being

forced  violently  aside  in  an  upward  or  downward  direction.  For  neither

naturally nor unnaturally can it move with any other motion but its own,

either itself or any part of it, since the reasoning which applies to the whole

applies also to the part.

It is equally reasonable to assume that this body will be ungenerated and

indestructible and exempt from increase and alteration, since everything that

comes to be comes into being from its contrary and in some substrate, and

passes away likewise in a substrate by the action of the contrary into the

contrary, as we explained in our opening discussions. Now the motions of

contraries are contrary. If then this body can have no contrary, because there

can  be  no  contrary  motion  to  the  circular,  nature  seems  justly  to  have

exempted  from  contraries  the  body  which  was  to  be  ungenerated  and

indestructible. For it is in contraries that generation and decay subsist. Again,

that which is subject to increase increases upon contact with a kindred body,

which is resolved into its matter. But there is nothing out of which this body

can have been generated. And if it is exempt from increase and diminution,

the  same  reasoning  leads  us  to  suppose  that  it  is  also  unalterable.  For

alteration  is  movement  in  respect  of  quality;  and  qualitative  states  and

dispositions,  such  as  health  and  disease,  do  not  come  into  being  without

changes of properties. But all natural bodies which change their properties we

see to be subject without exception to increase and diminution. This is the

case,  for  instance,  with  the  bodies  of  animals  and  their  parts  and  withvegetable bodies, and similarly also with those of the elements. And so, if the

body  which  moves  with  a  circular  motion  cannot  admit  of  increase  or

diminution, it is reasonable to suppose that it is also unalterable.

The reasons why the primary body is eternal and not subject to increase or

diminution, but unaging and unalterable and unmodified, will be clear from

what has been said to any one who believes in our assumptions. Our theory

seems to confirm experience and to be confirmed by it. For all men have

some  conception  of  the  nature  of  the  gods,  and  all  who  believe  in  the

existence of gods at all, whether barbarian or Greek, agree in allotting the

highest place to the deity, surely because they suppose that immortal is linked

with  immortal  and  regard  any  other  supposition  as  inconceivable.  If  then

there is, as there certainly is, anything divine, what we have just said about

the primary bodily substance was well said. The mere evidence of the senses

is enough to convince us of this, at least with human certainty. For in the

whole range of time past, so far as our inherited records reach, no change

appears to have taken place either in the whole scheme of the outermost

heaven or in any of its proper parts. The common name, too, which has been

handed down from our distant ancestors even to our own day, seems to show

that they conceived of it in the fashion which we have been expressing. The

same ideas, one must believe, recur in men’s minds not once or twice but

again and again. And so, implying that the primary body is something else

beyond earth, fire, air, and water, they gave the highest place a name of its

own, aither, derived from the fact that it ‘runs always’ for an eternity of time.

Anaxagoras,  however,  scandalously  misuses  this  name,  taking  aither  as

equivalent to fire.

It is also clear from what has been said why the number of what we call

simple bodies cannot be greater than it is. The motion of a simple body must

itself be simple, and we assert that there are only these two simple motions,

the circular and the straight, the latter being subdivided into motion away

from and motion towards the centre.

<

div id="section4" class="section" title="4">


4


That there is no other form of motion opposed as contrary to the circular

may  be  proved  in  various  ways.  In  the  first  place,  there  is  an  obvioustendency to oppose the straight line to the circular. For concave and convex

are a not only regarded as opposed to one another, but they are also coupled

together and treated as a unity in opposition to the straight. And so, if there is

a contrary to circular motion, motion in a straight line must be recognized as

having the best claim to that name. But the two forms of rectilinear motion

are opposed to one another by reason of their places; for up and down is a

difference and a contrary opposition in place. Secondly, it may be thought

that the same reasoning which holds good of the rectilinear path applies also

the circular, movement from A to B being opposed as contrary to movement

from B to A. But what is meant is still rectilinear motion. For that is limited

to a single path, while the circular paths which pass through the same two

points are infinite in number. Even if we are confined to the single semicircle

and the opposition is between movement from C to D and from D to C along

that semicircle, the case is no better. For the motion is the same as that along

the diameter, since we invariably regard the distance between two points as

the length of the straight line which joins them. It is no more satisfactory to

construct  a  circle  and  treat  motion  ‘along  one  semicircle  as  contrary  to

motion along the other. For example, taking a complete circle, motion from E

to F on the semicircle G may be opposed to motion from F to E on the

semicircle H. But even supposing these are contraries, it in no way follows

that the reverse motions on the complete circumference contraries. Nor again

can  motion  along  the  circle  from  A  to  B  be  regarded  as  the  contrary  of

motion from A to C: for the motion goes from the same point towards the

same point, and contrary motion was distinguished as motion from a contrary

to its contrary. And even if the motion round a circle is the contrary of the

reverse motion, one of the two would be ineffective: for both move to the

same point, because that which moves in a circle, at whatever point it begins,

must necessarily pass through all the contrary places alike. (By contrarieties

of place I mean up and down, back and front, and right and left; and the

contrary oppositions of movements are determined by those of places.) One

of the motions, then, would be ineffective, for if the two motions were of

equal strength, there would be no movement either way, and if one of the two

were preponderant, the other would be inoperative. So that if both bodies

were there, one of them, inasmuch as it would not be moving with its own

movement, would be useless, in the sense in which a shoe is useless when it

is not worn. But God and nature create nothing that has not its use.

<div id="section5" class="section" title="5">


5


This being clear, we must go on to consider the questions which remain.

First, is there an infinite body, as the majority of the ancient philosophers

thought, or is this an impossibility? The decision of this question, either way,

is not unimportant, but rather all-important, to our search for the truth. It is

this problem which has practically always been the source of the differences

of those who have written about nature as a whole. So it has been and so it

must be; since the least initial deviation from the truth is multiplied later a

thousandfold. Admit, for instance, the existence of a minimum magnitude,

and you will find that the minimum which you have introduced, small as it is,

causes  the  greatest  truths  of  mathematics  to  totter.  The  reason  is  that  a

principle is great rather in power than in extent; hence that which was small

at the start turns out a giant at the end. Now the conception of the infinite

possesses  this  power  of  principles,  and  indeed  in  the  sphere  of  quantity

possesses it in a higher degree than any other conception; so that it is in no

way absurd or unreasonable that the assumption that an infinite body exists

should be of peculiar moment to our inquiry. The infinite, then, we must now

discuss, opening the whole matter from the beginning.

  Every body is necessarily to be classed either as simple or as composite;

the infinite body, therefore, will be either simple or composite.

But it is clear, further, that if the simple bodies are finite, the composite

must also be finite, since that which is composed of bodies finite both in

number and in magnitude is itself finite in respect of number and magnitude:

its quantity is in fact the same as that of the bodies which compose it. What

remains for us to consider, then, is whether any of the simple bodies can be

infinite in magnitude, or whether this is impossible. Let us try the primary

body first, and then go on to consider the others.

The  body  which  moves  in  a  circle  must  necessarily  be  finite  in  every

respect, for the following reasons. (1) If the body so moving is infinite, the

radii drawn from the centre will be infinite. But the space between infinite

radii is infinite: and by the space between the radii I mean the area outside

which no magnitude which is in contact with the two lines can be conceived

as falling. This, I say, will be infinite: first, because in the case of finite radii

it is always finite; and secondly, because in it one can always go on to awidth greater than any given width; thus the reasoning which forces us to

believe in infinite number, because there is no maximum, applies also to the

space between the radii. Now the infinite cannot be traversed, and if the body

is infinite the interval between the radii is necessarily infinite: circular motion

therefore is an impossibility. Yet our eyes tell us that the heavens revolve in a

circle, and by argument also we have determined that there is something to

which circular movement belongs.

(2) Again, if from a finite time a finite time be subtracted, what remains

must be finite and have a beginning. And if the time of a journey has a

beginning, there must be a beginning also of the movement, and consequently

also of the distance traversed. This applies universally. Take a line, ACE,

infinite in one direction, E, and another line, BB, infinite in both directions.

Let ACE describe a circle, revolving upon C as centre. In its movement it will

cut BB continuously for a certain time. This will be a finite time, since the

total time is finite in which the heavens complete their circular orbit, and

consequently the time subtracted from it, during which the one line in its

motion cuts the other, is also finite. Therefore there will be a point at which

ACE began for the first time to cut BB. This, however, is impossible. The

infinite,  then,  cannot  revolve  in  a  circle;  nor  could  the  world,  if  it  were

infinite.

(3) That the infinite cannot move may also be shown as follows. Let A be a

finite line moving past the finite line, B. Of necessity A will pass clear of B

and B of A at the same moment; for each overlaps the other to precisely the

same  extent.  Now  if  the  two  were  both  moving,  and  moving  in  contrary

directions, they would pass clear of one another more rapidly; if one were

still and the other moving past it, less rapidly; provided that the speed of the

latter  were  the  same  in  both  cases.  This,  however,  is  clear:  that  it  is

impossible to traverse an infinite line in a finite time. Infinite time, then,

would  be  required.  (This  we  demonstrated  above  in  the  discussion  of

movement.) And it makes no difference whether a finite is passing by an

infinite or an infinite by a finite. For when A is passing B, then B overlaps A

and it makes no difference whether B is moved or unmoved, except that, if

both move, they pass clear of one another more quickly. It is, however, quite

possible  that  a  moving  line  should  in  certain  cases  pass  one  which  is

stationary quicker than it passes one moving in an opposite direction. One has

only to imagine the movement to be slow where both move and much faster

where  one  is  stationary.  To  suppose  one  line  stationary,  then,  makes  nodifficulty for our argument, since it is quite possible for A to pass B at a

slower rate when both are moving than when only one is. If, therefore, the

time which the finite moving line takes to pass the other is infinite, then

necessarily the time occupied by the motion of the infinite past the finite is

also infinite. For the infinite to move at all is thus absolutely impossible;

since the very smallest movement conceivable must take an infinity of time.

Moreover  the  heavens  certainly  revolve,  and  they  complete  their  circular

orbit in a finite time; so that they pass round the whole extent of any line

within their orbit, such as the finite line AB. The revolving body, therefore,

cannot be infinite.

(4) Again, as a line which has a limit cannot be infinite, or, if it is infinite,

is so only in length, so a surface cannot be infinite in that respect in which it

has  a  limit;  or,  indeed,  if  it  is  completely  determinate,  in  any  respect

whatever. Whether it be a square or a circle or a sphere, it cannot be infinite,

any more than a foot-rule can. There is then no such thing as an infinite

sphere  or  square  or  circle,  and  where  there  is  no  circle  there  can  be  no

circular movement, and similarly where there is no infinite at all there can be

no infinite movement; and from this it follows that, an infinite circle being

itself an impossibility, there can be no circular motion of an infinite body.

(5) Again, take a centre C, an infinite line, AB, another infinite line at right

angles to it, E, and a moving radius, CD. CD will never cease contact with E,

but the position will always be something like CE, CD cutting E at F. The

infinite line, therefore, refuses to complete the circle.

(6) Again, if the heaven is infinite and moves in a circle, we shall have to

admit that in a finite time it has traversed the infinite. For suppose the fixed

heaven infinite, and that which moves within it equal to it. It results that

when  the  infinite  body  has  completed  its  revolution,  it  has  traversed  an

infinite equal to itself in a finite time. But that we know to be impossible.

(7) It can also be shown, conversely, that if the time of revolution is finite,

the area traversed must also be finite; but the area traversed was equal to

itself; therefore, it is itself finite.

We have now shown that the body which moves in a circle is not endless

or infinite, but has its limit.

<

div id="section6" class="section" title="6">


6  Further, neither that which moves towards nor that which moves away

from the centre can be infinite. For the upward and downward motions are

contraries and are therefore motions towards contrary places. But if one of a

pair of contraries is determinate, the other must be determinate also. Now the

centre is determined; for, from whatever point the body which sinks to the

bottom starts its downward motion, it cannot go farther than the centre. The

centre,  therefore,  being  determinate,  the  upper  place  must  also  be

determinate.  But  if  these  two  places  are  determined  and  finite,  the

corresponding  bodies  must  also  be  finite.  Further,  if  up  and  down  are

determinate, the intermediate place is also necessarily determinate. For, if it is

indeterminate,  the  movement  within  it  will  be  infinite;  and  that  we  have

already shown to be an impossibility. The middle region then is determinate,

and  consequently  any  body  which  either  is  in  it,  or  might  be  in  it,  is

determinate. But the bodies which move up and down may be in it, since the

one moves naturally away from the centre and the other towards it.

  From this alone it is clear that an infinite body is an impossibility; but there

is a further point. If there is no such thing as infinite weight, then it follows

that  none  of  these  bodies  can  be  infinite.  For  the  supposed  infinite  body

would have to be infinite in weight. (The same argument applies to lightness:

for as the one supposition involves infinite weight, so the infinity of the body

which  rises  to  the  surface  involves  infinite  lightness.)  This  is  proved  as

follows. Assume the weight to be finite, and take an infinite body, AB, of the

weight C. Subtract from the infinite body a finite mass, BD, the weight of

which shall be E. E then is less than C, since it is the weight of a lesser mass.

Suppose then that the smaller goes into the greater a certain number of times,

and take BF bearing the same proportion to BD which the greater weight

bears to the smaller. For you may subtract as much as you please from an

infinite. If now the masses are proportionate to the weights, and the lesser

weight is that of the lesser mass, the greater must be that of the greater. The

weights, therefore, of the finite and of the infinite body are equal. Again, if

the weight of a greater body is greater than that of a less, the weight of GB

will be greater than that of FB; and thus the weight of the finite body is

greater than that of the infinite. And, further, the weight of unequal masses

will be the same, since the infinite and the finite cannot be equal. It does not

matter  whether  the  weights  are  commensurable  or  not.  If  (a)  they  are

incommensurable  the  same  reasoning  holds.  For  instance,  suppose  E

multiplied by three is rather more than C: the weight of three masses of thefull  size  of  BD  will  be  greater  than  C.  We  thus  arrive  at  the  same

impossibility  as  before.  Again  (b)  we  may  assume  weights  which  are

commensurate; for it makes no difference whether we begin with the weight

or with the mass. For example, assume the weight E to be commensurate with

C, and take from the infinite mass a part BD of weight E. Then let a mass BF

be taken having the same proportion to BD which the two weights have to

one another. (For the mass being infinite you may subtract from it as much as

you please.) These assumed bodies will be commensurate in mass and in

weight alike. Nor again does it make any difference to our demonstration

whether the total mass has its weight equally or unequally distributed. For it

must always be Possible to take from the infinite mass a body of equal weight

to BD by diminishing or increasing the size of the section to the necessary

extent.

  From what we have said, then, it is clear that the weight of the infinite

body cannot be finite. It must then be infinite. We have therefore only to

show this to be impossible in order to prove an infinite body impossible. But

the impossibility of infinite weight can be shown in the following way. A

given weight moves a given distance in a given time; a weight which is as

great and more moves the same distance in a less time, the times being in

inverse  proportion  to  the  weights.  For  instance,  if  one  weight  is  twice

another, it will take half as long over a given movement. Further, a finite

weight traverses any finite distance in a finite time. It necessarily follows

from this that infinite weight, if there is such a thing, being, on the one hand,

as great and more than as great as the finite, will move accordingly, but

being, on the other hand, compelled to move in a time inversely proportionate

to its greatness, cannot move at all. The time should be less in proportion as

the weight is greater. But there is no proportion between the infinite and the

finite: proportion can only hold between a less and a greater finite time. And

though  you  may  say  that  the  time  of  the  movement  can  be  continually

diminished, yet there is no minimum. Nor, if there were, would it help us. For

some finite body could have been found greater than the given finite in the

same proportion which is supposed to hold between the infinite and the given

finite; so that an infinite and a finite weight must have traversed an equal

distance in equal time. But that is impossible. Again, whatever the time, so

long as it is finite, in which the infinite performs the motion, a finite weight

must necessarily move a certain finite distance in that same time. Infinite

weight is therefore impossible, and the same reasoning applies also to infinitelightness. Bodies then of infinite weight and of infinite lightness are equally

impossible.

That there is no infinite body may be shown, as we have shown it, by a

detailed  consideration  of  the  various  cases.  But  it  may  also  be  shown

universally, not only by such reasoning as we advanced in our discussion of

principles (though in that passage we have already determined universally the

sense in which the existence of an infinite is to be asserted or denied), but

also suitably to our present purpose in the following way. That will lead us to

a further question. Even if the total mass is not infinite, it may yet be great

enough to admit a plurality of universes. The question might possibly be

raised  whether  there  is  any  obstacle  to  our  believing  that  there  are  other

universes  composed  on  the  pattern  of  our  own,  more  than  one,  though

stopping  short  of  infinity.  First,  however,  let  us  treat  of  the  infinite

universally.

<

div id="section7" class="section" title="7">


7


  Every body must necessarily be either finite or infinite, and if infinite,

either of similar or of dissimilar parts. If its parts are dissimilar, they must

represent either a finite or an infinite number of kinds. That the kinds cannot

be infinite is evident, if our original presuppositions remain unchallenged.

For the primary movements being finite in number, the kinds of simple body

are necessarily also finite, since the movement of a simple body is simple,

and the simple movements are finite, and every natural body must always

have its proper motion. Now if the infinite body is to be composed of a finite

number  of  kinds,  then  each  of  its  parts  must  necessarily  be  infinite  in

quantity, that is to say, the water, fire, &c., which compose it. But this is

impossible, because, as we have already shown, infinite weight and lightness

do not exist. Moreover it would be necessary also that their places should be

infinite in extent, so that the movements too of all these bodies would be

infinite. But this is not possible, if we are to hold to the truth of our original

presuppositions and to the view that neither that which moves downward,

nor,  by  the  same  reasoning,  that  which  moves  upward,  can  prolong  its

movement to infinity. For it is true in regard to quality, quantity, and place

alike that any process of change is impossible which can have no end. I meanthat if it is impossible for a thing to have come to be white, or a cubit long, or

in Egypt, it is also impossible for it to be in process of coming to be any of

these. It is thus impossible for a thing to be moving to a place at which in its

motion it can never by any possibility arrive. Again, suppose the body to

exist in dispersion, it may be maintained none the less that the total of all

these scattered particles, say, of fire, is infinite. But body we saw to be that

which  has  extension  every  way.  How  can  there  be  several  dissimilar

elements,  each  infinite?  Each  would  have  to  be  infinitely  extended  every

way.

It is no more conceivable, again, that the infinite should exist as a whole of

similar parts. For, in the first place, there is no other (straight) movement

beyond those mentioned: we must therefore give it one of them. And if so,

we  shall  have  to  admit  either  infinite  weight  or  infinite  lightness.  Nor,

secondly, could the body whose movement is circular be infinite, since it is

impossible for the infinite to move in a circle. This, indeed, would be as good

as  saying  that  the  heavens  are  infinite,  which  we  have  shown  to  be

impossible.

  Moreover, in general, it is impossible that the infinite should move at all. If

it did, it would move either naturally or by constraint: and if by constraint, it

possesses also a natural motion, that is to say, there is another place, infinite

like itself, to which it will move. But that is impossible.

That in general it is impossible for the infinite to be acted upon by the

finite or to act upon it may be shown as follows.

(1. The infinite cannot be acted upon by the finite.) Let A be an infinite, B

a  finite,  C  the  time  of  a  given  movement  produced  by  one  in  the  other.

Suppose, then, that A was heated, or impelled, or modified in any way, or

caused to undergo any sort of movement whatever, by in the time C. Let D be

less than B; and, assuming that a lesser agent moves a lesser patient in an

equal time, call the quantity thus modified by D, E. Then, as D is to B, so is E

to some finite quantum. We assume that the alteration of equal by equal takes

equal time, and the alteration of less by less or of greater by greater takes the

same time, if the quantity of the patient is such as to keep the proportion

which obtains between the agents, greater and less. If so, no movement can

be caused in the infinite by any finite agent in any time whatever. For a less

agent will produce that movement in a less patient in an equal time, and the

proportionate equivalent of that patient will be a finite quantity, since no

proportion holds between finite and infinite.(2. The infinite cannot act upon the finite.) Nor, again, can the infinite

produce a movement in the finite in any time whatever. Let A be an infinite,

B a finite, C the time of action. In the time C, D will produce that motion in a

patient less than B, say F. Then take E, bearing the same proportion to D as

the whole BF bears to F. E will produce the motion in BF in the time C. Thus

the finite and infinite effect the same alteration in equal times. But this is

impossible; for the assumption is that the greater effects it in a shorter time. It

will be the same with any time that can be taken, so that there will no time in

which the infinite can effect this movement. And, as to infinite time, in that

nothing can move another or be moved by it. For such time has no limit,

while the action and reaction have.

(3. There is no interaction between infinites.) Nor can infinite be acted

upon in any way by infinite. Let A and B be infinites, CD being the time of

the action A of upon B. Now the whole B was modified in a certain time, and

the part of this infinite, E, cannot be so modified in the same time, since we

assume that a less quantity makes the movement in a less time. Let E then,

when acted upon by A, complete the movement in the time D. Then, as D is

to CD, so is E to some finite part of B. This part will necessarily be moved by

A in the time CD. For we suppose that the same agent produces a given effect

on a greater and a smaller mass in longer and shorter times, the times and

masses varying proportionately. There is thus no finite time in which infinites

can move one another. Is their time then infinite? No, for infinite time has no

end, but the movement communicated has.

If therefore every perceptible body possesses the power of acting or of

being  acted  upon,  or  both  of  these,  it  is  impossible  that  an  infinite  body

should be perceptible. All bodies, however, that occupy place are perceptible.

There is therefore no infinite body beyond the heaven. Nor again is there

anything of limited extent beyond it. And so beyond the heaven there is no

body at all. For if you suppose it an object of intelligence, it will be in a

place-since  place  is  what  ‘within’  and  ‘beyond’  denote-and  therefore  an

object of perception. But nothing that is not in a place is perceptible.

The  question  may  also  be  examined  in  the  light  of  more  general

considerations as follows. The infinite, considered as a whole of similar parts,

cannot,  on  the  one  hand,  move  in  a  circle.  For  there  is  no  centre  of  the

infinite, and that which moves in a circle moves about the centre. Nor again

can the infinite move in a straight line. For there would have to be another

place infinite like itself to be the goal of its natural movement and another,equally great, for the goal of its unnatural movement. Moreover, whether its

rectilinear movement is natural or constrained, in either case the force which

causes its motion will have to be infinite. For infinite force is force of an

infinite body, and of an infinite body the force is infinite. So the motive body

also  will  be  infinite.  (The  proof  of  this  is  given  in  our  discussion  of

movement, where it is shown that no finite thing possesses infinite power,

and no infinite thing finite power.) If then that which moves naturally can

also move unnaturally, there will be two infinites, one which causes, and

another which exhibits the latter motion. Again, what is it that moves the

infinite? If it moves itself, it must be animate. But how can it possibly be

conceived as an infinite animal? And if there is something else that moves it,

there  will  be  two  infinites,  that  which  moves  and  that  which  is  moved,

differing in their form and power.

If the whole is not continuous, but exists, as Democritus and Leucippus

think, in the form of parts separated by void, there must necessarily be one

movement of all the multitude. They are distinguished, we are told, from one

another by their figures; but their nature is one, like many pieces of gold

separated from one another. But each piece must, as we assert, have the same

motion. For a single clod moves to the same place as the whole mass of earth,

and a spark to the same place as the whole mass of fire. So that if it be weight

that  all  possess,  no  body  is,  strictly  speaking,  light:  and  if  lightness  be

universal, none is heavy. Moreover, whatever possesses weight or lightness

will have its place either at one of the extremes or in the middle region. But

this is impossible while the world is conceived as infinite. And, generally,

that which has no centre or extreme limit, no up or down, gives the bodies no

place for their motion; and without that movement is impossible. A thing

must  move  either  naturally  or  unnaturally,  and  the  two  movements  are

determined by the proper and alien places. Again, a place in which a thing

rests or to which it moves unnaturally, must be the natural place for some

other  body,  as  experience  shows.  Necessarily,  therefore,  not  everything

possesses weight or lightness, but some things do and some do not. From

these arguments then it is clear that the body of the universe is not infinite.

<

div id="section8" class="section" title="8">


8We  must  now  proceed  to  explain  why  there  cannot  be  more  than  one

heaven-the further question mentioned above. For it may be thought that we

have not proved universal of bodies that none whatever can exist outside our

universe, and that our argument applied only to those of indeterminate extent.

Now all things rest and move naturally and by constraint. A thing moves

naturally to a place in which it rests without constraint, and rests naturally in

a place to which it moves without constraint. On the other hand, a thing

moves by constraint to a place in which it rests by constraint, and rests by

constraint in a place to which it moves by constraint. Further, if a given

movement  is  due  to  constraint,  its  contrary  is  natural.  If,  then,  it  is  by

constraint  that  earth  moves  from  a  certain  place  to  the  centre  here,  its

movement from here to there will be natural, and if earth from there rests

here without constraint, its movement hither will be natural. And the natural

movement in each case is one. Further, these worlds, being similar in nature

to ours, must all be composed of the same bodies as it. Moreover each of the

bodies, fire, I mean, and earth and their intermediates, must have the same

power as in our world. For if these names are used equivocally, if the identity

of name does not rest upon an identity of form in these elements and ours,

then  the  whole  to  which  they  belong  can  only  be  called  a  world  by

equivocation. Clearly, then, one of the bodies will move naturally away from

the centre and another towards the centre, since fire must be identical with

fire, earth with earth, and so on, as the fragments of each are identical in this

world. That this must be the case is evident from the principles laid down in

our discussion of the movements, for these are limited in number, and the

distinction of the elements depends upon the distinction of the movements.

Therefore, since the movements are the same, the elements must also be the

same  everywhere.  The  particles  of  earth,  then,  in  another  world  move

naturally also to our centre and its fire to our circumference. This, however, is

impossible, since, if it were true, earth must, in its own world, move upwards,

and fire to the centre; in the same way the earth of our world must move

naturally away from the centre when it moves towards the centre of another

universe. This follows from the supposed juxtaposition of the worlds. For

either we must refuse to admit the identical nature of the simple bodies in the

various  universes,  or,  admitting  this,  we  must  make  the  centre  and  the

extremity one as suggested. This being so, it follows that there cannot be

more worlds than one.

To postulate a difference of nature in the simple bodies according as theyare more or less distant from their proper places is unreasonable. For what

difference can it make whether we say that a thing is this distance away or

that? One would have to suppose a difference proportionate to the distance

and increasing with it, but the form is in fact the same. Moreover, the bodies

must have some movement, since the fact that they move is quite evident.

Are we to say then that all their movements, even those which are mutually

contrary,  are  due  to  constraint?  No,  for  a  body  which  has  no  natural

movement at all cannot be moved by constraint. If then the bodies have a

natural movement, the movement of the particular instances of each form

must necessarily have for goal a place numerically one, i.e. a particular centre

or a particular extremity. If it be suggested that the goal in each case is one in

form but numerically more than one, on the analogy of particulars which are

many though each undifferentiated in form, we reply that the variety of goal

cannot be limited to this portion or that but must extend to all alike. For all

are  equally  undifferentiated  in  form,  but  any  one  is  different  numerically

from any other. What I mean is this: if the portions in this world behave

similarly both to one another and to those in another world, then the portion

which is taken hence will not behave differently either from the portions in

another world or from those in the same world, but similarly to them, since in

form  no  portion  differs  from  another.  The  result  is  that  we  must  either

abandon our present assumption or assert that the centre and the extremity are

each numerically one. But this being so, the heaven, by the same evidence

and the same necessary inferences, must be one only and no more.

A consideration of the other kinds of movement also makes it plain that

there is some point to which earth and fire move naturally. For in general that

which is moved changes from something into something, the starting-point

and the goal being different in form, and always it is a finite change. For

instance, to recover health is to change from disease to health, to increase is

to change from smallness to greatness. Locomotion must be similar: for it

also has its goal and starting-point—and therefore the starting-point and the

goal of the natural movement must differ in form-just as the movement of

coming to health does not take any direction which chance or the wishes of

the mover may select. Thus, too, fire and earth move not to infinity but to

opposite  points;  and  since  the  opposition  in  place  is  between  above  and

below,  these  will  be  the  limits  of  their  movement.  (Even  in  circular

movement there is a sort of opposition between the ends of the diameter,

though  the  movement  as  a  whole  has  no  contrary:  so  that  here  too  themovement has in a sense an opposed and finite goal.) There must therefore be

some end to locomotion: it cannot continue to infinity.

This  conclusion  that  local  movement  is  not  continued  to  infinity  is

corroborated by the fact that earth moves more quickly the nearer it is to the

centre, and fire the nearer it is to the upper place. But if movement were

infinite speed would be infinite also; and if speed then weight and lightness.

For as superior speed in downward movement implies superior weight, so

infinite increase of weight necessitates infinite increase of speed.

  Further, it is not the action of another body that makes one of these bodies

move up and the other down; nor is it constraint, like the ‘extrusion’ of some

writers. For in that case the larger the mass of fire or earth the slower would

be the upward or downward movement; but the fact is the reverse: the greater

the mass of fire or earth the quicker always is its movement towards its own

place. Again, the speed of the movement would not increase towards the end

if it were due to constraint or extrusion; for a constrained movement always

diminishes in speed as the source of constraint becomes more distant, and a

body  moves  without  constraint  to  the  place  whence  it  was  moved  by

constraint.

A consideration of these points, then, gives adequate assurance of the truth

of  our  contentions.  The  same  could  also  be  shown  with  the  aid  of  the

discussions which fall under First Philosophy, as well as from the nature of

the circular movement, which must be eternal both here and in the other

worlds. It is plain, too, from the following considerations that the universe

must be one.

The bodily elements are three, and therefore the places of the elements will

be three also; the place, first, of the body which sinks to the bottom, namely

the  region  about  the  centre;  the  place,  secondly,  of  the  revolving  body,

namely the outermost place, and thirdly, the intermediate place, belonging to

the intermediate body. Here in this third place will be the body which rises to

the  surface;  since,  if  not  here,  it  will  be  elsewhere,  and  it  cannot  be

elsewhere:  for  we  have  two  bodies,  one  weightless,  one  endowed  with

weight, and below is place of the body endowed with weight, since the region

about the centre has been given to the heavy body. And its position cannot be

unnatural to it, for it would have to be natural to something else, and there is

nothing else. It must then occupy the intermediate place. What distinctions

there are within the intermediate itself we will explain later on.

We have now said enough to make plain the character and number of thebodily  elements,  the  place  of  each,  and  further,  in  general,  how  many  in

number the various places are.

<

div id="section9" class="section" title="9">


9


We must show not only that the heaven is one, but also that more than one

heaven is and, further, that, as exempt from decay and generation, the heaven

is eternal. We may begin by raising a difficulty. From one point of view it

might seem impossible that the heaven should be one and unique, since in all

formations and products whether of nature or of art we can distinguish the

shape in itself and the shape in combination with matter. For instance the

form of the sphere is one thing and the gold or bronze sphere another; the

shape of the circle again is one thing, the bronze or wooden circle another.

For when we state the essential nature of the sphere or circle we do not

include in the formula gold or bronze, because they do not belong to the

essence, but if we are speaking of the copper or gold sphere we do include

them. We still make the distinction even if we cannot conceive or apprehend

any  other  example  beside  the  particular  thing.  This  may,  of  course,

sometimes be the case: it might be, for instance, that only one circle could be

found; yet none the less the difference will remain between the being of circle

and of this particular circle, the one being form, the other form in matter, i.e.

a particular thing. Now since the universe is perceptible it must be regarded

as a particular; for everything that is perceptible subsists, as we know, in

matter. But if it is a particular, there will be a distinction between the being of

‘this  universe’  and  of  ‘universe’  unqualified.  There  is  a  difference,  then,

between ‘this universe’ and simple ‘universe’; the second is form and shape,

the first form in combination with matter; and any shape or form has, or may

have, more than one particular instance.

On the supposition of Forms such as some assert, this must be the case,

and equally on the view that no such entity has a separate existence. For in

every case in which the essence is in matter it is a fact of observation that the

particulars of like form are several or infinite in number. Hence there either

are, or may be, more heavens than one. On these grounds, then, it might be

inferred either that there are or that there might be several heavens. We must,

however, return and ask how much of this argument is correct and how muchnot.

Now it is quite right to say that the formula of the shape apart from the

matter must be different from that of the shape in the matter, and we may

allow this to be true. We are not, however, therefore compelled to assert a

plurality  of  worlds.  Such  a  plurality  is  in  fact  impossible  if  this  world

contains the entirety of matter, as in fact it does. But perhaps our contention

can be made clearer in this way. Suppose ‘aquilinity’ to be curvature in the

nose or flesh, and flesh to be the matter of aquilinity. Suppose further, that all

flesh came together into a single whole of flesh endowed with this aquiline

quality. Then neither would there be, nor could there arise, any other thing

that was aquiline. Similarly, suppose flesh and bones to be the matter of man,

and suppose a man to be created of all flesh and all bones in indissoluble

union. The possibility of another man would be removed. Whatever case you

took it would be the same. The general rule is this: a thing whose essence

resides in a substratum of matter can never come into being in the absence of

all matter. Now the universe is certainly a particular and a material thing: if

however, it is composed not of a part but of the whole of matter, then though

the being of ‘universe’ and of ‘this universe’ are still distinct, yet there is no

other universe, and no possibility of others being made, because all the matter

is already included in this. It remains, then, only to prove that it is composed

of all natural perceptible body.

First, however, we must explain what we mean by ‘heaven’ and in how

many senses we use the word, in order to make clearer the object of our

inquiry. (a) In one sense, then, we call ‘heaven’ the substance of the extreme

circumference  of  the  whole,  or  that  natural  body  whose  place  is  at  the

extreme circumference. We recognize habitually a special right to the name

‘heaven’ in the extremity or upper region, which we take to be the seat of all

that is divine. (b) In another sense, we use this name for the body continuous

with the extreme circumference which contains the moon, the sun, and some

of the stars; these we say are ‘in the heaven’. (c) In yet another sense we give

the  name  to  all  body  included  within  extreme  circumference,  since  we

habitually call the whole or totality ‘the heaven’. The word, then, is used in

three senses.

Now  the  whole  included  within  the  extreme  circumference  must  be

composed of all physical and sensible body, because there neither is, nor can

come into being, any body outside the heaven. For if there is a natural body

outside the extreme circumference it must be either a simple or a compositebody, and its position must be either natural or unnatural. But it cannot be

any of the simple bodies. For, first, it has been shown that that which moves

in a circle cannot change its place. And, secondly, it cannot be that which

moves from the centre or that which lies lowest. Naturally they could not be

there,  since  their  proper  places  are  elsewhere;  and  if  these  are  there

unnaturally, the exterior place will be natural to some other body, since a

place which is unnatural to one body must be natural to another: but we saw

that there is no other body besides these. Then it is not possible that any

simple body should be outside the heaven. But, if no simple body, neither can

any mixed body be there: for the presence of the simple body is involved in

the presence of the mixture. Further neither can any body come into that

place:  for  it  will  do  so  either  naturally  or  unnaturally,  and  will  be  either

simple or composite; so that the same argument will apply, since it makes no

difference whether the question is ‘does A exist?’ or ‘could A come to exist?’

From our arguments then it is evident not only that there is not, but also that

there  could  never  come  to  be,  any  bodily  mass  whatever  outside  the

circumference. The world as a whole, therefore, includes all its appropriate

matter, which is, as we saw, natural perceptible body. So that neither are

there now, nor have there ever been, nor can there ever be formed more

heavens than one, but this heaven of ours is one and unique and complete.

It is therefore evident that there is also no place or void or time outside the

heaven. For in every place body can be present; and void is said to be that in

which the presence of body, though not actual, is possible; and time is the

number  of  movement.  But  in  the  absence  of  natural  body  there  is  no

movement, and outside the heaven, as we have shown, body neither exists

nor can come to exist. It is clear then that there is neither place, nor void, nor

time, outside the heaven. Hence whatever is there, is of such a nature as not

to occupy any place, nor does time age it; nor is there any change in any of

the things which lie beyond the outermost motion; they continue through

their entire duration unalterable and unmodified, living the best and most

selfsufficient of lives. As a matter of fact, this word ‘duration’ possessed a

divine  significance  for  the  ancients,  for  the  fulfilment  which  includes  the

period of life of any creature, outside of which no natural development can

fall, has been called its duration. On the same principle the fulfilment of the

whole  heaven,  the  fulfilment  which  includes  all  time  and  infinity,  is

‘duration’-a name based upon the fact that it is always-duration immortal and

divine. From it derive the being and life which other things, some more orless  articulately  but  others  feebly,  enjoy.  So,  too,  in  its  discussions

concerning  the  divine,  popular  philosophy  often  propounds  the  view  that

whatever  is  divine,  whatever  is  primary  and  supreme,  is  necessarily

unchangeable. This fact confirms what we have said. For there is nothing else

stronger than it to move it-since that would mean more divine-and it has no

defect  and  lacks  none  of  its  proper  excellences.  Its  unceasing  movement,

then, is also reasonable, since everything ceases to move when it comes to its

proper place, but the body whose path is the circle has one and the same

place for starting-point and goal.

<

div id="section10" class="section" title="10">


10


  Having established these distinctions, we may now proceed to the question

whether  the  heaven  is  ungenerated  or  generated,  indestructible  or

destructible. Let us start with a review of the theories of other thinkers; for

the proofs of a theory are difficulties for the contrary theory. Besides, those

who have first heard the pleas of our adversaries will be more likely to credit

the assertions which we are going to make. We shall be less open to the

charge of procuring judgement by default. To give a satisfactory decision as

to the truth it is necessary to be rather an arbitrator than a party to the dispute.

That the world was generated all are agreed, but, generation over, some say

that  it  is  eternal,  others  say  that  it  is  destructible  like  any  other  natural

formation.  Others  again,  with  Empedliocles  of  Acragas  and  Heraclitus  of

Ephesus, believe that there is alternation in the destructive process, which

takes now this direction, now that, and continues without end.

Now  to  assert  that  it  was  generated  and  yet  is  eternal  is  to  assert  the

impossible; for we cannot reasonably attribute to anything any characteristics

but those which observation detects in many or all instances. But in this case

the  facts  point  the  other  way:  generated  things  are  seen  always  to  be

destroyed. Further, a thing whose present state had no beginning and which

could not have been other than it was at any previous moment throughout its

entire duration, cannot possibly be changed. For there will have to be some

cause of change, and if this had been present earlier it would have made

possible  another  condition  of  that  to  which  any  other  condition  was

impossible. Suppose that the world was formed out of elements which wereformerly  otherwise  conditioned  than  as  they  are  now.  Then  (1)  if  their

condition was always so and could not have been otherwise, the world could

never have come into being. And (2) if the world did come into being, then,

clearly, their condition must have been capable of change and not eternal:

after combination therefore they will be dispersed, just as in the past after

dispersion they came into combination, and this process either has been, or

could have been, indefinitely repeated. But if this is so, the world cannot be

indestructible, and it does not matter whether the change of condition has

actually occurred or remains a possibility.

  Some of those who hold that the world, though indestructible, was yet

generated, try to support their case by a parallel which is illusory. They say

that  in  their  statements  about  its  generation  they  are  doing  what

geometricians  do  when  they  construct  their  figures,  not  implying  that  the

universe  really  had  a  beginning,  but  for  didactic  reasons  facilitating

understanding  by  exhibiting  the  object,  like  the  figure,  as  in  course  of

formation. The two cases, as we said, are not parallel; for, in the construction

of  the  figure,  when  the  various  steps  are  completed  the  required  figure

forthwith results; but in these other demonstrations what results is not that

which was required. Indeed it cannot be so; for antecedent and consequent, as

assumed,  are  in  contradiction.  The  ordered,  it  is  said,  arose  out  of  the

unordered; and the same thing cannot be at the same time both ordered and

unordered; there must be a process and a lapse of time separating the two

states. In the figure, on the other hand, there is no temporal separation. It is

clear then that the universe cannot be at once eternal and generated.

To say that the universe alternately combines and dissolves is no more

paradoxical than to make it eternal but varying in shape. It is as if one were to

think that there was now destruction and now existence when from a child a

man  is  generated,  and  from  a  man  a  child.  For  it  is  clear  that  when  the

elements come together the result is not a chance system and combination,

but the very same as before-especially on the view of those who hold this

theory, since they say that the contrary is the cause of each state. So that if the

totality of body, which is a continuum, is now in this order or disposition and

now in that, and if the combination of the whole is a world or heaven, then it

will not be the world that comes into being and is destroyed, but only its

dispositions.

If the world is believed to be one, it is impossible to suppose that it should

be, as a whole, first generated and then destroyed, never to reappear; sincebefore it came into being there was always present the combination prior to it,

and that, we hold, could never change if it was never generated. If, on the

other hand, the worlds are infinite in number the view is more plausible. But

whether this is, or is not, impossible will be clear from what follows. For

there are some who think it possible both for the ungenerated to be destroyed

and for the generated to persist undestroyed. (This is held in the Timaeus,

where Plato says that the heaven, though it was generated, will none the less

exist to eternity.) So far as the heaven is concerned we have answered this

view with arguments appropriate to the nature of the heaven: on the general

question we shall attain clearness when we examine the matter universally.

<

div id="section11" class="section" title="11">


11


We  must  first  distinguish  the  senses  in  which  we  use  the  words

‘ungenerated’ and ‘generated’, ‘destructible’ and ‘indestructible’. These have

many meanings, and though it may make no difference to the argument, yet

some confusion of mind must result from treating as uniform in its use a

word  which  has  several  distinct  applications.  The  character  which  is  the

ground of the predication will always remain obscure.

The word ‘ungenerated’ then is used (a) in one sense whenever something

now is which formerly was not, no process of becoming or change being

involved. Such is the case, according to some, with contact and motion, since

there is no process of coming to be in contact or in motion. (b) It is used in

another sense, when something which is capable of coming to be, with or

without process, does not exist; such a thing is ungenerated in the sense that

its generation is not a fact but a possibility. (c) It is also applied where there

is general impossibility of any generation such that the thing now is which

then was not. And ‘impossibility’ has two uses: first, where it is untrue to say

that the thing can ever come into being, and secondly, where it cannot do so

easily, quickly, or well. In the same way the word ‘generated’ is used, (a)

first,  where  what  formerly  was  not  afterwards  is,  whether  a  process  of

becoming was or was not involved, so long as that which then was not, now

is; (b) secondly, of anything capable of existing, ‘capable’ being defined with

reference either to truth or to facility; (c) thirdly, of anything to which the

passage  from  not  being  to  being  belongs,  whether  already  actual,  if  itsexistence is due to a past process of becoming, or not yet actual but only

possible. The uses of the words ‘destructible’ and ‘indestructible’ are similar.

‘Destructible’ is applied (a) to that which formerly was and afterwards either

is not or might not be, whether a period of being destroyed and changed

intervenes  or  not;  and  (b)  sometimes  we  apply  the  word  to  that  which  a

process of destruction may cause not to be; and also (c) in a third sense, to

that which is easily destructible, to the ‘easily destroyed’, so to speak. Of the

indestructible the same account holds good. It is either (a) that which now is

and  now  is  not,  without  any  process  of  destruction,  like  contact,  which

without being destroyed afterwards is not, though formerly it was; or (b) that

which is but might not be, or which will at some time not be, though it now

is.  For  you  exist  now  and  so  does  the  contact;  yet  both  are  destructible,

because a time will come when it will not be true of you that you exist, nor of

these things that they are in contact. Thirdly (c) in its most proper use, it is

that which is, but is incapable of any destruction such that the thing which

now is later ceases to be or might cease to be; or again, that which has not yet

been destroyed, but in the future may cease to be. For indestructible is also

used of that which is destroyed with difficulty.

This being so, we must ask what we mean by ‘possible’ and ‘impossible’.

For in its most proper use the predicate ‘indestructible’ is given because it is

impossible that the thing should be destroyed, i.e. exist at one time and not at

another. And ‘ungenerated’ also involves impossibility when used for that

which cannot be generated, in such fashion that, while formerly it was not,

later it is. An instance is a commensurable diagonal. Now when we speak of

a power to move or to lift weights, we refer always to the maximum. We

speak, for instance, of a power to lift a hundred talents or walk a hundred

stades-though a power to effect the maximum is also a power to effect any

part of the maximum-since we feel obliged in defining the power to give the

limit or maximum. A thing, then, which is within it. If, for example, a man

can lift a hundred talents, he can also lift two, and if he can walk a hundred

stades, he can also walk two. But the power is of the maximum, and a thing

said,  with  reference  to  its  maximum,  to  be  incapable  of  so  much  is  also

incapable of any greater amount. It is, for instance, clear that a person who

cannot walk a thousand stades will also be unable to walk a thousand and

one. This point need not trouble us, for we may take it as settled that what is,

in  the  strict  sense,  possible  is  determined  by  a  limiting  maximum.  Now

perhaps the objection might be raised that there is no necessity in this, sincehe who sees a stade need not see the smaller measures contained in it, while,

on the contrary, he who can see a dot or hear a small sound will perceive

what is greater. This, however, does not touch our argument. The maximum

may be determined either in the power or in its object. The application of this

is plain. Superior sight is sight of the smaller body, but superior speed is that

of the greater body.

<

div id="section12" class="section" title="12">


12


  Having established these distinctions we car now proceed to the sequel. If

there are thing! capable both of being and of not being, there must be some

definite maximum time of their being and not being; a time, I mean, during

which  continued  existence  is  possible  to  them  and  a  time  during  which

continued  nonexistence  is  possible.  And  this  is  true  in  every  category,

whether the thing is, for example, ‘man’, or ‘white’, or ‘three cubits long’, or

whatever it may be. For if the time is not definite in quantity, but longer than

any that can be suggested and shorter than none, then it will be possible for

one and the same thing to exist for infinite time and not to exist for another

infinity. This, however, is impossible.

Let us take our start from this point. The impossible and the false have not

the same significance. One use of ‘impossible’ and ‘possible’, and ‘false’ and

‘true’, is hypothetical. It is impossible, for instance, on a certain hypothesis

that the triangle should have its angles equal to two right angles, and on

another the diagonal is commensurable. But there are also things possible and

impossible, false and true, absolutely. Now it is one thing to be absolutely

false,  and  another  thing  to  be  absolutely  impossible.  To  say  that  you  are

standing  when  you  are  not  standing  is  to  assert  a  falsehood,  but  not  an

impossibility. Similarly to say that a man who is playing the harp, but not

singing,  is  singing,  is  to  say  what  is  false  but  not  impossible.  To  say,

however, that you are at once standing and sitting, or that the diagonal is

commensurable, is to say what is not only false but also impossible. Thus it is

not the same thing to make a false and to make an impossible hypothesis, and

from the impossible hypothesis impossible results follow. A man has, it is

true,  the  capacity  at  once  of  sitting  and  of  standing,  because  when  he

possesses the one he also possesses the other; but it does not follow that hecan at once sit and stand, only that at another time he can do the other also.

But if a thing has for infinite time more than one capacity, another time is

impossible  and  the  times  must  coincide.  Thus  if  a  thing  which  exists  for

infinite time is destructible, it will have the capacity of not being. Now if it

exists  for  infinite  time  let  this  capacity  be  actualized;  and  it  will  be  in

actuality at once existent and non-existent. Thus a false conclusion would

follow because a false assumption was made, but if what was assumed had

not been impossible its consequence would not have been impossible.

  Anything then which always exists is absolutely imperishable. It is also

ungenerated, since if it was generated it will have the power for some time of

not being. For as that which formerly was, but now is not, or is capable at

some future time of not being, is destructible, so that which is capable of

formerly not having been is generated. But in the case of that which always

is, there is no time for such a capacity of not being, whether the supposed

time is finite or infinite; for its capacity of being must include the finite time

since it covers infinite time.

It is therefore impossible that one and the same thing should be capable of

always existing and of always not-existing. And ‘not always existing’, the

contradictory, is also excluded. Thus it is impossible for a thing always to

exist and yet to be destructible. Nor, similarly, can it be generated. For of two

attributes if B cannot be present without A, the impossibility A of proves the

impossibility of B. What always is, then, since it is incapable of ever not

being,  cannot  possibly  be  generated.  But  since  the  contradictory  of  ‘that

which  is  always  capable  of  being’  ‘that  which  is  not  always  capable  of

being’; while ‘that which is always capable of not being’ is the contrary,

whose contradictory in turn is ‘that which is not always capable of not being’,

it is necessary that the contradictories of both terms should be predicable of

one and the same thing, and thus that, intermediate between what always is

and what always is not, there should be that to which being and not-being are

both possible; for the contradictory of each will at times be true of it unless it

always exists. Hence that which not always is not will sometimes be and

sometimes not be; and it is clear that this is true also of that which cannot

always be but sometimes is and therefore sometimes is not. One thing, then,

will have the power of being, and will thus be intermediate between the other

two.

  Expresed  universally  our  argument  is  as  follows.  Let  there  be  two

attributes, A and B, not capable of being present in any one thing together,while  either  A  or  C  and  either  B  or  D  are  capable  of  being  present  in

everything. Then C and D must be predicated of everything of which neither

A nor B is predicated. Let E lie between A and B; for that which is neither of

two contraries is a mean between them. In E both C and D must be present,

for either A or C is present everywhere and therefore in E. Since then A is

impossible, C must be present, and the same argument holds of D.

  Neither that which always is, therefore, nor that which always is not is

either  generated  or  destructible.  And  clearly  whatever  is  generated  or

destructible is not eternal. If it were, it would be at once capable of always

being and capable of not always being, but it has already been shown that this

is  impossible.  Surely  then  whatever  is  ungenerated  and  in  being  must  be

eternal, and whatever is indestructible and in being must equally be so. (I use

the  words  ‘ungenerated’  and  ‘indestructible’  in  their  proper  sense,

‘ungenerated’ for that which now is and could not at any previous time have

been truly said not to be; ‘indestructible’ for that which now is and cannot at

any  future  time  be  truly  said  not  to  be.)  If,  again,  the  two  terms  are

coincident,  if  the  ungenerated  is  indestructible,  and  the  indestructible

ungenearted,  then  each  of  them  is  coincident  with  ‘eternal’;  anything

ungenerated is eternal and anything indestructible is eternal. This is clear too

from the definition of the terms, Whatever is destructible must be generated;

for  it  is  either  ungenerated,  or  generated,  but,  if  ungenerated,  it  is  by

hypothesis  indestructible.  Whatever,  further,  is  generated  must  be

destructible.  For  it  is  either  destructible  or  indestructible,  but,  if

indestructible, it is by hypothesis ungenerated.

If, however, ‘indestructible’ and ‘ungenerated’ are not coincident, there is

no  necessity  that  either  the  ungenerated  or  the  indestructible  should  be

eternal. But they must be coincident, for the following reasons. The terms

‘generated’ and ‘destructible’ are coincident; this is obvious from our former

remarks, since between what always is and what always is not there is an

intermediate  which  is  neither,  and  that  intermediate  is  the  generated  and

destructible. For whatever is either of these is capable both of being and of

not being for a definite time: in either case, I mean, there is a certain period of

time during which the thing is and another during which it is not. Anything

therefore which is generated or destructible must be intermediate. Now let A

be that which always is and B that which always is not, C the generated, and

D the destructible. Then C must be intermediate between A and B. For in

their case there is no time in the direction of either limit, in which either A isnot or B is. But for the generated there must be such a time either actually or

potentially, though not for A and B in either way. C then will be, and also not

be, for a limited length of time, and this is true also of D, the destructible.

Therefore each is both generated and destructible. Therefore ‘generated’ and

‘destructible’ are coincident. Now let E stand for the ungenerated, F for the

generated, G for the indestructible, and H for the destructible. As for F and H,

it has been shown that they are coincident. But when terms stand to one

another as these do, F and H coincident, E and F never predicated of the same

thing but one or other of everything, and G and H likewise, then E and G

must needs be coincident. For suppose that E is not coincident with G, then F

will be, since either E or F is predictable of everything. But of that of which F

is predicated H will be predicable also. H will then be coincident with G, but

this  we  saw  to  be  impossible.  And  the  same  argument  shows  that  G  is

coincident with E.

Now the relation of the ungenerated (E) to the generated (F) is the same as

that of the indestructible (G) to the destructible (H). To say then that there is

no reason why anything should not be generated and yet indestructible or

ungenerated and yet destroyed, to imagine that in the one case generation and

in the other case destruction occurs once for all, is to destroy part of the data.

For (1) everything is capable of acting or being acted upon, of being or not

being, either for an infinite, or for a definitely limited space of time; and the

infinite time is only a possible alternative because it is after a fashion defined,

as a length of time which cannot be exceeded. But infinity in one direction is

neither infinite or finite. (2) Further, why, after always existing, was the thing

destroyed,  why,  after  an  infinity  of  not  being,  was  it  generated,  at  one

moment rather than another? If every moment is alike and the moments are

infinite in number, it is clear that a generated or destructible thing existed for

an infinite time. It has therefore for an infinite time the capacity of not being

(since the capacity of being and the capacity of not being will be present

together), if destructible, in the time before destruction, if generated, in the

time after generation. If then we assume the two capacities to be actualized,

opposites will be present together. (3) Further, this second capacity will be

present like the first at every moment, so that the thing will have for an

infinite time the capacity both of being and of not being; but this has been

shown to be impossible. (4) Again, if the capacity is present prior to the

activity,  it  will  be  present  for  all  time,  even  while  the  thing  was  as  yet

ungenerated and non-existent, throughout the infinite time in which it wascapable of being generated. At that time, then, when it was not, at that same

time it had the capacity of being, both of being then and of being thereafter,

and therefore for an infinity of time.

It is clear also on other grounds that it is impossible that the destructible

should not at some time be destroyed. For otherwise it will always be at once

destructible and in actuality indestructible, so that it will be at the same time

capable of always existing and of not always existing. Thus the destructible is

at  some  time  actually  destroyed.  The  generable,  similarly,  has  been

generated, for it is capable of having been generated and thus also of not

always existing.

We may also see in the following way how impossible it is either for a

thing which is generated to be thenceforward indestructible, or for a thing

which  is  ungenerated  and  has  always  hitherto  existed  to  be  destroyed.

Nothing that is by chance can be indestructible or ungenerated, since the

products  of  chance  and  fortune  are  opposed  to  what  is,  or  comes  to  be,

always  or  usually,  while  anything  which  exists  for  a  time  infinite  either

absolutely or in one direction, is in existence either always or usually. That

which is by chance, then, is by nature such as to exist at one time and not at

another. But in things of that character the contradictory states proceed from

one and the same capacity, the matter of the thing being the cause equally of

its existence and of its non-existence. Hence contradictories would be present

together in actuality.

  Further, it cannot truly be said of a thing now that it exists last year, nor

could it be said last year that it exists now. It is therefore impossible for what

once did not exist later to be eternal. For in its later state it will possess the

capacity of not existing, only not of not existing at a time when it exists-since

then it exists in actuality-but of not existing last year or in the past. Now

suppose it to be in actuality what it is capable of being. It will then be true to

say now that it does not exist last year. But this is impossible. No capacity

relates to being in the past, but always to being in the present or future. It is

the same with the notion of an eternity of existence followed later by non-

existence. In the later state the capacity will be present for that which is not

there in actuality. Actualize, then, the capacity. It will be true to say now that

this exists last year or in the past generally.

  Considerations also not general like these but proper to the subject show it

to be impossible that what was formerly eternal should later be destroyed or

that what formerly was not should later be eternal. Whatever is destructible orgenerated is always alterable. Now alteration is due to contraries, and the

things which compose the natural body are the very same that destroy it.                          On the Heavens, Book II


Translated by J. L. Stocks


<

div id="section13" class="section" title="1">


1


That  the  heaven  as  a  whole  neither  came  into  being  nor  admits  of

destruction, as some assert, but is one and eternal, with no end or beginning

of its total duration, containing and embracing in itself the infinity of time,

we may convince ourselves not only by the arguments already set forth but

also by a consideration of the views of those who differ from us in providing

for its generation. If our view is a possible one, and the manner of generation

which they assert is impossible, this fact will have great weight in convincing

us of the immortality and eternity of the world. Hence it is well to persuade

oneself of the truth of the ancient and truly traditional theories, that there is

some immortal and divine thing which possesses movement, but movement

such as has no limit and is rather itself the limit of all other movement. A

limit is a thing which contains; and this motion, being perfect, contains those

imperfect motions which have a limit and a goal, having itself no beginning

or end, but unceasing through the infinity of time, and of other movements, to

some the cause of their beginning, to others offering the goal. The ancients

gave to the Gods the heaven or upper place, as being alone immortal; and our

present argument testifies that it is indestructible and ungenerated. Further, it

is unaffected by any mortal discomfort, and, in addition, effortless; for it

needs no constraining necessity to keep it to its path, and prevent it from

moving with some other movement more natural to itself. Such a constrained

movement would necessarily involve effort the more so, the more eternal it

were-and would be inconsistent with perfection. Hence we must not believe

the old tale which says that the world needs some Atlas to keep it safe-a tale

composed, it would seem, by men who, like later thinkers, conceived of all

the upper bodies as earthy and endowed with weight, and therefore supported

it in their fabulous way upon animate necessity. We must no more believethat than follow Empedocles when he says that the world, by being whirled

round, received a movement quick enough to overpower its own downward

tendency, and thus has been kept from destruction all this time. Nor, again, is

it conceivable that it should persist eternally by the necessitation of a soul.

For a soul could not live in such conditions painlessly or happily, since the

movement  involves  constraint,  being  imposed  on  the  first  body,  whose

natural motion is different, and imposed continuously. It must therefore be

uneasy and devoid of all rational satisfaction; for it could not even, like the

soul of mortal animals, take recreation in the bodily relaxation of sleep. An

Ixion’s lot must needs possess it, without end or respite. If then, as we said,

the view already stated of the first motion is a possible one, it is not only

more appropriate so to conceive of its eternity, but also on this hypothesis

alone are we able to advance a theory consistent with popular divinations of

the divine nature. But of this enough for the present.

<

div id="section14" class="section" title="2">


2


  Since there are some who say that there is a right and a left in the heaven,

with those who are known as Pythagoreans-to whom indeed the view really

belongs-we must consider whether, if we are to apply these principles to the

body of the universe, we should follow their statement of the matter or find a

better way. At the start we may say that, if right and left are applicable, there

are prior principles which must first be applied. These principles have been

analysed in the discussion of the movements of animals, for the reason that

they  are  proper  to  animal  nature.  For  in  some  animals  we  find  all  such

distinctions of parts as this of right and left clearly present, and in others

some; but in plants we find only above and below. Now if we are to apply to

the heaven such a distinction of parts, we must exect, as we have said, to find

in it also the distinction which in animals is found first of them all. The

distinctions are three, namely, above and below, front and its opposite, right

and left-all these three oppositions we expect to find in the perfect body-and

each may be called a principle. Above is the principle of length, right of

breadth,  front  of  depth.  Or  again  we  may  connect  them  with  the  various

movements,  taking  principle  to  mean  that  part,  in  a  thing  capable  of

movement, from which movement first begins. Growth starts from above,locomotion from the right, sensemovement from in front (for front is simply

the part to which the senses are directed). Hence we must not look for above

and below, right and left, front and back, in every kind of body, but only in

those which, being animate, have a principle of movement within themselves.

For  in  no  inanimate  thing  do  we  observe  a  part  from  which  movement

originates. Some do not move at all, some move, but not indifferently in any

direction; fire, for example, only upward, and earth only to the centre. It is

true  that  we  speak  of  above  and  below,  right  and  left,  in  these  bodies

relatively to ourselves. The reference may be to our own right hands, as with

the diviner, or to some similarity to our own members, such as the parts of a

statue possess; or we may take the contrary spatial order, calling right that

which is to our left, and left that which is to our right. We observe, however,

in the things themselves none of these distinctions; indeed if they are turned

round we proceed to speak of the opposite parts as right and left, a boy land

below, front and back. Hence it is remarkable that the Pythagoreans should

have spoken of these two principles, right and left, only, to the exclusion of

the other four, which have as good a title as they. There is no less difference

between  above  and  below  or  front  and  back  in  animals  generally  than

between right and left. The difference is sometimes only one of function,

sometimes also one of shape; and while the distinction of above and below is

characteristic of all animate things, whether plants or animals, that of right

and left is not found in plants. Further, inasmuch as length is prior to breadth,

if above is the principle of length, right of breadth, and if the principle of that

which is prior is itself prior, then above will be prior to right, or let us say,

since ‘prior’ is ambiguous, prior in order of generation. If, in addition, above

is the region from which movement originates, right the region in which it

starts, front the region to which it is directed, then on this ground too above

has a certain original character as compared with the other forms of position.

On these two grounds, then, they may fairly be criticized, first, for omitting

the more fundamental principles, and secondly, for thinking that the two they

mentioned were attributable equally to everything.

  Since we have already determined that functions of this kind belong to

things  which  possess,  a  principle  of  movement,  and  that  the  heaven  is

animate and possesses a principle of movement, clearly the heaven must also

exhibit  above  and  below,  right  and  left.  We  need  not  be  troubled  by  the

question, arising from the spherical shape of the world, how there can be a

distinction of right and left within it, all parts being alike and all for ever inmotion. We must think of the world as of something in which right differs

from left in shape as well as in other respects, which subsequently is included

in a sphere. The difference of function will persist, but will appear not to by

reason of the regularity of shape. In the same fashion must we conceive of the

beginning of its movement. For even if it never began to move, yet it must

possess a principle from which it would have begun to move if it had begun,

and from which it would begin again if it came to a stand. Now by its length I

mean  the  interval  between  its  poles,  one  pole  being  above  and  the  other

below; for two hemispheres are specially distinguished from all others by the

immobility  of  the  poles.  Further,  by  ‘transverse’  in  the  universe  we

commonly mean, not above and below, but a direction crossing the line of the

poles,  which,  by  implication,  is  length:  for  transverse  motion  is  motion

crossing motion up and down. Of the poles, that which we see above us is the

lower region, and that which we do not see is the upper. For right in anything

is, as we say, the region in which locomotion originates, and the rotation of

the heaven originates in the region from which the stars rise. So this will be

the right, and the region where they set the left. If then they begin from the

right and move round to the right, the upper must be the unseen pole. For if it

is the pole we see, the movement will be leftward, which we deny to be the

fact. Clearly then the invisible pole is above. And those who live in the other

hemisphere are above and to the right, while we are below and to the left.

This is just the opposite of the view of the Pythagoreans, who make us above

and on the right side and those in the other hemisphere below and on the left

side; the fact being the exact opposite. Relatively, however, to the secondary

revolution, I mean that of the planets, we are above and on the right and they

are below and on the left. For the principle of their movement has the reverse

position,  since  the  movement  itself  is  the  contrary  of  the  other:  hence  it

follows that we are at its beginning and they at its end. Here we may end our

discussion of the distinctions of parts created by the three dimensions and of

the consequent differences of position.

<

div id="section15" class="section" title="3">


3


  Since circular motion is not the contrary of the reverse circular motion, we

must consider why there is more than one motion, though we have to pursueour  inquiries  at  a  distance-a  distance  created  not  so  much  by  our  spatial

position as by the fact that our senses enable us to perceive very few of the

attributes of the heavenly bodies. But let not that deter us. The reason must be

sought in the following facts. Everything which has a function exists for its

function. The activity of God is immortality, i.e. eternal life. Therefore the

movement of that which is divine must be eternal. But such is the heaven,

viz. a divine body, and for that reason to it is given the circular body whose

nature it is to move always in a circle. Why, then, is not the whole body of

the  heaven  of  the  same  character  as  that  part?  Because  there  must  be

something at rest at the centre of the revolving body; and of that body no part

can be at rest, either elsewhere or at the centre. It could do so only if the

body’s natural movement were towards the centre. But the circular movement

is natural, since otherwise it could not be eternal: for nothing unnatural is

eternal. The unnatural is subsequent to the natural, being a derangement of

the natural which occurs in the course of its generation. Earth then has to

exist; for it is earth which is at rest at the centre. (At present we may take this

for granted: it shall be explained later.) But if earth must exist, so must fire.

For, if one of a pair of contraries naturally exists, the other, if it is really

contrary, exists also naturally. In some form it must be present, since the

matter of contraries is the same. Also, the positive is prior to its privation

(warm, for instance, to cold), and rest and heaviness stand for the privation of

lightness and movement. But further, if fire and earth exist, the intermediate

bodies must exist also: each element stands in a contrary relation to every

other. (This, again, we will here take for granted and try later to explain.)

these four elements generation clearly is involved, since none of them can be

eternal:  for  contraries  interact  with  one  another  and  destroy  one  another.

Further,  it  is  inconceivable  that  a  movable  body  should  be  eternal,  if  its

movement cannot be regarded as naturally eternal: and these bodies we know

to possess movement. Thus we see that generation is necessarily involved.

But  if  so,  there  must  be  at  least  one  other  circular  motion:  for  a  single

movement of the whole heaven would necessitate an identical relation of the

elements of bodies to one another. This matter also shall be cleared up in

what follows: but for the present so much is clear, that the reason why there

is more than one circular body is the necessity of generation, which follows

on the presence of fire, which, with that of the other bodies, follows on that

of  earth;  and  earth  is  required  because  eternal  movement  in  one  body

necessitates eternal rest in another.<

div id="section16" class="section" title="4">


4


The shape of the heaven is of necessity spherical; for that is the shape most

appropriate to its substance and also by nature primary.

First, let us consider generally which shape is primary among planes and

solids alike. Every plane figure must be either rectilinear or curvilinear. Now

the rectilinear is bounded by more than one line, the curvilinear by one only.

But since in any kind the one is naturally prior to the many and the simple to

the  complex,  the  circle  will  be  the  first  of  plane  figures.  Again,  if  by

complete, as previously defined, we mean a thing outside which no part of

itself can be found, and if addition is always possible to the straight line but

never to the circular, clearly the line which embraces the circle is complete. If

then the complete is prior to the incomplete, it follows on this ground also

that  the  circle  is  primary  among  figures.  And  the  sphere  holds  the  same

position among solids. For it alone is embraced by a single surface, while

rectilinear solids have several. The sphere is among solids what the circle is

among  plane  figures.  Further,  those  who  divide  bodies  into  planes  and

generate them out of planes seem to bear witness to the truth of this. Alone

among solids they leave the sphere undivided, as not possessing more than

one surface: for the division into surfaces is not just dividing a whole by

cutting it into its parts, but division of another fashion into parts different in

form. It is clear, then, that the sphere is first of solid figures.

If, again, one orders figures according to their numbers, it is most natural

to arrange them in this way. The circle corresponds to the number one, the

triangle, being the sum of two right angles, to the number two. But if one is

assigned to the triangle, the circle will not be a figure at all.

Now the first figure belongs to the first body, and the first body is that at

the farthest circumference. It follows that the body which revolves with a

circular movement must be spherical. The same then will be true of the body

continuous  with  it:  for  that  which  is  continuous  with  the  spherical  is

spherical. The same again holds of the bodies between these and the centre.

Bodies which are bounded by the spherical and in contact with it must be, as

wholes,  spherical;  and  the  bodies  below  the  sphere  of  the  planets  are

contiguous with the sphere above them. The sphere then will be sphericalthroughout;  for  every  body  within  it  is  contiguous  and  continuous  with

spheres.

  Again, since the whole revolves, palpably and by assumption, in a circle,

and since it has been shown that outside the farthest circumference there is

neither void nor place, from these grounds also it will follow necessarily that

the heaven is spherical. For if it is to be rectilinear in shape, it will follow that

there is place and body and void without it. For a rectilinear figure as it

revolves never continues in the same room, but where formerly was body, is

now none, and where now is none, body will be in a moment because of the

projection at the corners. Similarly, if the world had some other figure with

unequal radii, if, for instance, it were lentiform, or oviform, in every case we

should have to admit space and void outside the moving body, because the

whole body would not always occupy the same room.

  Again,  if  the  motion  of  the  heaven  is  the  measure  of  all  movements

whatever in virtue of being alone continuous and regular and eternal, and if,

in each kind, the measure is the minimum, and the minimum movement is the

swiftest, then, clearly, the movement of the heaven must be the swiftest of all

movements.  Now  of  lines  which  return  upon  themselves  the  line  which

bounds the circle is the shortest; and that movement is the swiftest which

follows  the  shortest  line.  Therefore,  if  the  heaven  moves  in  a  circle  and

moves more swiftly than anything else, it must necessarily be spherical.

  Corroborative evidence may be drawn from the bodies whose position is

about the centre. If earth is enclosed by water, water by air, air by fire, and

these  similarly  by  the  upper  bodies-which  while  not  continuous  are  yet

contiguous with them-and if the surface of water is spherical, and that which

is continuous with or embraces the spherical must itself be spherical, then on

these grounds also it is clear that the heavens are spherical. But the surface of

water is seen to be spherical if we take as our starting-point the fact that water

naturally  tends  to  collect  in  a  hollow  place-’hollow’  meaning  ‘nearer  the

centre’. Draw from the centre the lines AB, AC, and let their extremities be

joined by the straight line BC. The line AD, drawn to the base of the triangle,

will  be  shorter  than  either  of  the  radii.  Therefore  the  place  in  which  it

terminates will be a hollow place. The water then will collect there until

equality is established, that is until the line AE is equal to the two radii. Thus

water forces its way to the ends of the radii, and there only will it rest: but the

line  which  connects  the  extremities  of  the  radii  is  circular:  therefore  the

surface of the water BEC is spherical.It is plain from the foregoing that the universe is spherical. It is plain,

further, that it is turned (so to speak) with a finish which no manufactured

thing  nor  anything  else  within  the  range  of  our  observation  can  even

approach. For the matter of which these are composed does not admit of

anything  like  the  same  regularity  and  finish  as  the  substance  of  the

enveloping body; since with each step away from earth the matter manifestly

becomes finer in the same proportion as water is finer than earth.

<

div id="section17" class="section" title="5">


5


Now there are two ways of moving along a circle, from A to B or from A

to C, and we have already explained that these movements are not contrary to

one  another.  But  nothing  which  concerns  the  eternal  can  be  a  matter  of

chance or spontaneity, and the heaven and its circular motion are eternal. We

must therefore ask why this motion takes one direction and not the other.

Either this is itself an ultimate fact or there is an ultimate fact behind it. It

may seem evidence of excessive folly or excessive zeal to try to provide an

explanation of some things, or of everything, admitting no exception. The

criticism, however, is not always just: one should first consider what reason

there is for speaking, and also what kind of certainty is looked for, whether

human merely or of a more cogent kind. When any one shall succeed in

finding  proofs  of  greater  precision,  gratitude  will  be  due  to  him  for  the

discovery, but at present we must be content with a probable solution. If

nature always follows the best course possible, and, just as upward movement

is the superior form of rectilinear movement, since the upper region is more

divine than the lower, so forward movement is superior to backward, then

front  and  back  exhibits,  like  right  and  left,  as  we  said  before  and  as  the

difficulty  just  stated  itself  suggests,  the  distinction  of  prior  and  posterior,

which provides a reason and so solves our difficulty. Supposing that nature is

ordered in the best way possible, this may stand as the reason of the fact

mentioned. For it is best to move with a movement simple and unceasing,

and, further, in the superior of two possible directions.

<

div id="section18" class="section" title="6">6


We have next to show that the movement of the heaven is regular and not

irregular. This applies only to the first heaven and the first movement; for the

lower spheres exhibit a composition of several movements into one. If the

movement is uneven, clearly there will be acceleration, maximum speed, and

retardation, since these appear in all irregular motions. The maximum may

occur either at the starting-point or at the goal or between the two; and we

expect natural motion to reach its maximum at the goal, unnatural motion at

the  starting-point,  and  missiles  midway  between  the  two.  But  circular

movement, having no beginning or limit or middle in the direct sense of the

words, has neither whence nor whither nor middle: for in time it is eternal,

and in length it returns upon itself without a break. If then its movement has

no maximum, it can have no irregularity, since irregularity is produced by

retardation and acceleration. Further, since everything that is moved is moved

by something, the cause of the irregularity of movement must lie either in the

mover or in the moved or both. For if the mover moved not always with the

same force, or if the moved were altered and did not remain the same, or if

both were to change, the result might well be an irregular movement in the

moved. But none of these possibilities can be conceived as actual in the case

of the heavens. As to that which is moved, we have shown that it is primary

and simple and ungenerated and indestructible and generally unchanging; and

the mover has an even better right to these attributes. It is the primary that

moves the primary, the simple the simple, the indestructible and ungenerated

that which is indestructible and ungenerated. Since then that which is moved,

being a body, is nevertheless unchanging, how should the mover, which is

incorporeal, be changed?

It  follows  then,  further,  that  the  motion  cannot  be  irregular.  For  if

irregularity occurs, there must be change either in the movement as a whole,

from fast to slow and slow to fast, or in its parts. That there is no irregularity

in the parts is obvious, since, if there were, some divergence of the stars

would have taken place before now in the infinity of time, as one moved

slower and another faster: but no alteration of their intervals is ever observed.

Nor again is a change in the movement as a whole admissible. Retardation is

always due to incapacity, and incapacity is unnatural. The incapacities of

animals, age, decay, and the like, are all unnatural, due, it seems, to the fact

that the whole animal complex is made up of materials which differ in respectof their proper places, and no single part occupies its own place. If therefore

that which is primary contains nothing unnatural, being simple and unmixed

and  in  its  proper  place  and  having  no  contrary,  then  it  has  no  place  for

incapacity, nor, consequently, for retardation or (since acceleration involves

retardation) for acceleration. Again, it is inconceivable that the mover should

first show incapacity for an infinite time, and capacity afterwards for another

infinity. For clearly nothing which, like incapacity, unnatural ever continues

for an infinity of time; nor does the unnatural endure as long as the natural, or

any  form  of  incapacity  as  long  as  the  capacity.  But  if  the  movement  is

retarded  it  must  necessarily  be  retarded  for  an  infinite  time.  Equally

impossible  is  perpetual  acceleration  or  perpetual  retardation.  For  such

movement would be infinite and indefinite, but every movement, in our view,

proceeds  from  one  point  to  another  and  is  definite  in  character.  Again,

suppose one assumes a minimum time in less than which the heaven could

not complete its movement. For, as a given walk or a given exercise on the

harp cannot take any and every time, but every performance has its definite

minimum time which is unsurpassable, so, one might suppose, the movement

of the heaven could not be completed in any and every time. But in that case

perpetual acceleration is impossible (and, equally, perpetual retardation: for

the argument holds of both and each), if we may take acceleration to proceed

by identical or increasing additions of speed and for an infinite time. The

remaining alternative is to say that the movement exhibits an alternation of

slower and faster: but this is a mere fiction and quite inconceivable. Further,

irregularity of this kind would be particularly unlikely to pass unobserved,

since contrast makes observation easy.

That there is one heaven, then, only, and that it is ungenerated and eternal,

and further that its movement is regular, has now been sufficiently explained.

<

div id="section19" class="section" title="7">


7


We have next to speak of the stars, as they are called, of their composition,

shape, and movements. It would be most natural and consequent upon what

has been said that each of the stars should be composed of that substance in

which their path lies, since, as we said, there is an element whose natural

movement is circular. In so saying we are only following the same line ofthought as those who say that the stars are fiery because they believe the

upper body to be fire, the presumption being that a thing is composed of the

same stuff as that in which it is situated. The warmth and light which proceed

from  them  are  caused  by  the  friction  set  up  in  the  air  by  their  motion.

Movement tends to create fire in wood, stone, and iron; and with even more

reason should it have that effect on air, a substance which is closer to fire

than  these.  An  example  is  that  of  missiles,  which  as  they  move  are

themselves fired so strongly that leaden balls are melted; and if they are fired

the surrounding air must be similarly affected. Now while the missiles are

heated  by  reason  of  their  motion  in  air,  which  is  turned  into  fire  by  the

agitation  produced  by  their  movement,  the  upper  bodies  are  carried  on  a

moving  sphere,  so  that,  though  they  are  not  themselves  fired,  yet  the  air

underneath  the  sphere  of  the  revolving  body  is  necessarily  heated  by  its

motion, and particularly in that part where the sun is attached to it. Hence

warmth increases as the sun gets nearer or higher or overhead. Of the fact,

then, that the stars are neither fiery nor move in fire, enough has been said.

<

div id="section20" class="section" title="8">


8


  Since changes evidently occur not only in the position of the stars but also

in that of the whole heaven, there are three possibilities. Either (1) both are at

rest, or (2) both are in motion, or (3) the one is at rest and the other in motion.

(1) That both should be at rest is impossible; for, if the earth is at rest, the

hypothesis does not account for the observations; and we take it as granted

that the earth is at rest. It remains either that both are moved, or that the one

is moved and the other at rest.

(2) On the view, first, that both are in motion, we have the absurdity that

the stars and the circles move with the same speed, i.e. that the arc of every

star is that of the circle in it moves. For star and circle are seen to come back

to the same place at the same moment; from which it follows that the star has

traversed  the  circle  and  the  circle  has  completed  its  own  movement,  i.e.

traversed  its  own  circumference,  at  one  and  the  same  moment.  But  it  is

difficult to conceive that the pace of each star should be exactly proportioned

to the size of its circle. That the pace of each circle should be proportionate to

its size is not absurd but inevitable: but that the same should be true of themovement of the stars contained in the circles is quite incredible. For if, on

the one hand, we suppose that the star which moves on the greater circle is

necessarily swifter, clearly we also admit that if stars shifted their position so

as  to  exchange  circles,  the  slower  would  become  swifter  and  the  swifter

slower. But this would show that their movement was not their own, but due

to  the  circles.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  arrangement  was  a  chance

combination, the coincidence in every case of a greater circle with a swifter

movement of the star contained in it is too much to believe. In one or two

cases it might not inconceivably fall out so, but to imagine it in every case

alike is a mere fiction. Besides, chance has no place in that which is natural,

and what happens everywhere and in every case is no matter of chance.

(3) The same absurdity is equally plain if it is supposed that the circles

stand still and that it is the stars themselves which move. For it will follow

that the outer stars are the swifter, and that the pace of the stars corresponds

to the size of their circles.

  Since, then, we cannot reasonably suppose either that both are in motion or

that the star alone moves, the remaining alternative is that the circles should

move, while the stars are at rest and move with the circles to which they are

attached. Only on this supposition are we involved in no absurd consequence.

For, in the first place, the quicker movement of the larger circle is natural

when all the circles are attached to the same centre. Whenever bodies are

moving with their proper motion, the larger moves quicker. It is the same

here with the revolving bodies: for those that are intercepted by two radii will

be larger in the larger circle, and hence it is not surprising that the revolution

of the larger circle should take the same time as that of the smaller. And

secondly, the fact that the heavens do not break in pieces follows not only

from this but also from the proof already given of the continuity of the whole.

  Again, since the stars are spherical, as our opponents assert and we may

consistently admit, inasmuch as we construct them out of the spherical body,

and since the spherical body has two movements proper to itself, namely

rolling and spinning, it follows that if the stars have a movement of their

own, it will be one of these. But neither is observed. (1) Suppose them to

spin. They would then stay where they were, and not change their place, as,

by observation and general consent, they do. Further, one would expect them

all to exhibit the same movement: but the only star which appears to possess

this movement is the sun, at sunrise or sunset, and this appearance is due not

to the sun itself but to the distance from which we observe it. The visual raybeing excessively prolonged becomes weak and wavering. The same reason

probably  accounts  for  the  apparent  twinkling  of  the  fixed  stars  and  the

absence of twinkling in the planets. The planets are near, so that the visual

ray reaches them in its full vigour, but when it comes to the fixed stars it is

quivering because of the distance and its excessive extension; and its tremor

produces an appearance of movement in the star: for it makes no difference

whether movement is set up in the ray or in the object of vision.

(2) On the other hand, it is also clear that the stars do not roll. For rolling

involves rotation: but the ‘face’, as it is called, of the moon is always seen.

Therefore, since any movement of their own which the stars possessed would

presumably be one proper to themselves, and no such movement is observed

in them, clearly they have no movement of their own.

  There is, further, the absurdity that nature has bestowed upon them no

organ appropriate to such movement. For nature leaves nothing to chance,

and would not, while caring for animals, overlook things so precious. Indeed,

nature seems deliberately to have stripped them of everything which makes

selforiginated  progression  possible,  and  to  have  removed  them  as  far  as

possible from things which have organs of movement. This is just why it

seems proper that the whole heaven and every star should be spherical. For

while of all shapes the sphere is the most convenient for movement in one

place,  making  possible,  as  it  does,  the  swiftest  and  most  selfcontained

motion,  for  forward  movement  it  is  the  most  unsuitable,  least  of  all

resembling  shapes  which  are  self-moved,  in  that  it  has  no  dependent  or

projecting part, as a rectilinear figure has, and is in fact as far as possible

removed in shape from ambulatory bodies. Since, therefore, the heavens have

to move in one place, and the stars are not required to move themselves

forward, it is natural that both should be spherical-a shape which best suits

the movement of the one and the immobility of the other.

<

div id="section21" class="section" title="9">


9


  From all this it is clear that the theory that the movement of the stars

produces a harmony, i.e. that the sounds they make are concordant, in spite of

the grace and originality with which it has been stated, is nevertheless untrue.

Some thinkers suppose that the motion of bodies of that size must produce anoise, since on our earth the motion of bodies far inferior in size and in speed

of movement has that effect. Also, when the sun and the moon, they say, and

all the stars, so great in number and in size, are moving with so rapid a

motion,  how  should  they  not  produce  a  sound  immensely  great?  Starting

from this argument and from the observation that their speeds, as measured

by their distances, are in the same ratios as musical concordances, they assert

that the sound given forth by the circular movement of the stars is a harmony.

Since, however, it appears unaccountable that we should not hear this music,

they explain this by saying that the sound is in our ears from the very moment

of birth and is thus indistinguishable from its contrary silence, since sound

and silence are discriminated by mutual contrast. What happens to men, then,

is just what happens to coppersmiths, who are so accustomed to the noise of

the  smithy  that  it  makes  no  difference  to  them.  But,  as  we  said  before,

melodious and poetical as the theory is, it cannot be a true account of the

facts. There is not only the absurdity of our hearing nothing, the ground of

which they try to remove, but also the fact that no effect other than sensitive

is produced upon us. Excessive noises, we know, shatter the solid bodies

even of inanimate things: the noise of thunder, for instance, splits rocks and

the strongest of bodies. But if the moving bodies are so great, and the sound

which penetrates to us is proportionate to their size, that sound must needs

reach us in an intensity many times that of thunder, and the force of its action

must be immense. Indeed the reason why we do not hear, and show in our

bodies none of the effects of violent force, is easily given: it is that there is no

noise. But not only is the explanation evident; it is also a corroboration of the

truth of the views we have advanced. For the very difficulty which made the

Pythagoreans say that the motion of the stars produces a concord corroborates

our view. Bodies which are themselves in motion, produce noise and friction:

but those which are attached or fixed to a moving body, as the parts to a ship,

can no more create noise, than a ship on a river moving with the stream. Yet

by the same argument one might say it was absurd that on a large vessel the

motion of mast and poop should not make a great noise, and the like might be

said of the movement of the vessel itself. But sound is caused when a moving

body is enclosed in an unmoved body, and cannot be caused by one enclosed

in, and continuous with, a moving body which creates no friction. We may

say, then, in this matter that if the heavenly bodies moved in a generally

diffused  mass  of  air  or  fire,  as  every  one  supposes,  their  motion  would

necessarily cause a noise of tremendous strength and such a noise wouldnecessarily reach and shatter us. Since, therefore, this effect is evidently not

produced, it follows that none of them can move with the motion either of

animate nature or of constraint. It is as though nature had foreseen the result,

that  if  their  movement  were  other  than  it  is,  nothing  on  this  earth  could

maintain its character.

That the stars are spherical and are not selfmoved, has now been explained.

<

div id="section22" class="section" title="10">


10


  With their order-I mean the position of each, as involving the priority of

some and the posteriority of others, and their respective distances from the

extremity-with this astronomy may be left to deal, since the astronomical

discussion  is  adequate.  This  discussion  shows  that  the  movements  of  the

several stars depend, as regards the varieties of speed which they exhibit, on

the distance of each from the extremity. It is established that the outermost

revolution of the heavens is a simple movement and the swiftest of all, and

that the movement of all other bodies is composite and relatively slow, for

the reason that each is moving on its own circle with the reverse motion to

that of the heavens. This at once leads us to expect that the body which is

nearest to that first simple revolution should take the longest time to complete

its circle, and that which is farthest from it the shortest, the others taking a

longer time the nearer they are and a shorter time the farther away they are.

For it is the nearest body which is most strongly influenced, and the most

remote, by reason of its distance, which is least affected, the influence on the

intermediate bodies varying, as the mathematicians show, with their distance.

<

div id="section23" class="section" title="11">


11


  With regard to the shape of each star, the most reasonable view is that they

are  spherical.  It  has  been  shown  that  it  is  not  in  their  nature  to  move

themselves, and, since nature is no wanton or random creator, clearly she will

have given things which possess no movement a shape particularly unadaptedto movement. Such a shape is the sphere, since it possesses no instrument of

movement. Clearly then their mass will have the form of a sphere. Again,

what holds of one holds of all, and the evidence of our eyes shows us that the

moon is spherical. For how else should the moon as it waxes and wanes show

for  the  most  part  a  crescent-shaped  or  gibbous  figure,  and  only  at  one

moment  a  half-moon?  And  astronomical  arguments  give  further

confirmation; for no other hypothesis accounts for the crescent shape of the

sun’s eclipses. One, then, of the heavenly bodies being spherical, clearly the

rest will be spherical also.

<

div id="section24" class="section" title="12">


12


  There are two difficulties, which may very reasonably here be raised, of

which we must now attempt to state the probable solution: for we regard the

zeal of one whose thirst after philosophy leads him to accept even slight

indications where it is very difficult to see one’s way, as a proof rather of

modesty than of overconfidence.

Of many such problems one of the strangest is the problem why we find

the greatest number of movements in the intermediate bodies, and not, rather,

in each successive body a variety of movement proportionate to its distance

from  the  primary  motion.  For  we  should  expect,  since  the  primary  body

shows one motion only, that the body which is nearest to it should move with

the fewest movements, say two, and the one next after that with three, or

some similar arrangement. But the opposite is the case. The movements of

the sun and moon are fewer than those of some of the planets. Yet these

planets are farther from the centre and thus nearer to the primary body than

they, as observation has itself revealed. For we have seen the moon, half-full,

pass beneath the planet Mars, which vanished on its shadow side and came

forth by the bright and shining part. Similar accounts of other stars are given

by the Egyptians and Babylonians, whose observations have been kept for

very many years past, and from whom much of our evidence about particular

stars is derived. A second difficulty which may with equal justice be raised is

this. Why is it that the primary motion includes such a multitude of stars that

their whole array seems to defy counting, while of the other stars each one is

separated off, and in no case do we find two or more attached to the samemotion?

On these questions, I say, it is well that we should seek to increase our

understanding, though we have but little to go upon, and are placed at so

great a distance from the facts in question. Nevertheless there are certain

principles  on  which  if  we  base  our  consideration  we  shall  not  find  this

difficulty by any means insoluble. We may object that we have been thinking

of the stars as mere bodies, and as units with a serial order indeed but entirely

inanimate; but should rather conceive them as enjoying life and action. On

this view the facts cease to appear surprising. For it is natural that the best-

conditioned of all things should have its good without action, that which is

nearest to it should achieve it by little and simple action, and that which is

farther removed by a complexity of actions, just as with men’s bodies one is

in good condition without exercise at all, another after a short walk, while

another requires running and wrestling and hard training, and there are yet

others who however hard they worked themselves could never secure this

good, but only some substitute for it. To succeed often or in many things is

difficult.  For  instance,  to  throw  ten  thousand  Coan  throws  with  the  dice

would  be  impossible,  but  to  throw  one  or  two  is  comparatively  easy.  In

action, again, when A has to be done to get B, B to get C, and C to get D, one

step or two present little difficulty, but as the series extends the difficulty

grows. We must, then, think of the action of the lower stars as similar to that

of animals and plants. For on our earth it is man that has the greatest variety

of actions-for there are many goods that man can secure; hence his actions

are various and directed to ends beyond them-while the perfectly conditioned

has no need of action, since it is itself the end, and action always requires two

terms, end and means. The lower animals have less variety of action than

man; and plants perhaps have little action and of one kind only. For either

they have but one attainable good (as indeed man has), or, if several, each

contributes directly to their ultimate good. One thing then has and enjoys the

ultimate good, other things attain to it, one immediately by few steps, another

by many, while yet another does not even attempt to secure it but is satisfied

to reach a point not far removed from that consummation. Thus, taking health

as the end, there will be one thing that always possesses health, others that

attain it, one by reducing flesh, another by running and thus reducing flesh,

another by taking steps to enable himself to run, thus further increasing the

number  of  movements,  while  another  cannot  attain  health  itself,  but  only

running or reduction of flesh, so that one or other of these is for such a beingthe end. For while it is clearly best for any being to attain the real end, yet, if

that cannot be, the nearer it is to the best the better will be its state. It is for

this reason that the earth moves not at all and the bodies near to it with few

movements. For they do not attain the final end, but only come as near to it as

their  share  in  the  divine  principle  permits.  But  the  first  heaven  finds  it

immediately with a single movement, and the bodies intermediate between

the first and last heavens attain it indeed, but at the cost of a multiplicity of

movement.

As to the difficulty that into the one primary motion is crowded a vast

multitude of stars, while of the other stars each has been separately given

special  movements  of  its  own,  there  is  in  the  first  place  this  reason  for

regarding the arrangement as a natural one. In thinking of the life and moving

principle of the several heavens one must regard the first as far superior to the

others. Such a superiority would be reasonable. For this single first motion

has to move many of the divine bodies, while the numerous other motions

move  only  one  each,  since  each  single  planet  moves  with  a  variety  of

motions. Thus, then, nature makes matters equal and establishes a certain

order, giving to the single motion many bodies and to the single body many

motions. And there is a second reason why the other motions have each only

one body, in that each of them except the last, i.e. that which contains the one

star, is really moving many bodies. For this last sphere moves with many

others, to which it is fixed, each sphere being actually a body; so that its

movement will be a joint product. Each sphere, in fact, has its particular

natural motion, to which the general movement is, as it were, added. But the

force of any limited body is only adequate to moving a limited body.

The  characteristics  of  the  stars  which  move  with  a  circular  motion,  in

respect  of  substance  and  shape,  movement  and  order,  have  now  been

sufficiently explained.

<

div id="section25" class="section" title="13">


13


It remains to speak of the earth, of its position, of the question whether it is

at rest or in motion, and of its shape.

I. As to its position there is some difference of opinion. Most people-all, in

fact, who regard the whole heaven as finite-say it lies at the centre. But theItalian philosophers known as Pythagoreans take the contrary view. At the

centre, they say, is fire, and the earth is one of the stars, creating night and

day by its circular motion about the centre. They further construct another

earth in opposition to ours to which they give the name counterearth. In all

this they are not seeking for theories and causes to account for observed facts,

but  rather  forcing  their  observations  and  trying  to  accommodate  them  to

certain theories and opinions of their own. But there are many others who

would agree that it is wrong to give the earth the central position, looking for

confirmation rather to theory than to the facts of observation. Their view is

that the most precious place befits the most precious thing: but fire, they say,

is  more  precious  than  earth,  and  the  limit  than  the  intermediate,  and  the

circumference and the centre are limits. Reasoning on this basis they take the

view that it is not earth that lies at the centre of the sphere, but rather fire. The

Pythagoreans have a further reason. They hold that the most important part of

the world, which is the centre, should be most strictly guarded, and name it,

or rather the fire which occupies that place, the ‘Guardhouse of Zeus’, as if

the word ‘centre’ were quite unequivocal, and the centre of the mathematical

figure were always the same with that of the thing or the natural centre. But it

is better to conceive of the case of the whole heaven as analogous to that of

animals, in which the centre of the animal and that of the body are different.

For this reason they have no need to be so disturbed about the world, or to

call in a guard for its centre: rather let them look for the centre in the other

sense and tell us what it is like and where nature has set it. That centre will be

something primary and precious; but to the mere position we should give the

last place rather than the first. For the middle is what is defined, and what

defines it is the limit, and that which contains or limits is more precious than

that which is limited, see ing that the latter is the matter and the former the

essence of the system.

II.  As  to  the  position  of  the  earth,  then,  this  is  the  view  which  some

advance, and the views advanced concerning its rest or motion are similar.

For here too there is no general agreement. All who deny that the earth lies at

the centre think that it revolves about the centre, and not the earth only but, as

we said before, the counter-earth as well. Some of them even consider it

possible that there are several bodies so moving, which are invisible to us

owing to the interposition of the earth. This, they say, accounts for the fact

that eclipses of the moon are more frequent than eclipses of the sun: for in

addition to the earth each of these moving bodies can obstruct it. Indeed, as inany case the surface of the earth is not actually a centre but distant from it a

full hemisphere, there is no more difficulty, they think, in accounting for the

observed facts on their view that we do not dwell at the centre, than on the

common view that the earth is in the middle. Even as it is, there is nothing in

the observations to suggest that we are removed from the centre by half the

diameter  of  the  earth.  Others,  again,  say  that  the  earth,  which  lies  at  the

centre, is ‘rolled’, and thus in motion, about the axis of the whole heaven, So

it stands written in the Timaeus.

III. There are similar disputes about the shape of the earth. Some think it is

spherical, others that it is flat and drum-shaped. For evidence they bring the

fact that, as the sun rises and sets, the part concealed by the earth shows a

straight and not a curved edge, whereas if the earth were spherical the line of

section would have to be circular. In this they leave out of account the great

distance of the sun from the earth and the great size of the circumference,

which,  seen  from  a  distance  on  these  apparently  small  circles  appears

straight. Such an appearance ought not to make them doubt the circular shape

of the earth. But they have another argument. They say that because it is at

rest, the earth must necessarily have this shape. For there are many different

ways in which the movement or rest of the earth has been conceived.

The  difficulty  must  have  occurred  to  every  one.  It  would  indeed  be  a

complacent mind that felt no surprise that, while a little bit of earth, let loose

in mid-air moves and will not stay still, and more there is of it the faster it

moves, the whole earth, free in midair, should show no movement at all. Yet

here is this great weight of earth, and it is at rest. And again, from beneath

one of these moving fragments of earth, before it falls, take away the earth,

and it will continue its downward movement with nothing to stop it. The

difficulty then, has naturally passed into a common place of philosophy; and

one may well wonder that the solutions offered are not seen to involve greater

absurdities than the problem itself.

By these considerations some have been led to assert that the earth below

us is infinite, saying, with Xenophanes of Colophon, that it has ‘pushed its

roots to infinity’,-in order to save the trouble of seeking for the cause. Hence

the sharp rebuke of Empedocles, in the words ‘if the deeps of the earth are

endless and endless the ample ether-such is the vain tale told by many a

tongue, poured from the mouths of those who have seen but little of the

whole.  Others  say  the  earth  rests  upon  water.  This,  indeed,  is  the  oldest

theory that has been preserved, and is attributed to Thales of Miletus. It wassupposed  to  stay  still  because  it  floated  like  wood  and  other  similar

substances, which are so constituted as to rest upon but not upon air. As if the

same account had not to be given of the water which carries the earth as of

the earth itself! It is not the nature of water, any more than of earth, to stay in

mid-air: it must have something to rest upon. Again, as air is lighter than

water,  so  is  water  than  earth:  how  then  can  they  think  that  the  naturally

lighter substance lies below the heavier? Again, if the earth as a whole is

capable of floating upon water, that must obviously be the case with any part

of it. But observation shows that this is not the case. Any piece of earth goes

to the bottom, the quicker the larger it is. These thinkers seem to push their

inquiries some way into the problem, but not so far as they might. It is what

we are all inclined to do, to direct our inquiry not by the matter itself, but by

the views of our opponents: and even when interrogating oneself one pushes

the inquiry only to the point at which one can no longer offer any opposition.

Hence  a  good  inquirer  will  be  one  who  is  ready  in  bringing  forward  the

objections proper to the genus, and that he will be when he has gained an

understanding of all the differences.

  Anaximenes and Anaxagoras and Democritus give the flatness of the earth

as the cause of its staying still. Thus, they say, it does not cut, but covers like

a lid, the air beneath it. This seems to be the way of flat-shaped bodies: for

even the wind can scarcely move them because of their power of resistance.

The same immobility, they say, is produced by the flatness of the surface

which the earth presents to the air which underlies it; while the air, not having

room enough to change its place because it is underneath the earth, stays

there in a mass, like the water in the case of the water-clock. And they adduce

an amount of evidence to prove that air, when cut off and at rest, can bear a

considerable weight.

Now, first, if the shape of the earth is not flat, its flatness cannot be the

cause of its immobility. But in their own account it is rather the size of the

earth than its flatness that causes it to remain at rest. For the reason why the

air is so closely confined that it cannot find a passage, and therefore stays

where it is, is its great amount: and this amount great because the body which

isolates it, the earth, is very large. This result, then, will follow, even if the

earth is spherical, so long as it retains its size. So far as their arguments go,

the earth will still be at rest.

In general, our quarrel with those who speak of movement in this way

cannot be confined to the parts; it concerns the whole universe. One mustdecide at the outset whether bodies have a natural movement or not, whether

there is no natural but only constrained movement. Seeing, however, that we

have already decided this matter to the best of our ability, we are entitled to

treat our results as representing fact. Bodies, we say, which have no natural

movement, have no constrained movement; and where there is no natural and

no  constrained  movement  there  will  be  no  movement  at  all.  This  is  a

conclusion, the necessity of which we have already decided, and we have

seen further that rest also will be inconceivable, since rest, like movement, is

either natural or constrained. But if there is any natural movement, constraint

will not be the sole principle of motion or of rest. If, then, it is by constraint

that  the  earth  now  keeps  its  place,  the  so-called  ‘whirling’  movement  by

which its parts came together at the centre was also constrained. (The form of

causation supposed they all borrow from observations of liquids and of air, in

which the larger and heavier bodies always move to the centre of the whirl.

This is thought by all those who try to generate the heavens to explain why

the earth came together at the centre. They then seek a reason for its staying

there; and some say, in the manner explained, that the reason is its size and

flatness, others, with Empedocles, that the motion of the heavens, moving

about it at a higher speed, prevents movement of the earth, as the water in a

cup, when the cup is given a circular motion, though it is often underneath

the  bronze,  is  for  this  same  reason  prevented  from  moving  with  the

downward movement which is natural to it.) But suppose both the ‘whirl’ and

its flatness (the air beneath being withdrawn) cease to prevent the earth’s

motion, where will the earth move to then? Its movement to the centre was

constrained, and its rest at the centre is due to constraint; but there must be

some motion which is natural to it. Will this be upward motion or downward

or what? It must have some motion; and if upward and downward motion are

alike to it, and the air above the earth does not prevent upward movement,

then no more could air below it prevent downward movement. For the same

cause must necessarily have the same effect on the same thing.

  Further, against Empedocles there is another point which might be made.

When the elements were separated off by Hate, what caused the earth to keep

its place? Surely the ‘whirl’ cannot have been then also the cause. It is absurd

too  not  to  perceive  that,  while  the  whirling  movement  may  have  been

responsible for the original coming together of the art of earth at the centre,

the question remains, why now do all heavy bodies move to the earth. For the

whirl surely does not come near us. Why, again, does fire move upward? Not,surely, because of the whirl. But if fire is naturally such as to move in a

certain direction, clearly the same may be supposed to hold of earth. Again, it

cannot be the whirl which determines the heavy and the light. Rather that

movement caused the pre-existent heavy and light things to go to the middle

and stay on the surface respectively. Thus, before ever the whirl began, heavy

and light existed; and what can have been the ground of their distinction, or

the manner and direction of their natural movements? In the infinite chaos

there can have been neither above nor below, and it is by these that heavy and

light are determined.

It is to these causes that most writers pay attention: but there are some,

Anaximander, for instance, among the ancients, who say that the earth keeps

its  place  because  of  its  indifference.  Motion  upward  and  downward  and

sideways were all, they thought, equally inappropriate to that which is set at

the centre and indifferently related to every extreme point; and to move in

contrary directions at the same time was impossible: so it must needs remain

still. This view is ingenious but not true. The argument would prove that

everything, whatever it be, which is put at the centre, must stay there. Fire,

then, will rest at the centre: for the proof turns on no peculiar property of

earth. But this does not follow. The observed facts about earth are not only

that it remains at the centre, but also that it moves to the centre. The place to

which any fragment of earth moves must necessarily be the place to which

the whole moves; and in the place to which a thing naturally moves, it will

naturally rest. The reason then is not in the fact that the earth is indifferently

related to every extreme point: for this would apply to any body, whereas

movement to the centre is peculiar to earth. Again it is absurd to look for a

reason why the earth remains at the centre and not for a reason why fire

remains at the extremity. If the extremity is the natural place of fire, clearly

earth must also have a natural place. But suppose that the centre is not its

place,  and  that  the  reason  of  its  remaining  there  is  this  necessity  of

indifference-on the analogy of the hair which, it is said, however great the

tension, will not break under it, if it be evenly distributed, or of the men who,

though  exceedingly  hungry  and  thirsty,  and  both  equally,  yet  being

equidistant from food and drink, is therefore bound to stay where he is-even

so, it still remains to explain why fire stays at the extremities. It is strange,

too, to ask about things staying still but not about their motion,-why, I mean,

one thing, if nothing stops it, moves up, and another thing to the centre.

Again, their statements are not true. It happens, indeed, to be the case that athing to which movement this way and that is equally inappropriate is obliged

to  remain  at  the  centre.  But  so  far  as  their  argument  goes,  instead  of

remaining there, it will move, only not as a mass but in fragments. For the

argument applies equally to fire. Fire, if set at the centre, should stay there,

like earth, since it will be indifferently related to every point on the extremity.

Nevertheless it will move, as in fact it always does move when nothing stops

it, away from the centre to the extremity. It will not, however, move in a mass

to a single point on the circumference-the only possible result on the lines of

the indifference theory-but rather each corresponding portion of fire to the

corresponding part of the extremity, each fourth part, for instance, to a fourth

part of the circumference. For since no body is a point, it will have parts. The

expansion, when the body increased the place occupied, would be on the

same principle as the contraction, in which the place was diminished. Thus,

for all the indifference theory shows to the contrary, earth also would have

moved in this manner away from the centre, unless the centre had been its

natural place.

We have now outlined the views held as to the shape, position, and rest or

movement of the earth.

<

div id="section26" class="section" title="14">


14


Let us first decide the question whether the earth moves or is at rest. For,

as we said, there are some who make it one of the stars, and others who,

setting it at the centre, suppose it to be ‘rolled’ and in motion about the pole

as axis. That both views are untenable will be clear if we take as our starting-

point the fact that the earth’s motion, whether the earth be at the centre or

away from it, must needs be a constrained motion. It cannot be the movement

of the earth itself. If it were, any portion of it would have this movement; but

in  fact  every  part  moves  in  a  straight  line  to  the  centre.  Being,  then,

constrained and unnatural, the movement could not be eternal. But the order

of the universe is eternal. Again, everything that moves with the circular

movement, except the first sphere, is observed to be passed, and to move with

more than one motion. The earth, then, also, whether it move about the centre

or as stationary at it, must necessarily move with two motions. But if this

were so, there would have to be passings and turnings of the fixed stars. Yetno such thing is observed. The same stars always rise and set in the same

parts of the earth.

  Further, the natural movement of the earth, part and whole alike, is the

centre of the whole-whence the fact that it is now actually situated at the

centre-but  it  might  be  questioned  since  both  centres  are  the  same,  which

centre it is that portions of earth and other heavy things move to. Is this their

goal because it is the centre of the earth or because it is the centre of the

whole? The goal, surely, must be the centre of the whole. For fire and other

light things move to the extremity of the area which contains the centre. It

happens, however, that the centre of the earth and of the whole is the same.

Thus they do move to the centre of the earth, but accidentally, in virtue of the

fact that the earth’s centre lies at the centre of the whole. That the centre of

the earth is the goal of their movement is indicated by the fact that heavy

bodies moving towards the earth do not parallel but so as to make equal

angles, and thus to a single centre, that of the earth. It is clear, then, that the

earth must be at the centre and immovable, not only for the reasons already

given, but also because heavy bodies forcibly thrown quite straight upward

return to the point from which they started, even if they are thrown to an

infinite distance. From these considerations then it is clear that the earth does

not move and does not lie elsewhere than at the centre.

  From what we have said the explanation of the earth’s immobility is also

apparent. If it is the nature of earth, as observation shows, to move from any

point to the centre, as of fire contrariwise to move from the centre to the

extremity, it is impossible that any portion of earth should move away from

the centre except by constraint. For a single thing has a single movement, and

a  simple  thing  a  simple:  contrary  movements  cannot  belong  to  the  same

thing, and movement away from the centre is the contrary of movement to it.

If then no portion of earth can move away from the centre, obviously still less

can the earth as a whole so move. For it is the nature of the whole to move to

the point to which the part naturally moves. Since, then, it would require a

force greater than itself to move it, it must needs stay at the centre. This view

is further supported by the contributions of mathematicians to astronomy,

since the observations made as the shapes change by which the order of the

stars is determined, are fully accounted for on the hypothesis that the earth

lies at the centre. Of the position of the earth and of the manner of its rest or

movement, our discussion may here end.

Its  shape  must  necessarily  be  spherical.  For  every  portion  of  earth  hasweight until it reaches the centre, and the jostling of parts greater and smaller

would  bring  about  not  a  waved  surface,  but  rather  compression  and

convergence of part and part until the centre is reached. The process should

be conceived by supposing the earth to come into being in the way that some

of  the  natural  philosophers  describe.  Only  they  attribute  the  downward

movement to constraint, and it is better to keep to the truth and say that the

reason  of  this  motion  is  that  a  thing  which  possesses  weight  is  naturally

endowed with a centripetal movement. When the mixture, then, was merely

potential, the things that were separated off moved similarly from every side

towards the centre. Whether the parts which came together at the centre were

distributed  at  the  extremities  evenly,  or  in  some  other  way,  makes  no

difference. If, on the one hand, there were a similar movement from each

quarter of the extremity to the single centre, it is obvious that the resulting

mass would be similar on every side. For if an equal amount is added on

every side the extremity of the mass will be everywhere equidistant from its

centre, i.e. the figure will be spherical. But neither will it in any way affect

the argument if there is not a similar accession of concurrent fragments from

every  side.  For  the  greater  quantity,  finding  a  lesser  in  front  of  it,  must

necessarily drive it on, both having an impulse whose goal is the centre, and

the greater weight driving the lesser forward till this goal is reached. In this

we  have  also  the  solution  of  a  possible  difficulty.  The  earth,  it  might  be

argued, is at the centre and spherical in shape: if, then, a weight many times

that of the earth were added to one hemisphere, the centre of the earth and of

the whole will no longer be coincident. So that either the earth will not stay

still at the centre, or if it does, it will be at rest without having its centre at the

place to which it is still its nature to move. Such is the difficulty. A short

consideration will give us an easy answer, if we first give precision to our

postulate  that  any  body  endowed  with  weight,  of  whatever  size,  moves

towards the centre. Clearly it will not stop when its edge touches the centre.

The greater quantity must prevail until the body’s centre occupies the centre.

For that is the goal of its impulse. Now it makes no difference whether we

apply this to a clod or common fragment of earth or to the earth as a whole.

The  fact  indicated  does  not  depend  upon  degrees  of  size  but  applies

universally to everything that has the centripetal impulse. Therefore earth in

motion, whether in a mass or in fragments, necessarily continues to move

until  it  occupies  the  centre  equally  every  way,  the  less  being  forced  to

equalize itself by the greater owing to the forward drive of the impulse.If the earth was generated, then, it must have been formed in this way, and

so  clearly  its  generation  was  spherical;  and  if  it  is  ungenerated  and  has

remained so always, its character must be that which the initial generation, if

it had occurred, would have given it. But the spherical shape, necessitated by

this argument, follows also from the fact that the motions of heavy bodies

always make equal angles, and are not parallel. This would be the natural

form of movement towards what is naturally spherical. Either then the earth

is spherical or it is at least naturally spherical. And it is right to call anything

that which nature intends it to be, and which belongs to it, rather than that

which it is by constraint and contrary to nature. The evidence of the senses

further  corroborates  this.  How  else  would  eclipses  of  the  moon  show

segments shaped as we see them? As it is, the shapes which the moon itself

each month shows are of every kind straight, gibbous, and concave-but in

eclipses the outline is always curved: and, since it is the interposition of the

earth that makes the eclipse, the form of this line will be caused by the form

of the earth’s surface, which is therefore spherical. Again, our observations of

the stars make it evident, not only that the earth is circular, but also that it is a

circle of no great size. For quite a small change of position to south or north

causes a manifest alteration of the horizon. There is much change, I mean, in

the stars which are overhead, and the stars seen are different, as one moves

northward or southward. Indeed there are some stars seen in Egypt and in the

neighbourhood of Cyprus which are not seen in the northerly regions; and

stars, which in the north are never beyond the range of observation, in those

regions rise and set. All of which goes to show not only that the earth is

circular in shape, but also that it is a sphere of no great size: for otherwise the

effect of so slight a change of place would not be quickly apparent. Hence

one should not be too sure of the incredibility of the view of those who

conceive  that  there  is  continuity  between  the  parts  about  the  pillars  of

Hercules and the parts about India, and that in this way the ocean is one. As

further evidence in favour of this they quote the case of elephants, a species

occurring  in  each  of  these  extreme  regions,  suggesting  that  the  common

characteristic of these extremes is explained by their continuity. Also, those

mathematicians who try to calculate the size of the earth’s circumference

arrive at the figure 400,000 stades. This indicates not only that the earth’s

mass is spherical in shape, but also that as compared with the stars it is not of

great size.                          On the Heavens, Book III


Translated by J. L. Stocks


<

div id="section27" class="section" title="1">


1


We have already discussed the first heaven and its parts, the moving stars

within  it,  the  matter  of  which  these  are  composed  and  their  bodily

constitution,  and  we  have  also  shown  that  they  are  ungenerated  and

indestructible.  Now  things  that  we  call  natural  are  either  substances  or

functions  and  attributes  of  substances.  As  substances  I  class  the  simple

bodies-fire, earth, and the other terms of the series-and all things composed

of them; for example, the heaven as a whole and its parts, animals, again, and

plants and their parts. By attributes and functions I mean the movements of

these and of all other things in which they have power in themselves to cause

movement,  and  also  their  alterations  and  reciprocal  transformations.  It  is

obvious, then, that the greater part of the inquiry into nature concerns bodies:

for a natural substance is either a body or a thing which cannot come into

existence without body and magnitude. This appears plainly from an analysis

of  the  character  of  natural  things,  and  equally  from  an  inspection  of  the

instances of inquiry into nature. Since, then, we have spoken of the primary

element, of its bodily constitution, and of its freedom from destruction and

generation, it remains to speak of the other two. In speaking of them we shall

be  obliged  also  to  inquire  into  generation  and  destruction.  For  if  there  is

generation anywhere, it must be in these elements and things composed of

them.

This is indeed the first question we have to ask: is generation a fact or not?

Earlier speculation was at variance both with itself and with the views here

put forward as to the true answer to this question. Some removed generation

and  destruction  from  the  world  altogether.  Nothing  that  is,  they  said,  is

generated or destroyed, and our conviction to the contrary is an illusion. So

maintained the school of Melissus and Parmenides. But however excellenttheir theories may otherwise be, anyhow they cannot be held to speak as

students of nature. There may be things not subject to generation or any kind

of movement, but if so they belong to another and a higher inquiry than the

study of nature. They, however, had no idea of any form of being other than

the  substance  of  things  perceived;  and  when  they  saw,  what  no  one

previously had seen, that there could be no knowledge or wisdom without

some such unchanging entities, they naturally transferred what was true of

them to things perceived. Others, perhaps intentionally, maintain precisely

the contrary opinion to this. It has been asserted that everything in the world

was subject to generation and nothing was ungenerated, but that after being

generated  some  things  remained  indestructible  while  the  rest  were  again

destroyed. This had been asserted in the first instance by Hesiod and his

followers,  but  afterwards  outside  his  circle  by  the  earliest  natural

philosophers. But what these thinkers maintained was that all else has been

generated and, as they said, ‘is flowing away, nothing having any solidity,

except  one  single  thing  which  persists  as  the  basis  of  all  these

transformations. So we may interpret the statements of Heraclitus of Ephesus

and many others. And some subject all bodies whatever to generation, by

means of the composition and separation of planes.

  Discussion of the other views may be postponed. But this last theory which

composes every body of planes is, as the most superficial observation shows,

in  many  respects  in  plain  contradiction  with  mathematics.  It  is,  however,

wrong to remove the foundations of a science unless you can replace them

with  others  more  convincing.  And,  secondly,  the  same  theory  which

composes  solids  of  planes  clearly  composes  planes  of  lines  and  lines  of

points, so that a part of a line need not be a line. This matter has been already

considered in our discussion of movement, where we have shown that an

indivisible length is impossible. But with respect to natural bodies there are

impossibilities involved in the view which asserts indivisible lines, which we

may briefly consider at this point. For the impossible consequences which

result from this view in the mathematical sphere will reproduce themselves

when it is applied to physical bodies, but there will be difficulties in physics

which are not present in mathematics; for mathematics deals with an abstract

and  physics  with  a  more  concrete  object.  There  are  many  attributes

necessarily  present  in  physical  bodies  which  are  necessarily  excluded  by

indivisibility; all attributes, in fact, which are divisible. There can be nothing

divisible in an indivisible thing, but the attributes of bodies are all divisible inone of two ways. They are divisible into kinds, as colour is divided into white

and black, and they are divisible per accidens when that which has them is

divisible.  In  this  latter  sense  attributes  which  are  simple  are  nevertheless

divisible.  Attributes  of  this  kind  will  serve,  therefore,  to  illustrate  the

impossibility of the view. It is impossible, if two parts of a thing have no

weight, that the two together should have weight. But either all perceptible

bodies or some, such as earth and water, have weight, as these thinkers would

themselves admit. Now if the point has no weight, clearly the lines have not

either, and, if they have not, neither have the planes. Therefore no body has

weight. It is, further, manifest that their point cannot have weight. For while a

heavy thing may always be heavier than something and a light thing lighter

than something, a thing which is heavier or lighter than something need not

be itself heavy or light, just as a large thing is larger than others, but what is

larger is not always large. A thing which, judged absolutely, is small may

none the less be larger than other things. Whatever, then, is heavy and also

heavier than something else, must exceed this by something which is heavy.

A heavy thing therefore is always divisible. But it is common ground that a

point is indivisible. Again, suppose that what is heavy or weight is a dense

body,  and  what  is  light  rare.  Dense  differs  from  rare  in  containing  more

matter in the same cubic area. A point, then, if it may be heavy or light, may

be dense or rare. But the dense is divisible while a point is indivisible. And if

what is heavy must be either hard or soft, an impossible consequence is easy

to draw. For a thing is soft if its surface can be pressed in, hard if it cannot;

and if it can be pressed in it is divisible.

  Moreover, no weight can consist of parts not possessing weight. For how,

except by the merest fiction, can they specify the number and character of the

parts which will produce weight? And, further, when one weight is greater

than another, the difference is a third weight; from which it will follow that

every  indivisible  part  possesses  weight.  For  suppose  that  a  body  of  four

points possesses weight. A body composed of more than four points will

superior in weight to it, a thing which has weight. But the difference between

weight and weight must be a weight, as the difference between white and

whiter is white. Here the difference which makes the superior weight heavier

is  the  single  point  which  remains  when  the  common  number,  four,  is

subtracted. A single point, therefore, has weight.

  Further, to assume, on the one hand, that the planes can only be put in

linear contact would be ridiculous. For just as there are two ways of puttinglines together, namely, end to and side by side, so there must be two ways of

putting planes together. Lines can be put together so that contact is linear by

laying one along the other, though not by putting them end to end. But if,

similarly, in putting the lanes together, superficial contact is allowed as an

alternative to linear, that method will give them bodies which are not any

element nor composed of elements. Again, if it is the number of planes in a

body that makes one heavier than another, as the Timaeus explains, clearly

the line and the point will have weight. For the three cases are, as we said

before, analogous. But if the reason of differences of weight is not this, but

rather the heaviness of earth and the lightness of fire, then some of the planes

will be light and others heavy (which involves a similar distinction in the

lines and the points); the earthplane, I mean, will be heavier than the fire-

plane. In general, the result is either that there is no magnitude at all, or that

all magnitude could be done away with. For a point is to a line as a line is to a

plane and as a plane is to a body. Now the various forms in passing into one

another will each be resolved into its ultimate constituents. It might happen

therefore that nothing existed except points, and that there was no body at all.

A further consideration is that if time is similarly constituted, there would be,

or might be, a time at which it was done away with. For the indivisible now is

like a point in a line. The same consequences follow from composing the

heaven of numbers, as some of the Pythagoreans do who make all nature out

of  numbers.  For  natural  bodies  are  manifestly  endowed  with  weight  and

lightness, but an assemblage of units can neither be composed to form a body

nor possess weight.

<

div id="section28" class="section" title="2">


2


The  necessity  that  each  of  the  simple  bodies  should  have  a  natural

movement may be shown as follows. They manifestly move, and if they have

no proper movement they must move by constraint: and the constrained is the

same as the unnatural. Now an unnatural movement presupposes a natural

movement  which  it  contravenes,  and  which,  however  many  the  unnatural

movements, is always one. For naturally a thing moves in one way, while its

unnatural movements are manifold. The same may be shown, from the fact of

rest. Rest, also, must either be constrained or natural, constrained in a place towhich movement was constrained, natural in a place movement to which was

natural. Now manifestly there is a body which is at rest at the centre. If then

this rest is natural to it, clearly motion to this place is natural to it. If, on the

other hand, its rest is constrained, what is hindering its motion? Something,

which is at rest: but if so, we shall simply repeat the same argument; and

either we shall come to an ultimate something to which rest where it is or we

shall  have  an  infinite  process,  which  is  impossible.  The  hindrance  to  its

movement, then, we will suppose, is a moving thing-as Empedocles says that

it is the vortex which keeps the earth still-: but in that case we ask, where

would it have moved to but for the vortex? It could not move infinitely; for to

traverse an infinite is impossible, and impossibilities do not happen. So the

moving  thing  must  stop  somewhere,  and  there  rest  not  by  constraint  but

naturally. But a natural rest proves a natural movement to the place of rest.

Hence Leucippus and Democritus, who say that the primary bodies are in

perpetual  movement  in  the  void  or  infinite,  may  be  asked  to  explain  the

manner of their motion and the kind of movement which is natural to them.

For if the various elements are constrained by one another to move as they

do,  each  must  still  have  a  natural  movement  which  the  constrained

contravenes, and the prime mover must cause motion not by constraint but

naturally.  If  there  is  no  ultimate  natural  cause  of  movement  and  each

preceding term in the series is always moved by constraint, we shall have an

infinite process. The same difficulty is involved even if it is supposed, as we

read in the Timaeus, that before the ordered world was made the elements

moved  without  order.  Their  movement  must  have  been  due  either  to

constraint or to their nature. And if their movement was natural, a moment’s

consideration shows that there was already an ordered world. For the prime

mover must cause motion in virtue of its own natural movement, and the

other bodies, moving without constraint, as they came to rest in their proper

places, would fall into the order in which they now stand, the heavy bodies

moving towards the centre and the light bodies away from it. But that is the

order of their distribution in our world. There is a further question, too, which

might  be  asked.  Is  it  possible  or  impossible  that  bodies  in  unordered

movement should combine in some cases into combinations like those of

which bodies of nature’s composing are composed, such, I mean, as bones

and flesh? Yet this is what Empedocles asserts to have occurred under Love.

‘Many a head’, says he, ‘came to birth without a neck.’ The answer to the

view that there are infinite bodies moving in an infinite is that, if the cause ofmovement is single, they must move with a single motion, and therefore not

without order; and if, on the other hand, the causes are of infinite variety,

their motions too must be infinitely varied. For a finite number of causes

would  produce  a  kind  of  order,  since  absence  of  order  is  not  proved  by

diversity  of  direction  in  motions:  indeed,  in  the  world  we  know,  not  all

bodies, but only bodies of the same kind, have a common goal of movement.

Again, disorderly movement means in reality unnatural movement, since the

order proper to perceptible things is their nature. And there is also absurdity

and  impossibility  in  the  notion  that  the  disorderly  movement  is  infinitely

continued. For the nature of things is the nature which most of them possess

for most of the time. Thus their view brings them into the contrary position

that disorder is natural, and order or system unnatural. But no natural fact can

originate  in  chance.  This  is  a  point  which  Anaxagoras  seems  to  have

thoroughly grasped; for he starts his cosmogony from unmoved things. The

others, it is true, make things collect together somehow before they try to

produce motion and separation. But there is no sense in starting generation

from an original state in which bodies are separated and in movement. Hence

Empedocles begins after the process ruled by Love: for he could not have

constructed the heaven by building it up out of bodies in separation, making

them to combine by the power of Love, since our world has its constituent

elements in separation, and therefore presupposes a previous state of unity

and combination.

  These arguments make it plain that every body has its natural movement,

which is not constrained or contrary to its nature. We go on to show that there

are certain bodies whose necessary impetus is that of weight and lightness. Of

necessity,  we  assert,  they  must  move,  and  a  moved  thing  which  has  no

natural  impetus  cannot  move  either  towards  or  away  from  the  centre.

Suppose  a  body  A  without  weight,  and  a  body  B  endowed  with  weight.

Suppose the weightless body to move the distance CD, while B in the same

time moves the distance CE, which will be greater since the heavy thing must

move further. Let the heavy body then be divided in the proportion CE: CD

(for there is no reason why a part of B should not stand in this relation to the

whole). Now if the whole moves the whole distance CE, the part must in the

same  time  move  the  distance  CD.  A  weightless  body,  therefore,  and  one

which has weight will move the same distance, which is impossible. And the

same argument would fit the case of lightness. Again, a body which is in

motion but has neither weight nor lightness, must be moved by constraint,and must continue its constrained movement infinitely. For there will be a

force which moves it, and the smaller and lighter a body is the further will a

given force move it. Now let A, the weightless body, be moved the distance

CE, and B, which has weight, be moved in the same time the distance CD.

Dividing  the  heavy  body  in  the  proportion  CE:CD,  we  subtract  from  the

heavy body a part which will in the same time move the distance CE, since

the whole moved CD: for the relative speeds of the two bodies will be in

inverse ratio to their respective sizes. Thus the weightless body will move the

same distance as the heavy in the same time. But this is impossible. Hence,

since the motion of the weightless body will cover a greater distance than any

that is suggested, it will continue infinitely. It is therefore obvious that every

body must have a definite weight or lightness. But since ‘nature’ means a

source  of  movement  within  the  thing  itself,  while  a  force  is  a  source  of

movement  in  something  other  than  it  or  in  itself  qua  other,  and  since

movement is always due either to nature or to constraint, movement which is

natural, as downward movement is to a stone, will be merely accelerated by

an  external  force,  while  an  unnatural  movement  will  be  due  to  the  force

alone. In either case the air is as it were instrumental to the force. For air is

both  light  and  heavy,  and  thus  qua  light  produces  upward  motion,  being

propelled  and  set  in  motion  by  the  force,  and  qua  heavy  produces  a

downward motion. In either case the force transmits the movement to the

body by first, as it were, impregnating the air. That is why a body moved by

constraint continues to move when that which gave the impulse ceases to

accompany it. Otherwise, i.e. if the air were not endowed with this function,

constrained movement would be impossible. And the natural movement of a

body may be helped on in the same way. This discussion suffices to show (1)

that all bodies are either light or heavy, and (2) how unnatural movement

takes place.

  From what has been said earlier it is plain that there cannot be generation

either of everything or in an absolute sense of anything. It is impossible that

everything should be generated, unless an extra-corporeal void is possible.

For, assuming generation, the place which is to be occupied by that which is

coming to be, must have been previously occupied by void in which no body

was. Now it is quite possible for one body to be generated out of another, air

for instance out of fire, but in the absence of any pre-existing mass generation

is impossible. That which is potentially a certain kind of body may, it is true,

become  such  in  actuality,  But  if  the  potential  body  was  not  already  inactuality some other kind of body, the existence of an extra-corporeal void

must be admitted.

<

div id="section29" class="section" title="3">


3


It remains to say what bodies are subject to generation, and why. Since in

every case knowledge depends on what is primary, and the elements are the

primary  constituents  of  bodies,  we  must  ask  which  of  such  bodies  are

elements, and why; and after that what is their number and character. The

answer will be plain if we first explain what kind of substance an element is.

An element, we take it, is a body into which other bodies may be analysed,

present in them potentially or in actuality (which of these, is still disputable),

and not itself divisible into bodies different in form. That, or something like

it, is what all men in every case mean by element. Now if what we have

described is an element, clearly there must be such bodies. For flesh and

wood and all other similar bodies contain potentially fire and earth, since one

sees these elements exuded from them; and, on the other hand, neither in

potentiality nor in actuality does fire contain flesh or wood, or it would exude

them. Similarly, even if there were only one elementary body, it would not

contain them. For though it will be either flesh or bone or something else,

that does not at once show that it contained these in potentiality: the further

question  remains,  in  what  manner  it  becomes  them.  Now  Anaxagoras

opposes Empedocles’ view of the elements. Empedocles says that fire and

earth and the related bodies are elementary bodies of which all things are

composed; but this Anaxagoras denies. His elements are the homoeomerous

things, viz. flesh, bone, and the like. Earth and fire are mixtures, composed of

them  and  all  the  other  seeds,  each  consisting  of  a  collection  of  all  the

homoeomerous bodies, separately invisible; and that explains why from these

two bodies all others are generated. (To him fire and aither are the same

thing.) But since every natural body has it proper movement, and movements

are either simple or mixed, mixed in mixed bodies and simple in simple, there

must obviously be simple bodies; for there are simple movements. It is plain,

then, that there are elements, and why.

<

div id="section30" class="section" title="4">4


The next question to consider is whether the elements are finite or infinite

in number, and, if finite, what their number is. Let us first show reason or

denying that their number is infinite, as some suppose. We begin with the

view of Anaxagoras that all the homoeomerous bodies are elements. Any one

who adopts this view misapprehends the meaning of element. Observation

shows that even mixed bodies are often divisible into homoeomerous parts;

examples are flesh, bone, wood, and stone. Since then the composite cannot

be an element, not every homoeomerous body can be an element; only, as we

said before, that which is not divisible into bodies different in form. But even

taking ‘element’ as they do, they need not assert an infinity of elements, since

the hypothesis of a finite number will give identical results. Indeed even two

or  three  such  bodies  serve  the  purpose  as  well,  as  Empedocles’  attempt

shows. Again, even on their view it turns out that all things are not composed

of homocomerous bodies. They do not pretend that a face is composed of

faces, or that any other natural conformation is composed of parts like itself.

Obviously then it would be better to assume a finite number of principles.

They should, in fact, be as few as possible, consistently with proving what

has  to  be  proved.  This  is  the  common  demand  of  mathematicians,  who

always assume as principles things finite either in kind or in number. Again,

if body is distinguished from body by the appropriate qualitative difference,

and there is a limit to the number of differences (for the difference lies in

qualities apprehended by sense, which are in fact finite in number, though

this requires proof), then manifestly there is necessarily a limit to the number

of elements.

  There  is,  further,  another  view-that  of  Leucippus  and  Democritus  of

Abdera-the implications of which are also unacceptable. The primary masses,

according to them, are infinite in number and indivisible in mass: one cannot

turn  into  many  nor  many  into  one;  and  all  things  are  generated  by  their

combination and involution. Now this view in a sense makes things out to be

numbers or composed of numbers. The exposition is not clear, but this is its

real meaning. And further, they say that since the atomic bodies differ in

shape, and there is an infinity of shapes, there is an infinity of simple bodies.

But they have never explained in detail the shapes of the various elements,

except  so  far  to  allot  the  sphere  to  fire.  Air,  water,  and  the  rest  they

distinguished  by  the  relative  size  of  the  atom,  assuming  that  the  atomicsubstance was a sort of master-seed for each and every element. Now, in the

first place, they make the mistake already noticed. The principles which they

assume are not limited in number, though such limitation would necessitate

no other alteration in their theory. Further, if the differences of bodies are not

infinite, plainly the elements will not be an infinity. Besides, a view which

asserts atomic bodies must needs come into conflict with the mathematical

sciences, in addition to invalidating many common opinions and apparent

data of sense perception. But of these things we have already spoken in our

discussion  of  time  and  movement.  They  are  also  bound  to  contradict

themselves. For if the elements are atomic, air, earth, and water cannot be

differentiated by the relative sizes of their atoms, since then they could not be

generated out of one another. The extrusion of the largest atoms is a process

that will in time exhaust the supply; and it is by such a process that they

account for the generation of water, air, and earth from one another. Again,

even on their own presuppositions it does not seem as if the clements would

be  infinite  in  number.  The  atoms  differ  in  figure,  and  all  figures  are

composed of pyramids, rectilinear the case of rectilinear figures, while the

sphere has eight pyramidal parts. The figures must have their principles, and,

whether these are one or two or more, the simple bodies must be the same in

number as they. Again, if every element has its proper movement, and a

simple body has a simple movement, and the number of simple movements is

not  infinite,  because  the  simple  motions  are  only  two  and  the  number  of

places is not infinite, on these grounds also we should have to deny that the

number of elements is infinite.

<

div id="section31" class="section" title="5">


5


  Since the number of the elements must be limited, it remains to inquire

whether there is more than one element. Some assume one only, which is

according  to  some  water,  to  others  air,  to  others  fire,  to  others  again

something finer than water and denser than air, an infinite body-so they say-

bracing all the heavens.

Now those who decide for a single element, which is either water or air or

a body finer than water and denser than air, and proceed to generate other

things out of it by use of the attributes density and rarity, all alike fail toobserve the fact that they are depriving the element of its priority. Generation

out of the elements is, as they say, synthesis, and generation into the elements

is analysis, so that the body with the finer parts must have priority in the

order of nature. But they say that fire is of all bodies the finest. Hence fire

will be first in the natural order. And whether the finest body is fire or not

makes  no  difference;  anyhow  it  must  be  one  of  the  other  bodies  that  is

primary  and  not  that  which  is  intermediate.  Again,  density  and  rarity,  as

instruments of generation, are equivalent to fineness and coarseness, since the

fine is rare, and coarse in their use means dense. But fineness and coarseness,

again, are equivalent to greatness and smallness, since a thing with small

parts is fine and a thing with large parts coarse. For that which spreads itself

out widely is fine, and a thing composed of small parts is so spread out. In the

end, then, they distinguish the various other substances from the element by

the greatness and smallness of their parts. This method of distinction makes

all judgement relative. There will be no absolute distinction between fire,

water,  and  air,  but  one  and  the  same  body  will  be  relatively  to  this  fire,

relatively to something else air. The same difficulty is involved equally in the

view elements and distinguishes them by their greatness and smallness. The

principle of distinction between bodies being quantity, the various sizes will

be in a definite ratio, and whatever bodies are in this ratio to one another

must  be  air,  fire,  earth,  and  water  respectively.  For  the  ratios  of  smaller

bodies may be repeated among greater bodies.

  Those  who  start  from  fire  as  the  single  element,  while  avoiding  this

difficulty,  involve  themselves  in  many  others.  Some  of  them  give  fire  a

particular shape, like those who make it a pyramid, and this on one of two

grounds. The reason given may be-more crudely-that the pyramid is the most

piercing of figures as fire is of bodies, or-more ingeniously-the position may

be supported by the following argument. As all bodies are composed of that

which has the finest parts, so all solid figures are composed of pryamids: but

the finest body is fire, while among figures the pyramid is primary and has

the  smallest  parts;  and  the  primary  body  must  have  the  primary  figure:

therefore fire will be a pyramid. Others, again, express no opinion on the

subject of its figure, but simply regard it as the of the finest parts, which in

combination will form other bodies, as the fusing of gold-dust produces solid

gold. Both of these views involve the same difficulties. For (1) if, on the one

hand, they make the primary body an atom, the view will be open to the

objections already advanced against the atomic theory. And further the theoryis inconsistent with a regard for the facts of nature. For if all bodies are

quantitatively  commensurable,  and  the  relative  size  of  the  various

homoeomerous masses and of their several elements are in the same ratio, so

that the total mass of water, for instance, is related to the total mass of air as

the elements of each are to one another, and so on, and if there is more air

than  water  and,  generally,  more  of  the  finer  body  than  of  the  coarser,

obviously the element of water will be smaller than that of air. But the lesser

quantity is contained in the greater. Therefore the air element is divisible.

And  the  same  could  be  shown  of  fire  and  of  all  bodies  whose  parts  are

relatively fine. (2) If, on the other hand, the primary body is divisible, then

(a) those who give fire a special shape will have to say that a part of fire is

not fire, because a pyramid is not composed of pyramids, and also that not

every body is either an element or composed of elements, since a part of fire

will be neither fire nor any other element. And (b) those whose ground of

distinction is size will have to recognize an element prior to the element, a

regress  which  continues  infinitely,  since  every  body  is  divisible  and  that

which has the smallest parts is the element. Further, they too will have to say

that the same body is relatively to this fire and relatively to that air, to others

again water and earth.

The common error of all views which assume a single element is that they

allow only one natural movement, which is the same for every body. For it is

a  matter  of  observation  that  a  natural  body  possesses  a  principle  of

movement. If then all bodies are one, all will have one movement. With this

motion the greater their quantity the more they will move, just as fire, in

proportion as its quantity is greater, moves faster with the upward motion

which belongs to it. But the fact is that increase of quantity makes many

things move the faster downward. For these reasons, then, as well as from the

distinction  already  established  of  a  plurality  of  natural  movements,  it  is

impossible that there should be only one element. But if the elements are not

an  infinity  and  not  reducible  to  one,  they  must  be  several  and  finite  in

number.

<

div id="section32" class="section" title="6">


6


First  we  must  inquire  whether  the  elements  are  eternal  or  subject  togeneration and destruction; for when this question has been answered their

number  and  character  will  be  manifest.  In  the  first  place,  they  cannot  be

eternal. It is a matter of observation that fire, water, and every simple body

undergo a process of analysis, which must either continue infinitely or stop

somewhere. (1) Suppose it infinite. Then the time occupied by the process

will be infinite, and also that occupied by the reverse process of synthesis.

For the processes of analysis and synthesis succeed one another in the various

parts.  It  will  follow  that  there  are  two  infinite  times  which  are  mutually

exclusive,  the  time  occupied  by  the  synthesis,  which  is  infinite,  being

preceded by the period of analysis. There are thus two mutually exclusive

infinites,  which  is  impossible.  (2)  Suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the

analysis stops somewhere. Then the body at which it stops will be either

atomic or, as Empedocles seems to have intended, a divisible body which

will yet never be divided. The foregoing arguments show that it cannot be an

atom; but neither can it be a divisible body which analysis will never reach.

For a smaller body is more easily destroyed than a larger; and a destructive

process  which  succeeds  in  destroying,  that  is,  in  resolving  into  smaller

bodies, a body of some size, cannot reasonably be expected to fail with the

smaller  body.  Now  in  fire  we  observe  a  destruction  of  two  kinds:  it  is

destroyed by its contrary when it is quenched, and by itself when it dies out.

But the effect is produced by a greater quantity upon a lesser, and the more

quickly the smaller it is. The elements of bodies must therefore be subject to

destruction and generation.

  Since they are generated, they must be generated either from something

incorporeal or from a body, and if from a body, either from one another or

from  something  else.  The  theory  which  generates  them  from  something

incorporeal requires an extra-corporeal void. For everything that comes to be

comes to be in something, and that in which the generation takes place must

either be incorporeal or possess body; and if it has body, there will be two

bodies in the same place at the same time, viz. that which is coming to be and

that which was previously there, while if it is incorporeal, there must be an

extra-corporeal void. But we have already shown that this is impossible. But,

on  the  other  hand,  it  is  equally  impossible  that  the  elements  should  be

generated from some kind of body. That would involve a body distinct from

the elements and prior to them. But if this body possesses weight or lightness,

it will be one of the elements; and if it has no tendency to movement, it will

be an immovable or mathematical entity, and therefore not in a place at all. Aplace in which a thing is at rest is a place in which it might move, either by

constraint, i.e. unnaturally, or in the absence of constraint, i.e. naturally. If,

then, it is in a place and somewhere, it will be one of the elements; and if it is

not in a place, nothing can come from it, since that which comes into being

and  that  out  of  which  it  comes  must  needs  be  together.  The  elements

therefore cannot be generated from something incorporeal nor from a body

which is not an element, and the only remaining alternative is that they are

generated from one another.

<

div id="section33" class="section" title="7">


7


We  must,  therefore,  turn  to  the  question,  what  is  the  manner  of  their

generation from one another? Is it as Empedocles and Democritus say, or as

those who resolve bodies into planes say, or is there yet another possibility?

(1)  What  the  followers  of  Empedocles  do,  though  without  observing  it

themselves, is to reduce the generation of elements out of one another to an

illusion. They make it a process of excretion from a body of what was in it all

the time-as though generation required a vessel rather than a material-so that

it involves no change of anything. And even if this were accepted, there are

other implications equally unsatisfactory. We do not expect a mass of matter

to be made heavier by compression. But they will be bound to maintain this,

if they say that water is a body present in air and excreted from air, since air

becomes heavier when it turns into water. Again, when the mixed body is

divided, they can show no reason why one of the constituents must by itself

take up more room than the body did: but when water turns into air, the room

occupied is increased. The fact is that the finer body takes up more room, as

is  obvious  in  any  case  of  transformation.  As  the  liquid  is  converted  into

vapour or air the vessel which contains it is often burst because it does not

contain room enough. Now, if there is no void at all, and if, as those who take

this view say, there is no expansion of bodies, the impossibility of this is

manifest: and if there is void and expansion, there is no accounting for the

fact that the body which results from division cfpies of necessity a greater

space. It is inevitable, too, that generation of one out of another should come

to a stop, since a finite quantum cannot contain an infinity of finite quanta.

When earth produces water something is taken away from the earth, for theprocess is one of excretion. The same thing happens again when the residue

produces water. But this can only go on for ever, if the finite body contains

an infinity, which is impossible. Therefore the generation of elements out of

one another will not always continue.

(2) We have now explained that the mutual transformations of the elements

cannot take place by means of excretion. The remaining alternative is that

they should be generated by changing into one another. And this in one of

two ways, either by change of shape, as the same wax takes the shape both of

a sphere and of a cube, or, as some assert, by resolution into planes. (a)

Generation by change of shape would necessarily involve the assertion of

atomic bodies. For if the particles were divisible there would be a part of fire

which was not fire and a part of earth which was not earth, for the reason that

not every part of a pyramid is a pyramid nor of a cube a cube. But if (b) the

process is resolution into planes, the first difficulty is that the elements cannot

all be generated out of one another. This they are obliged to assert, and do

assert. It is absurd, because it is unreasonable that one element alone should

have no part in the transformations, and also contrary to the observed data of

sense, according to which all alike change into one another. In fact their

explanation of the observations is not consistent with the observations. And

the reason is that their ultimate principles are wrongly assumed: they had

certain predetermined views, and were resolved to bring everything into line

with  them.  It  seems  that  perceptible  things  require  perceptible  principles,

eternal things eternal principles, corruptible things corruptible principles; and,

in general, every subject matter principles homogeneous with itself. But they,

owing to their love for their principles, fall into the attitude of men who

undertake the defence of a position in argument. In the confidence that the

principles  are  true  they  are  ready  to  accept  any  consequence  of  their

application. As though some principles did not require to be judged from

their results, and particularly from their final issue! And that issue, which in

the case of productive knowledge is the product, in the knowledge of nature

is the unimpeachable evidence of the senses as to each fact.

The result of their view is that earth has the best right to the name element,

and is alone indestructible; for that which is indissoluble is indestructible and

elementary, and earth alone cannot be dissolved into any body but itself.

Again,  in  the  case  of  those  elements  which  do  suffer  dissolution,  the

‘suspension’ of the triangles is unsatisfactory. But this takes place whenever

one  is  dissolved  into  another,  because  of  the  numerical  inequality  of  thetriangles which compose them. Further, those who hold these views must

needs  suppose  that  generation  does  not  start  from  a  body.  For  what  is

generated out of planes cannot be said to have been generated from a body.

And they must also assert that not all bodies are divisible, coming thus into

conflict with our most accurate sciences, namely the mathematical, which

assume that even the intelligible is divisible, while they, in their anxiety to

save their hypothesis, cannot even admit this of every perceptible thing. For

any  one  who  gives  each  element  a  shape  of  its  own,  and  makes  this  the

ground  of  distinction  between  the  substances,  has  to  attribute  to  them

indivisibility; since division of a pyramid or a sphere must leave somewhere

at least a residue which is not sphere or a pyramid. Either, then, a part of fire

is not fire, so that there is a body prior to the element-for every body is either

an element or composed of elements-or not every body is divisible.

<

div id="section34" class="section" title="8">


8


In general, the attempt to give a shape to each of the simple bodies is

unsound, for the reason, first, that they will not succeed in filling the whole.

It is agreed that there are only three plane figures which can fill a space, the

triangle, the square, and the hexagon, and only two solids, the pyramid and

the cube. But the theory needs more than these because the elements which it

recognizes  are  more  in  number.  Secondly,  it  is  manifest  that  the  simple

bodies  are  often  given  a  shape  by  the  place  in  which  they  are  included,

particularly water and air. In such a case the shape of the element cannot

persist; for, if it did, the contained mass would not be in continuous contact

with the containing body; while, if its shape is changed, it will cease to be

water, since the distinctive quality is shape. Clearly, then, their shapes are not

fixed. Indeed, nature itself seems to offer corroboration of this theoretical

conclusion.  Just  as  in  other  cases  the  substratum  must  be  formless  and

unshapen-for thus the ‘all-receptive’, as we read in the Timaeus, will be best

for  modelling-so  the  elements  should  be  conceived  as  a  material  for

composite  things;  and  that  is  why  they  can  put  off  their  qualitative

distinctions and pass into one another. Further, how can they account for the

generation of flesh and bone or any other continuous body? The elements

alone  cannot  produce  them  because  their  collocation  cannot  produce  acontinuum. Nor can the composition of planes; for this produces the elements

themselves, not bodies made up of them. Any one then who insists upon an

exact statement of this kind of theory, instead of assenting after a passing

glance at it, will see that it removes generation from the world.

  Further,  the  very  properties,  powers,  and  motions,  to  which  they  paid

particular attention in allotting shapes, show the shapes not to be in accord

with  the  bodies.  Because  fire  is  mobile  and  productive  of  heat  and

combustion, some made it a sphere, others a pyramid. These shapes, they

thought, were the most mobile because they offer the fewest points of contact

and are the least stable of any; they were also the most apt to produce warmth

and combustion, because the one is angular throughout while the other has

the  most  acute  angles,  and  the  angles,  they  say,  produce  warmth  and

combustion. Now, in the first place, with regard to movement both are in

error.  These  may  be  the  figures  best  adapted  to  movement;  they  are  not,

however,  well  adapted  to  the  movement  of  fire,  which  is  an  upward  and

rectilinear movement, but rather to that form of circular movement which we

call rolling. Earth, again, they call a cube because it is stable and at rest. But

it  rests  only  in  its  own  place,  not  anywhere;  from  any  other  it  moves  if

nothing  hinders,  and  fire  and  the  other  bodies  do  the  same.  The  obvious

inference, therefore, is that fire and each several element is in a foreign place

a sphere or a pyramid, but in its own a cube. Again, if the possession of

angles makes a body produce heat and combustion, every element produces

heat, though one may do so more than another. For they all possess angles,

the octahedron and dodecahedron as well as the pyramid; and Democritus

makes  even  the  sphere  a  kind  of  angle,  which  cuts  things  because  of  its

mobility. The difference, then, will be one of degree: and this is plainly false.

They must also accept the inference that the mathematical produce heat and

combustion, since they too possess angles and contain atomic spheres and

pyramids, especially if there are, as they allege, atomic figures. Anyhow if

these functions belong to some of these things and not to others, they should

explain the difference, instead of speaking in quite general terms as they do.

Again, combustion of a body produces fire, and fire is a sphere or a pyramid.

The body, then, is turned into spheres or pyramids. Let us grant that these

figures may reasonably be supposed to cut and break up bodies as fire does;

still  it  remains  quite  inexplicable  that  a  pyramid  must  needs  produce

pyramids or a sphere spheres. One might as well postulate that a knife or a

saw divides things into knives or saws. It is also ridiculous to think only ofdivision  when  allotting  fire  its  shape.  Fire  is  generally  thought  of  as

combining and connecting rather than as separating. For though it separates

bodies  different  in  kind,  it  combines  those  which  are  the  same;  and  the

combining is essential to it, the functions of connecting and uniting being a

mark  of  fire,  while  the  separating  is  incidental.  For  the  expulsion  of  the

foreign  body  is  an  incident  in  the  compacting  of  the  homogeneous.  In

choosing the shape, then, they should have thought either of both functions or

preferably  of  the  combining  function.  In  addition,  since  hot  and  cold  are

contrary powers, it is impossible to allot any shape to the cold. For the shape

given must be the contrary of that given to the hot, but there is no contrariety

between figures. That is why they have all left the cold out, though properly

either all or none should have their distinguishing figures. Some of them,

however, do attempt to explain this power, and they contradict themselves. A

body  of  large  particles,  they  say,  is  cold  because  instead  of  penetrating

through the passages it crushes. Clearly, then, that which is hot is that which

penetrates these passages, or in other words that which has fine particles. It

results that hot and cold are distinguished not by the figure but by the size of

the particles. Again, if the pyramids are unequal in size, the large ones will

not be fire, and that figure will produce not combustion but its contrary.

  From what has been said it is clear that the difference of the elements does

not depend upon their shape. Now their most important differences are those

of property, function, and power; for every natural body has, we maintain, its

own functions, properties, and powers. Our first business, then, will be to

speak of these, and that inquiry will enable us to explain the differences of

each from each.                          On the Heavens, Book IV


Translated by J. L. Stocks


<

div id="section35" class="section" title="1">


1


We have now to consider the terms ‘heavy’ and ‘light’. We must ask what

the bodies so called are, how they are constituted, and what is the reason of

their  possessing  these  powers.  The  consideration  of  these  questions  is  a

proper part of the theory of movement, since we call things heavy and light

because they have the power of being moved naturally in a certain way. The

activities  corresponding  to  these  powers  have  not  been  given  any  name,

unless it is thought that ‘impetus’ is such a name. But because the inquiry

into nature is concerned with movement, and these things have in themselves

some spark (as it were) of movement, all inquirers avail themselves of these

powers, though in all but a few cases without exact discrimination. We must

then  first  look  at  whatever  others  have  said,  and  formulate  the  questions

which require settlement in the interests of this inquiry, before we go on to

state our own view of the matter.

  Language recognizes (a) an absolute, (b) a relative heavy and light. Of two

heavy things, such as wood and bronze, we say that the one is relatively light,

the other relatively heavy. Our predecessors have not dealt at all with the

absolute use, of the terms, but only with the relative. I mean, they do not

explain what the heavy is or what the light is, but only the relative heaviness

and  lightness  of  things  possessing  weight.  This  can  be  made  clearer  as

follows. There are things whose constant nature it is to move away from the

centre,  while  others  move  constantly  towards  the  centre;  and  of  these

movements that which is away from the centre I call upward movement and

that which is towards it I call downward movement. (The view, urged by

some, that there is no up and no down in the heaven, is absurd. There can be,

they say, no up and no down, since the universe is similar every way, and

from any point on the earth’s surface a man by advancing far enough willcome to stand foot to foot with himself. But  the extremity of the whole,

which we call ‘above’, is in position above and in nature primary. And since

the universe has an extremity and a centre, it must clearly have an up and

down. Common usage is thus correct, though inadequate. And the reason of

its inadequacy is that men think that the universe is not similar every way.

They recognize only the hemisphere which is over us. But if they went on to

think  of  the  world  as  formed  on  this  pattern  all  round,  with  a  centre

identically related to each point on the extremity, they would have to admit

that the extremity was above and the centre below.) By absolutely light, then,

we mean that which moves upward or to the extremity, and by absolutely

heavy that which moves downward or to the centre. By lighter or relatively

light we mean that one, of two bodies endowed with weight and equal in

bulk, which is exceeded by the other in the speed of its natural downward

movement.

<

div id="section36" class="section" title="2">


2


  Those of our predecessors who have entered upon this inquiry have for the

most part spoken of light and heavy things only in the sense in which one of

two  things  both  endowed  with  weight  is  said  to  be  the  lighter.  And  this

treatment they consider a sufficient analysis also of the notions of absolute

heaviness, to which their account does not apply. This, however, will become

clearer as we advance. One use of the terms ‘lighter’ and ‘heavier’ is that

which is set forth in writing in the Timaeus, that the body which is composed

of the greater number of identical parts is relatively heavy, while that which

is composed of a smaller number is relatively light. As a larger quantity of

lead  or  of  bronze  is  heavier  than  a  smaller-and  this  holds  good  of  all

homogeneous  masses,  the  superior  weight  always  depending  upon  a

numerical superiority of equal parts-in precisely the same way, they assert,

lead is heavier than wood. For all bodies, in spite of the general opinion to the

contrary, are composed of identical parts and of a single material. But this

analysis says nothing of the absolutely heavy and light. The facts are that fire

is always light and moves upward, while earth and all earthy things move

downwards  or  towards  the  centre.  It  cannot  then  be  the  fewness  of  the

triangles  (of  which,  in  their  view,  all  these  bodies  are  composed)  whichdisposes fire to move upward. If it were, the greater the quantity of fire the

slower it would move, owing to the increase of weight due to the increased

number of triangles. But the palpable fact, on the contrary, is that the greater

the quantity, the lighter the mass is and the quicker its upward movement:

and, similarly, in the reverse movement from above downward, the small

mass will move quicker and the large slower. Further, since to be lighter is to

have fewer of these homogeneous parts and to be heavier is to have more,

and  air,  water,  and  fire  are  composed  of  the  same  triangles,  the  only

difference being in the number of such parts, which must therefore explain

any distinction of relatively light and heavy between these bodies, it follows

that there must be a certain quantum of air which is heavier than water. But

the facts are directly opposed to this. The larger the quantity of air the more

readily it moves upward, and any portion of air without exception will rise up

out of the water.

So much for one view of the distinction between light and heavy. To others

the analysis seems insufficient; and their views on the subject, though they

belong to an older generation than ours, have an air of novelty. It is apparent

that there are bodies which, when smaller in bulk than others, yet exceed

them in weight. It is therefore obviously insufficient to say that bodies of

equal weight are composed of an equal number of primary parts: for that

would give equality of bulk. Those who maintain that the primary or atomic

parts, of which bodies endowed with weight are composed, are planes, cannot

so speak without absurdity; but those who regard them as solids are in a

better position to assert that of such bodies the larger is the heavier. But since

in composite bodies the weight obviously does not correspond in this way to

the bulk, the lesser bulk being often superior in weight (as, for instance, if

one be wool and the other bronze), there are some who think and say that the

cause is to be found elsewhere. The void, they say, which is imprisoned in

bodies, lightens them and sometimes makes the larger body the lighter. The

reason is that there is more void. And this would also account for the fact that

a body composed of a number of solid parts equal to, or even smaller than,

that of another is sometimes larger in bulk than it. In short, generally and in

every case a body is relatively light when it contains a relatively large amount

of void. This is the way they put it themselves, but their account requires an

addition. Relative lightness must depend not only on an excess of void, but

also an a defect of solid: for if the ratio of solid to void exceeds a certain

proportion, the relative lightness will disappear. Thus fire, they say, is thelightest of things just for this reason that it has the most void. But it would

follow that a large mass of gold, as containing more void than a small mass

of fire, is lighter than it, unless it also contains many times as much solid.

The addition is therefore necessary.

Of those who deny the existence of a void some, like Anaxagoras and

Empedocles, have not tried to analyse the notions of light and heavy at all;

and those who, while still denying the existence of a void, have attempted

this, have failed to explain why there are bodies which are absolutely heavy

and light, or in other words why some move upward and others downward.

The  fact,  again,  that  the  body  of  greater  bulk  is  sometimes  lighter  than

smaller bodies is one which they have passed over in silence, and what they

have said gives no obvious suggestion for reconciling their views with the

observed facts.

But those who attribute the lightness of fire to its containing so much void

are necessarily involved in practically the same difficulties. For though fire

be supposed to contain less solid than any other body, as well as more void,

yet there will be a certain quantum of fire in which the amount of solid or

plenum is in excess of the solids contained in some small quantity of earth.

They may reply that there is an excess of void also. But the question is, how

will they discriminate the absolutely heavy? Presumably, either by its excess

of solid or by its defect of void. On the former view there could be an amount

of  earth  so  small  as  to  contain  less  solid  than  a  large  mass  of  fire.  And

similarly, if the distinction rests on the amount of void, there will be a body,

lighter  than  the  absolutely  light,  which  nevertheless  moves  downward  as

constantly  as  the  other  moves  upward.  But  that  cannot  be  so,  since  the

absolutely light is always lighter than bodies which have weight and move

downward, while, on the other hand, that which is lighter need not be light,

because in common speech we distinguish a lighter and a heavier (viz. water

and earth) among bodies endowed with weight. Again, the suggestion of a

certain ratio between the void and the solid in a body is no more equal to

solving the problem before us. The manner of speaking will issue in a similar

impossibility. For any two portions of fire, small or great, will exhibit the

same ratio of solid to void, but the upward movement of the greater is quicker

than that of the less, just as the downward movement of a mass of gold or

lead, or of any other body endowed with weight, is quicker in proportion to

its size. This, however, should not be the case if the ratio is the ground of

distinction  between  heavy  things  and  light.  There  is  also  an  absurdity  inattributing the upward movement of bodies to a void which does not itself

move. If, however, it is the nature of a void to move upward and of a plenum

to  move  downward,  and  therefore  each  causes  a  like  movement  in  other

things, there was no need to raise the question why composite bodies are

some light and some heavy; they had only to explain why these two things

are themselves light and heavy respectively, and to give, further, the reason

why  the  plenum  and  the  void  are  not  eternally  separated.  It  is  also

unreasonable to imagine a place for the void, as if the void were not itself a

kind of place. But if the void is to move, it must have a place out of which

and into which the change carries it. Also what is the cause of its movement?

Not, surely, its voidness: for it is not the void only which is moved, but also

the solid.

  Similar  difficulties  are  involved  in  all  other  methods  of  distinction,

whether they account for the relative lightness and heaviness of bodies by

distinctions  of  size,  or  proceed  on  any  other  principle,  so  long  as  they

attribute to each the same matter, or even if they recognize more than one

matter, so long as that means only a pair of contraries. If there is a single

matter,  as  with  those  who  compose  things  of  triangles,  nothing  can  be

absolutely heavy or light: and if there is one matter and its contrary-the void,

for instance, and the plenum-no reason can be given for the relative lightness

and heaviness of the bodies intermediate between the absolutely light and

heavy when compared either with one another or with these themselves. The

view which bases the distinction upon differences of size is more like a mere

fiction  than  those  previously  mentioned,  but,  in  that  it  is  able  to  make

distinctions between the four elements, it is in a stronger position for meeting

the foregoing difficulties. Since, however, it imagines that these bodies which

differ in size are all made of one substance, it implies, equally with the view

that there is but one matter, that there is nothing absolutely light and nothing

which moves upward (except as being passed by other things or forced up by

them); and since a multitude of small atoms are heavier than a few large ones,

it will follow that much air or fire is heavier than a little water or earth, which

is impossible.

<

div id="section37" class="section" title="3">


3These, then, are the views which have been advanced by others and the

terms in which they state them. We may begin our own statement by settling

a question which to some has been the main difficulty-the question why some

bodies move always and naturally upward and others downward, while others

again move both upward and downward. After that we will inquire into light

and heavy and of the various phenomena connected with them. The local

movement of each body into its own place must be regarded as similar to

what happens in connexion with other forms of generation and change. There

are,  in  fact,  three  kinds  of  movement,  affecting  respectively  the  size,  the

form,  and  the  place  of  a  thing,  and  in  each  it  is  observable  that  change

proceeds from a contrary to a contrary or to something intermediate: it is

never  the  change  of  any  chance  subject  in  any  chance  direction,  nor,

similarly, is the relation of the mover to its object fortuitous: the thing altered

is different from the thing increased, and precisely the same difference holds

between that which produces alteration and that which produces increase. In

the  same  manner  it  must  be  thought  that  produces  local  motion  and  that

which is so moved are not fortuitously related. Now, that which produces

upward  and  downward  movement  is  that  which  produces  weight  and

lightness, and that which is moved is that which is potentially heavy or light,

and the movement of each body to its own place is motion towards its own

form. (It is best to interpret in this sense the common statement of the older

writers that ‘like moves to like’. For the words are not in every sense true to

fact. If one were to remove the earth to where the moon now is, the various

fragments of earth would each move not towards it but to the place in which

it now is. In general, when a number of similar and undifferentiated bodies

are moved with the same motion this result is necessarily produced, viz. that

the place which is the natural goal of the movement of each single part is also

that of the whole. But since the place of a thing is the boundary of that which

contains it, and the continent of all things that move upward or downward is

the extremity and the centre, and this boundary comes to be, in a sense, the

form of that which is contained, it is to its like that a body moves when it

moves to its own place. For the successive members of the scries are like one

another: water, I mean, is like air and air like fire, and between intermediates

the relation may be converted, though not between them and the extremes;

thus air is like water, but water is like earth: for the relation of each outer

body to that which is next within it is that of form to matter.) Thus to ask why

fire  moves  upward  and  earth  downward  is  the  same  as  to  ask  why  thehealable,  when  moved  and  changed  qua  healable,  attains  health  and  not

whiteness; and similar questions might be asked concerning any other subject

of aletion. Of course the subject of increase, when changed qua increasable,

attains not health but a superior size. The same applies in the other cases. One

thing changes in quality, another in quantity: and so in place, a light thing

goes upward, a heavy thing downward. The only difference is that in the last

case, viz. that of the heavy and the light, the bodies are thought to have a

spring  of  change  within  themselves,  while  the  subjects  of  healing  and

increase are thought to be moved purely from without. Sometimes, however,

even they change of themselves, ie. in response to a slight external movement

reach health or increase, as the case may be. And since the same thing which

is healable is also receptive of disease, it depends on whether it is moved qua

healable or qua liable to disease whether the motion is towards health or

towards disease. But the reason why the heavy and the light appear more than

these things to contain within themselves the source of their movements is

that  their  matter  is  nearest  to  being.  This  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that

locomotion belongs to bodies only when isolated from other bodies, and is

generated last of the several kinds of movement; in order of being then it will

be first. Now whenever air comes into being out of water, light out of heavy,

it goes to the upper place. It is forthwith light: becoming is at an end, and in

that  place  it  has  being.  Obviously,  then,  it  is  a  potentiality,  which,  in  its

passage to actuality, comes into that place and quantity and quality which

belong  to  its  actuality.  And  the  same  fact  explains  why  what  is  already

actually fire or earth moves, when nothing obstructs it, towards its own place.

For  motion  is  equally  immediate  in  the  case  of  nutriment,  when  nothing

hinders, and in the case of the thing healed, when nothing stays the healing.

But the movement is also due to the original creative force and to that which

removes  the  hindrance  or  off  which  the  moving  thing  rebounded,  as  was

explained in our opening discussions, where we tried to show how none of

these things moves itself. The reason of the various motions of the various

bodies, and the meaning of the motion of a body to its own place, have now

been explained.

<

div id="section38" class="section" title="4">


4We have now to speak of the distinctive properties of these bodies and of

the  various  phenomena  connected  with  them.  In  accordance  with  general

conviction we may distinguish the absolutely heavy, as that which sinks to

the bottom of all things, from the absolutely light, which is that which rises to

the surface of all things. I use the term ‘absolutely’, in view of the generic

character of ‘light’ and ‘heavy’, in order to confine the application to bodies

which do not combine lightness and heaviness. It is apparent, I mean, that

fire, in whatever quantity, so long as there is no external obstacle moves

upward, and earth downward; and, if the quantity is increased, the movement

is the same, though swifter. But the heaviness and lightness of bodies which

combine these qualities is different from this, since while they rise to the

surface of some bodies they sink to the bottom of others. Such are air and

water. Neither of them is absolutely either light or heavy. Both are lighter

than earth-for any portion of either rises to the surface of it-but heavier than

fire, since a portion of either, whatever its quantity, sinks to the bottom of

fire;  compared  together,  however,  the  one  has  absolute  weight,  the  other

absolute lightness, since air in any quantity rises to the surface of water,

while water in any quantity sinks to the bottom of air. Now other bodies are

severally light and heavy, and evidently in them the attributes are due to the

difference of their uncompounded parts: that is to say, according as the one or

the  other  happens  to  preponderate  the  bodies  will  be  heavy  and  light

respectively. Therefore we need only speak of these parts, since they are

primary and all else consequential: and in so doing we shall be following the

advice which we gave to those whose attribute heaviness to the presence of

plenum  and  lightness  to  that  of  void.  It  is  due  to  the  properties  of  the

elementary  bodies  that  a  body  which  is  regarded  as  light  in  one  place  is

regarded as heavy in another, and vice versa. In air, for instance, a talent’s

weight of wood is heavier than a mina of lead, but in water the wood is the

lighter. The reason is that all the elements except fire have weight and all but

earth lightness. Earth, then, and bodies in which earth preponderates, must

needs have weight everywhere, while water is heavy anywhere but in earth,

and air is heavy when not in water or earth. In its own place each of these

bodies has weight except fire, even air. Of this we have evidence in the fact

that a bladder when inflated weighs more than when empty. A body, then, in

which  air  preponderates  over  earth  and  water,  may  well  be  lighter  than

something in water and yet heavier than it in air, since such a body does not

rise in air but rises to the surface in water.The following account will make it plain that there is an absolutely light

and an absolutely heavy body. And by absolutely light I mean one which of

its own nature always moves upward, by absolutely heavy one which of its

own nature always moves downward, if no obstacle is in the way. There are, I

say, these two kinds of body, and it is not the case, as some maintain, that all

bodies have weight. Different views are in fact agreed that there is a heavy

body, which moves uniformly towards the centre. But is also similarly a light

body. For we see with our eyes, as we said before, that earthy things sink to

the bottom of all things and move towards the centre. But the centre is a fixed

point. If therefore there is some body which rises to the surface of all things-

and we observe fire to move upward even in air itself, while the air remains at

rest-clearly this body is moving towards the extremity. It cannot then have

any weight. If it had, there would be another body in which it sank: and if

that had weight, there would be yet another which moved to the extremity

and thus rose to the surface of all moving things. In fact, however, we have

no evidence of such a body. Fire, then, has no weight. Neither has earth any

lightness,  since  it  sinks  to  the  bottom  of  all  things,  and  that  which  sinks

moves to the centre. That there is a centre towards which the motion of heavy

things, and away from which that of light things is directed, is manifest in

many ways. First, because no movement can continue to infinity. For what

cannot be can no more come-to-be than be, and movement is a coming to-be

in one place from another. Secondly, like the upward movement of fire, the

downward movement of earth and all heavy things makes equal angles on

every side with the earth’s surface: it must therefore be directed towards the

centre. Whether it is really the centre of the earth and not rather that of the

whole to which it moves, may be left to another inquiry, since these are

coincident. But since that which sinks to the bottom of all things moves to the

centre, necessarily that which rises to the surface moves to the extremity of

the region in which the movement of these bodies takes place. For the centre

is opposed as contrary to the extremity, as that which sinks is opposed to that

which rises to the surface. This also gives a reasonable ground for the duality

of heavy and light in the spatial duality centre and extremity. Now there is

also the intermediate region to which each name is given in opposition to the

other extreme. For that which is intermediate between the two is in a sense

both extremity and centre. For this reason there is another heavy and light;

namely, water and air. But in our view the continent pertains to form and the

contained to matter: and this distinction is present in every genus. Alike inthe sphere of quality and in that of quantity there is that which corresponds

rather to form and that which corresponds to matter. In the same way, among

spatial distinctions, the above belongs to the determinate, the below to matter.

The same holds, consequently, also of the matter itself of that which is heavy

and  light:  as  potentially  possessing  the  one  character,  it  is  matter  for  the

heavy, and as potentially possessing the other, for the light. It is the same

matter, but its being is different, as that which is receptive of disease is the

same as that which is receptive of health, though in being different from it,

and therefore diseasedness is different from healthiness.

<

div id="section39" class="section" title="5">


5


A thing then which has the one kind of matter is light and always moves

upward, while a thing which has the opposite matter is heavy and always

moves downward. Bodies composed of kinds of matter different from these

but having relatively to each other the character which these have absolutely,

possess both the upward and the downward motion. Hence air and water each

have both lightness and weight, and water sinks to the bottom of all things

except earth, while air rises to the surface of all things except fire. But since

there is one body only which rises to the surface of all things and one only

which sinks to the bottom of all things, there must needs be two other bodies

which sink in some bodies and rise to the surface of others. The kinds of

matter, then, must be as numerous as these bodies, i.e. four, but though they

are four there must be a common matter of all-particularly if they pass into

one another-which in each is in being different. There is no reason why there

should not be one or more intermediates between the contraries, as in the case

of  colour;  for  ‘intermediate’  and  ‘mean’  are  capable  of  more  than  one

application.

Now in its own place every body endowed with both weight and lightness

has weightwhereas earth has weight everywhere-but they only have lightness

among bodies to whose surface they rise. Hence when a support is withdrawn

such a body moves downward until it reaches the body next below it, air to

the place of water and water to that of earth. But if the fire above air is

removed, it will not move upward to the place of fire, except by constraint;

and in that way water also may be drawn up, when the upward movement ofair which has had a common surface with it is swift enough to overpower the

downward impulse of the water. Nor does water move upward to the place of

air,  except  in  the  manner  just  described.  Earth  is  not  so  affected  at  all,

because a common surface is not possible to it. Hence water is drawn up into

the  vessel  to  which  fire  is  applied,  but  not  earth.  As  earth  fails  to  move

upward, so fire fails to move downward when air is withdrawn from beneath

it: for fire has no weight even in its own place, as earth has no lightness. The

other two move downward when the body beneath is withdrawn because,

while the absolutely heavy is that which sinks to the bottom of all things, the

relatively heavy sinks to its own place or to the surface of the body in which

it rises, since it is similar in matter to it.

It is plain that one must suppose as many distinct species of matter as there

are bodies. For if, first, there is a single matter of all things, as, for instance,

the void or the plenum or extension or the triangles, either all things will

move upward or all things will move downward, and the second motion will

be  abolished.  And  so,  either  there  will  be  no  absolutely  light  body,  if

superiority of weight is due to superior size or number of the constituent

bodies  or  to  the  fullness  of  the  body:  but  the  contrary  is  a  matter  of

observation,  and  it  has  been  shown  that  the  downward  and  upward

movements are equally constant and universal: or, if the matter in question is

the void or something similar, which moves uniformly upward, there will be

nothing  to  move  uniformly  downward.  Further,  it  will  follow  that  the

intermediate bodies move downward in some cases quicker than earth: for air

in  sufficiently  large  quantity  will  contain  a  larger  number  of  triangles  or

solids or particles. It is, however, manifest that no portion of air whatever

moves  downward.  And  the  same  reasoning  applies  to  lightness,  if  that  is

supposed to depend on superiority of quantity of matter. But if, secondly, the

kinds of matter are two, it will be difficult to make the intermediate bodies

behave as air and water behave. Suppose, for example, that the two asserted

are void and plenum. Fire, then, as moving upward, will be void, earth, as

moving downward, plenum; and in air, it will be said, fire preponderates, in

water, earth. There will then be a quantity of water containing more fire than

a little air, and a large amount of air will contain more earth than a little

water: consequently we shall have to say that air in a certain quantity moves

downward more quickly than a little water. But such a thing has never been

observed  anywhere.  Necessarily,  then,  as  fire  goes  up  because  it  has

something,  e.g.  void,  which  other  things  do  not  have,  and  earth  goesdownward because it has plenum, so air goes to its own place above water

because it has something else, and water goes downward because of some

special kind of body. But if the two bodies are one matter, or two matters

both present in each, there will be a certain quantity of each at which water

will excel a little air in the upward movement and air excel water in the

downward movement, as we have already often said.

<

div id="section40" class="section" title="6">


6


The  shape  of  bodies  will  not  account  for  their  moving  upward  or

downward  in  general,  though  it  will  account  for  their  moving  faster  or

slower. The reasons for this are not difficult to see. For the problem thus

raised is why a flat piece of iron or lead floats upon water, while smaller and

less heavy things, so long as they are round or long-a needle, for instance-

sink down; and sometimes a thing floats because it is small, as with gold dust

and the various earthy and dusty materials which throng the air. With regard

to  these  questions,  it  is  wrong  to  accept  the  explanation  offered  by

Democritus. He says that the warm bodies moving up out of the water hold

up heavy bodies which are broad, while the narrow ones fall through, because

the bodies which offer this resistance are not numerous. But this would be

even more likely to happen in air-an objection which he himself raises. His

reply to the objection is feeble. In the air, he says, the ‘drive’ (meaning by

drive  the  movement  of  the  upward  moving  bodies)  is  not  uniform  in

direction. But since some continua are easily divided and others less easily,

and things which produce division differ similarly in the case with which

they produce it, the explanation must be found in this fact. It is the easily

bounded, in proportion as it is easily bounded, which is easily divided; and

air is more so than water, water than earth. Further, the smaller the quantity in

each kind, the more easily it is divided and disrupted. Thus the reason why

broad things keep their place is because they cover so wide a surface and the

greater quantity is less easily disrupted. Bodies of the opposite shape sink

down because they occupy so little of the surface, which is therefore easily

parted. And these considerations apply with far greater force to air, since it is

so much more easily divided than water. But since there are two factors, the

force  responsible  for  the  downward  motion  of  the  heavy  body  and  thedisruption-resisting force of the continuous surface, there must be some ratio

between the two. For in proportion as the force applied by the heavy thing

towards disruption and division exceeds that which resides in the continuum,

the quicker will it force its way down; only if the force of the heavy thing is

the weaker, will it ride upon the surface.

We have now finished our examination of the heavy and the light and of

the phenomena connected with them.                On Generation and Corruption, Book I


Translated by H. H. Joachim


<

div class="section" title="1">


1


Our  next  task  is  to  study  coming-to-be  and  passing-away.  We  are  to

distinguish  the  causes,  and  to  state  the  definitions,  of  these  processes

considered in general-as changes predicable uniformly of all the things that

come-to-be and pass-away by nature. Further, we are to study growth and

‘alteration’. We must inquire what each of them is; and whether ‘alteration’ is

to be identified with coming-to-be, or whether to these different names there

correspond two separate processes with distinct natures.

On this question, indeed, the early philosophers are divided. Some of them

assert  that  the  so-called  ‘unqualified  coming-to-be’  is  ‘alteration’,  while

others maintain that ‘alteration’ and coming-to-be are distinct. For those who

say that the universe is one something (i.e. those who generate all things out

of one thing) are bound to assert that coming-to-be is ‘alteration’, and that

whatever ‘comes-to-be’ in the proper sense of the term is ‘being altered’: but

those who make the matter of things more than one must distinguish coming-

to-be from ‘alteration’. To this latter class belong Empedocles, Anaxagoras,

and Leucippus. And yet Anaxagoras himself failed to understand his own

utterance. He says, at all events, that coming-to-be and passing-away are the

same as ‘being altered’:’ yet, in common with other thinkers, he affirms that

the elements are many. Thus Empedocles holds that the corporeal elements

are four, while all the elements-including those which initiate movement-are

six in number; whereas Anaxagoras agrees with Leucippus and Democritus

that the elements are infinite.

  (Anaxagoras  posits  as  elements  the  ‘homoeomeries’,  viz.  bone,  flesh,

marrow, and everything else which is such that part and whole are the same

in  name  and  nature;  while  Democritus  and  Leucippus  say  that  there  are

indivisible bodies, infinite both in number and in the varieties of their shapes,of  which  everything  else  is  composed-the  compounds  differing  one  from

another  according  to  the  shapes,  ‘positions’,  and  ‘groupings’  of  their

constituents.)

For the views of the school of Anaxagoras seem diametrically opposed to

those of the followers of Empedocles. Empedocles says that Fire, Water, Air,

and Earth are four elements, and are thus ‘simple’ rather than flesh, bone, and

bodies  which,  like  these,  are  ‘homoeomeries’.  But  the  followers  of

Anaxagoras regard the ‘homoeomeries’ as ‘simple’ and elements, whilst they

affirm that Earth, Fire, Water, and Air are composite; for each of these is

(according to them) a ‘common seminary’ of all the ‘homoeomeries’.

  Those,  then,  who  construct  all  things  out  of  a  single  element,  must

maintain that coming-tobe and passing-away are ‘alteration’. For they must

affirm that the underlying something always remains identical and one; and

change of such a substratum is what we call ‘altering’ Those, on the other

hand, who make the ultimate kinds of things more than one, must maintain

that  ‘alteration’  is  distinct  from  coming-to-be:  for  coming-to-be  and

passingaway  result  from  the  consilience  and  the  dissolution  of  the  many

kinds. That is why Empedocles too uses language to this effect, when he says

‘There is no coming-to-be of anything, but only a mingling and a divorce of

what has been mingled’. Thus it is clear (i) that to describe coming-to-be and

passing-away  in  these  terms  is  in  accordance  with  their  fundamental

assumption, and (ii) that they do in fact so describe them: nevertheless, they

too must recognize ‘alteration’ as a fact distinct from coming to-be, though it

is impossible for them to do so consistently with what they say.

That we are right in this criticism is easy to perceive. For ‘alteration’ is a

fact of observation. While the substance of the thing remains unchanged, we

see it ‘altering’ just as we see in it the changes of magnitude called ‘growth’

and  ‘diminution’.  Nevertheless,  the  statements  of  those  who  posit  more

‘original reals’ than one make ‘alteration’ impossible. For ‘alteration, as we

assert, takes place in respect to certain qualities: and these qualities (I mean,

e.g. hot-cold, white-black, dry-moist, soft-hard, and so forth) are, all of them,

differences characterizing the ‘elements’. The actual words of Empedocles

may be quoted in illustration


The sun everywhere bright to see, and hot,

The rain everywhere dark and cold;and  he  distinctively  characterizes  his  remaining  elements  in  a  similar

manner.  Since,  therefore,  it  is  not  possible  for  Fire  to  become  Water,  or

Water  to  become  Earth,  neither  will  it  be  possible  for  anything  white  to

become  black,  or  anything  soft  to  become  hard;  and  the  same  argument

applies to all the other qualities. Yet this is what ‘alteration’ essentially is.

It follows, as an obvious corollary, that a single matter must always be

assumed as underlying the contrary ‘poles’ of any change whether change of

place, or growth and diminution, or ‘alteration’; further, that the being of this

matter and the being of ‘alteration’ stand and fall together. For if the change

is ‘alteration’, then the substratum is a single element; i.e. all things which

admit of change into one another have a single matter. And, conversely, if the

substratum of the changing things is one, there is ‘alteration’.

  Empedocles, indeed, seems to contradict his own statements as well as the

observed facts. For he denies that any one of his elements comes-to-be out of

any other, insisting on the contrary that they are the things out of which

everything else comes-to-be; and yet (having brought the entirety of existing

things, except Strife, together into one) he maintains, simultaneously with

this denial, that each thing once more comes-to-be out of the One. Hence it

was clearly out of a One that this came-to-be Water, and that Fire, various

portions  of  it  being  separated  off  by  certain  characteristic  differences  or

qualities-as indeed he calls the sun ‘white and hot’, and the earth ‘heavy and

hard’. If, therefore, these characteristic differences be taken away (for they

can be taken away, since they came-to-be), it will clearly be inevitable for

Earth to come to-be out of Water and Water out of Earth, and for each of the

other elements to undergo a similar transformation-not only then, but also

now-if, and because, they change their qualities. And, to judge by what he

says, the qualities are such that they can be ‘attached’ to things and can again

be ‘separated’ from them, especially since Strife and Love are still fighting

with one another for the mastery. It was owing to this same conflict that the

elements were generated from a One at the former period. I say ‘generated’,

for  presumably  Fire,  Earth,  and  Water  had  no  distinctive  existence  at  all

while merged in one.

  There is another obscurity in the theory Empedocles. Are we to regard the

One as his ‘original real’? Or is it the Many-i.e. Fire and Earth, and the

bodies co-ordinate with these? For the One is an ‘element’ in so far as it

underlies the process as matter-as that out of which Earth and Fire come-to-

be through a change of qualities due to ‘the motion’. On the other hand, in sofar  as  the  One  results  from  composition  (by  a  consilience  of  the  Many),

whereas they result from disintegration the Many are more ‘elementary’ than

the One, and prior to it in their nature.

<

div class="section" title="2">


2


We have therefore to discuss the whole subject of ‘unqualified’ coming-to-

be and passingaway; we have to inquire whether these changes do or do not

occur and, if they occur, to explain the precise conditions of their occurrence.

We  must  also  discuss  the  remaining  forms  of  change,  viz.  growth  and

‘alteration’. For though, no doubt, Plato investigated the conditions under

which  things  come-to-be  and  pass-away,  he  confined  his  inquiry  to  these

changes; and he discussed not all coming-to-be, but only that of the elements.

He asked no questions as to how flesh or bones, or any of the other similar

compound things, come-to-be; nor again did he examine the conditions under

which ‘alteration’ or growth are attributable to things.

A similar criticism applies to all our predecessors with the single exception

of  Democritus.  Not  one  of  them  penetrated  below  the  surface  or  made  a

thorough examination of a single one of the problems. Democritus, however,

does seem not only to have thought carefully about all the problems, but also

to be distinguished from the outset by his method. For, as we are saying, none

of the other philosophers made any definite statement about growth, except

such as any amateur might have made. They said that things grow ‘by the

accession of like to like’, but they did not proceed to explain the manner of

this accession. Nor did they give any account of ‘combination’: and they

neglected almost every single one of the remaining problems, offering no

explanation, e.g. of ‘action’ or ‘passion’ how in physical actions one thing

acts and the other undergoes action. Democritus and Leucippus, however,

postulate the ‘figures’, and make ‘alteration’ and coming-to-be result from

them. They explain coming-to-be and passing-away by their ‘dissociation’

and  ‘association’,  but  ‘alteration’  by  their  ‘grouping’  and  ‘Position’.  And

since they thought that the ‘truth lay in the appearance, and the appearances

are  conflicting  and  infinitely  many,  they  made  the  ‘figures’  infinite  in

number. Hence-owing to the changes of the compound-the same thing seems

different  and  conflicting  to  different  people:  it  is  ‘transposed’  by  a  smalladditional ingredient, and appears utterly other by the ‘transposition’ of a

single constituent. For Tragedy and Comedy are both composed of the same

letters.

  Since almost all our predecessors think (i) that coming-to-be is distinct

from  ‘alteration’,  and  (ii)  that,  whereas  things  ‘alter’  by  change  of  their

qualities, it is by ‘association’ and ‘dissociation’ that they come-to-be and

pass-away, we must concentrate our attention on these theses. For they lead

to  many  perplexing  and  well-grounded  dilemmas.  If,  on  the  one  hand,

coming-to-be is ‘association’, many impossible consequences result: and yet

there are other arguments, not easy to unravel, which force the conclusion

upon us that coming-to-be cannot possibly be anything else. If, on the other

hand,  coming-to-be  is  not  ‘association’,  either  there  is  no  such  thing  as

coming-to-be at all or it is ‘alteration’: or else we must endeavour to unravel

this  dilemma  too-and  a  stubborn  one  we  shall  find  it.  The  fundamental

question, in dealing with all these difficulties, is this: ‘Do things come-to-be

and “alter” and grow, and undergo the contrary changes, because the primary

“reals” are indivisible magnitudes? Or is no magnitude indivisible?’ For the

answer we give to this question makes the greatest difference. And again, if

the  primary  ‘reals’  are  indivisible  magnitudes,  are  these  bodies,  as

Democritus and Leucippus maintain? Or are they planes, as is asserted in the

Timaeus?

To resolve bodies into planes and no further-this, as we have also remarked

elsewhere, in itself a paradox. Hence there is more to be said for the view that

there are indivisible bodies. Yet even these involve much of paradox. Still, as

we have said, it is possible to construct ‘alteration’ and coming-to-be with

them, if one ‘transposes’ the same by ‘turning’ and ‘intercontact’, and by ‘the

varieties of the figures’, as Democritus does. (His denial of the reality of

colour is a corollary from this position: for, according to him, things get

coloured  by  ‘turning’  of  the  ‘figures’.)  But  the  possibility  of  such  a

construction no longer exists for those who divide bodies into planes. For

nothing except solids results from putting planes together: they do not even

attempt to generate any quality from them.

Lack of experience diminishes our power of taking a comprehensive view

of the admitted facts. Hence those who dwell in intimate association with

nature  and  its  phenomena  grow  more  and  more  able  to  formulate,  as  the

foundations  of  their  theories,  principles  such  as  to  admit  of  a  wide  and

coherent development: while those whom devotion to abstract discussionshas rendered unobservant of the facts are too ready to dogmatize on the basis

of a few observations. The rival treatments of the subject now before us will

serve to illustrate how great is the difference between a ‘scientific’ and a

‘dialectical’ method of inquiry. For, whereas the Platonists argue that there

must be atomic magnitudes ‘because otherwise “The Triangle” will be more

than one’, Democritus would appear to have been convinced by arguments

appropriate to the subject, i.e. drawn from the science of nature. Our meaning

will  become  clear  as  we  proceed.  For  to  suppose  that  a  body  (i.e.  a

magnitude) is divisible through and through, and that this division is possible,

involves  a  difficulty.  What  will  there  be  in  the  body  which  escapes  the

division?

If it is divisible through and through, and if this division is possible, then it

might be, at one and the same moment, divided through and through, even

though the dividings had not been effected simultaneously: and the actual

occurrence of this result would involve no impossibility. Hence the same

principle  will  apply  whenever  a  body  is  by  nature  divisible  through  and

through, whether by bisection, or generally by any method whatever: nothing

impossible will have resulted if it has actually been divided-not even if it has

been divided into innumerable parts, themselves divided innumerable times.

Nothing impossible will have resulted, though perhaps nobody in fact could

so divide it.

  Since, therefore, the be dy is divisible through and through, let it have been

divided. What, then, will remain? A magnitude? No: that is impossible, since

then there will be something not divided, whereas ex hypothesis the body was

divisible through and through. But if it be admitted that neither a body nor a

magnitude will remain, and yet division is to take place, the constituents of

the body will either be points (i.e. without magnitude) or absolutely nothing.

If its constituents are nothings, then it might both come-to-be out of nothings

and exist as a composite of nothings: and thus presumably the whole body

will  be  nothing  but  an  appearance.  But  if  it  consists  of  points,  a  similar

absurdity will result: it will not possess any magnitude. For when the points

were in contact and coincided to form a single magnitude, they did not make

the whole any bigger (since, when the body was divided into two or more

parts,  the  whole  was  not  a  bit  smaller  or  bigger  than  it  was  before  the

division): hence, even if all the points be put together, they will not make any

magnitude.

But suppose that, as the body is being divided, a minute section-a piece ofsawdust, as it were-is extracted, and that in this sense-a body ‘comes away’

from  the  magnitude,  evading  the  division.  Even  then  the  same  argument

applies. For in what sense is that section divisible? But if what ‘came away’

was  not  a  body  but  a  separable  form  or  quality,  and  if  the  magnitude  is

‘points or contacts thus qualified’: it is paradoxical that a magnitude should

consist  of  elements,  which  are  not  magnitudes.  Moreover,  where  will  the

points be? And are they motionless or moving? And every contact is always a

contact of two somethings, i.e. there is always something besides the contact

or the division or the point.

These, then, are the difficulties resulting from the supposition that any and

every  body,  whatever  its  size,  is  divisible  through  and  through.  There  is,

besides,  this  further  consideration.  If,  having  divided  a  piece  of  wood  or

anything else, I put it together, it is again equal to what it was, and is one.

Clearly this is so, whatever the point at which I cut the wood. The wood,

therefore, has been divided potentially through and through. What, then, is

there in the wood besides the division? For even if we suppose there is some

quality, yet how is the wood dissolved into such constituents and how does it

come-to-be out of them? Or how are such constituents separated so as to exist

apart from one another? Since, therefore, it is impossible for magnitudes to

consist of contacts or points, there must be indivisible bodies and magnitudes.

Yet, if we do postulate the latter, we are confronted with equally impossible

consequences, which we have examined in other works.’ But we must try to

disentangle  these  perplexities,  and  must  therefore  formulate  the  whole

problem over again.

On the one hand, then, it is in no way paradoxical that every perceptible

body should be indivisible as well as divisible at any and every point. For the

second predicate will at. tach to it potentially, but the first actually. On the

other hand, it would seem to be impossible for a body to be, even potentially,

divisible at all points simultaneously. For if it were possible, then it might

actually occur, with the result, not that the body would simultaneously be

actually both (indivisible and divided), but that it would be simultaneously

divided at any and every point. Consequently, nothing will remain and the

body will have passed-away into what is incorporeal: and so it might come-

to-be again either out of points or absolutely out of nothing. And how is that

possible?

But  now  it  is  obvious  that  a  body  is  in  fact  divided  into  separable

magnitudes which are smaller at each division-into magnitudes which fallapart from one another and are actually separated. Hence (it is urged) the

process of dividing a body part by part is not a ‘breaking up’ which could

continue ad infinitum; nor can a body be simultaneously divided at every

point, for that is not possible; but there is a limit, beyond which the ‘breaking

up’ cannot proceed. The necessary consequence-especially if coming-to-be

and  passing-away  are  to  take  place  by  ‘association’  and  ‘dissociation’

respectively-is  that  a  body  must  contain  atomic  magnitudes  which  are

invisible. Such is the argument which is believed to establish the necessity of

atomic magnitudes: we must now show that it conceals a faulty inference,

and exactly where it conceals it.

  For,  since  point  is  not  ‘immediately-next’  to  point,  magnitudes  are

‘divisible through and through’ in one sense, and yet not in another. When,

however, it is admitted that a magnitude is ‘divisible through and through’, it

is thought there is a point not only anywhere, but also everywhere, in it:

hence it is supposed to follow, from the admission, that the magnitude must

be divided away into nothing. For it is supposed-there is a point everywhere

within it, so that it consists either of contacts or of points. But it is only in one

sense that the magnitude is ‘divisible through and through’, viz. in so far as

there is one point anywhere within it and all its points are everywhere within

it if you take them singly one by one. But there are not more points than one

anywhere  within  it,  for  the  points  are  not  ‘consecutive’:  hence  it  is  not

simultaneously ‘divisible through and through’. For if it were, then, if it be

divisible at its centre, it will be divisible also at a point ‘immediately-next’ to

its centre. But it is not so divisible: for position is not ‘immediately-next’ to

position, nor point to point-in other words, division is not ‘immediately-next’

to division, nor composition to composition.

  Hence there are both ‘association’ and ‘dissociation’, though neither (a)

into, and out of, atomic magnitudes (for that involves many impossibilities),

nor (b) so that division takes place through and through-for this would have

resulted only if point had been ‘immediately-next’ to point: but ‘dissociation’

takes  place  into  small  (i.e.  relatively  small)  parts,  and  ‘association’  takes

place out of relatively small parts.

It is wrong, however, to suppose, as some assert, that coming-to-be and

passing-away in the unqualified and complete sense are distinctively defined

by ‘association’ and ‘dissociation’, while the change that takes place in what

is continuous is ‘alteration’. On the contrary, this is where the whole error

lies.  For  unqualified  coming-to-be  and  passing-away  are  not  effected  by‘association’ and ‘dissociation’. They take place when a thing changes, from

this to that, as a whole. But the philosophers we are criticizing suppose that

all such change is ‘alteration’: whereas in fact there is a difference. For in that

which underlies the change there is a factor corresponding to the definition

and there is a material factor. When, then, the change is in these constitutive

factors, there will be coming-to-be or passing-away: but when it is in the

thing’s  qualities,  i.e.  a  change  of  the  thing  per  accidents,  there  will  be

‘alteration’.

  ‘Dissociation’ and ‘association’ affect the thing’s susceptibility to passing-

away. For if water has first been ‘dissociated’ into smallish drops, air comes-

to-be  out  of  it  more  quickly:  while,  if  drops  of  water  have  first  been

‘associated’, air comes-to-be more slowly. Our doctrine will become clearer

in  the  sequel.’  Meantime,  so  much  may  be  taken  as  established-viz.  that

coming-to-be cannot be ‘association’, at least not the kind of ‘association’

some philosophers assert it to be.

<

div class="section" title="3">


3


Now that we have established the preceding distinctions, we must first

consider whether there is anything which comes-to-be and passes-away in the

unqualified sense: or whether nothing comes-to-be in this strict sense, but

everything always comes-to-be something and out of something-I mean, e.g.

comes-to-be-healthy out of being-ill and ill out of being-healthy, comes-to-

be-small out of being big and big out of being-small, and so on in every other

instance. For if there is to be coming-to-be without qualification, ‘something’

must-without qualification-’come-to-be out of not-being’, so that it would be

true  to  say  that  ‘not-being  is  an  attribute  of  some  things’.  For  qualified

coming-to-be is a process out of qualified not-being (e.g. out of not-white or

not-beautiful), but unqualified coming-to-be is a process out of unqualified

not-being.

Now  ‘unqulified’  means  either  (i)  the  primary  predication  within  each

Category, or (ii) the universal, i.e. the all-comprehensive, predication. Hence,

if’unqualified not-being ‘means the negation of ‘being’ in the sense of the

primary  term  of  the  Category  in  question,  we  shall  have,  in  ‘unqualified

coming-to-be’, a coming-to-be of a substance out of not-substance. But thatwhich is not a substance or a ‘this’ clearly cannot possess predicates drawn

from any of the other Categories either-e.g. we cannot attribute to it any

quality, quantity, or position. Otherwise, properties would admit of existence

in separation from substances. If, on the other hand, ‘unqualified not-being’

means ‘what is not in any sense at all’, it will be a universal negation of all

forms of being, so that what comes-to-be will have to come-to-be out of

nothing.

  Although we have dealt with these problems at greater length in another

work,where  we  have  set  forth  the  difficulties  and  established  the

distinguishing definitions, the following concise restatement of our results

must here be offered: In one sense things come-to-be out of that which has no

‘being’ without qualification: yet in another sense they come-to-be always

out of what is’. For coming-to-be necessarily implies the pre-existence of

something which potentially ‘is’, but actually ‘is not’; and this something is

spoken of both as ‘being’ and as ‘not-being’.

  These  distinctions  may  be  taken  as  established:  but  even  then  it  is

extraordinarily difficult to see how there can be ‘unqualified coming-to-be’

(whether we suppose it to occur out of what potentially ‘is’, or in some other

way),  and  we  must  recall  this  problem  for  further  examination.  For  the

question might be raised whether substance (i.e. the ‘this’) comes-to-be at all.

Is it not rather the ‘such’, the ‘so great’, or the ‘somewhere’, which comes-to-

be? And the same question might be raised about ‘passing-away’ also. For if

a substantial thing comes-to-be, it is clear that there will ‘be’ (not actually,

but potentially) a substance, out of which its coming-to-be will proceed and

into which the thing that is passing-away will necessarily change. Then will

any predicate belonging to the remaining Categories attach actually to this

presupposed substance? In other words, will that which is only potentially a

‘this’ (which only potentially is), while without the qualification ‘potentially’

it is not a ‘this’ (i.e. is not), possess, e.g. any determinate size or quality or

position? For (i) if it possesses none of these determinations actually, but all

of  them  only  potentially,  the  result  is  first  that  a  being,  which  is  not  a

determinate  being,  is  capable  of  separate  existence;  and  in  addition  that

coming-to-be proceeds out of nothing pre-existing-a thesis which, more than

any other, preoccupied and alarmed the earliest philosophers. On the other

hand (ii) if, although it is not a ‘this somewhat’ or a substance, it is to possess

some  of  the  remaining  determinations  quoted  above,  then  (as  we  said)’

properties will be separable from substances.We must therefore concentrate all our powers on the discussion of these

difficulties and on the solution of a further question-viz. What is the cause of

the perpetuity of coming-to-be? Why is there always unqualified, as well as

partial, coming-to-be? Cause’ in this connexion has two senses. It means (i)

the source from which, as we say, the process ‘originates’, and (ii) the matter.

It is the material cause that we have here to state. For, as to the other cause,

we  have  already  explained  (in  our  treatise  on  Motion  that  it  involves  (a)

something  immovable  through  all  time  and  (b)  something  always  being

moved. And the accurate treatment of the first of these-of the immovable

‘originative  source’-belongs  to  the  province  of  the  other,  or  ‘prior’,

philosophy: while as regards ‘that which sets everything else in motion by

being  itself  continuously  moved’,  we  shall  have  to  explain  later’  which

amongst the so-called ‘specific’ causes exhibits this character. But at present

we are to state the material cause-the cause classed under the head of matter-

to which it is due that passing-away and coming-to-be never fail to occur in

Nature.  For  perhaps,  if  we  succeed  in  clearing  up  this  question,  it  will

simultaneously become clear what account we ought to give of that which

perplexed us just now, i.e. of unqualified passingaway and coming-to-be.

Our new question too-viz. ‘what is the cause of the unbroken continuity of

coming-to-be?’-is  sufficiently  perplexing,  if  in  fact  what  passes-away

vanishes into ‘what is not’ and ‘what is not’ is nothing (since ‘what is not’ is

neither a thing, nor possessed of a quality or quantity, nor in any place). If,

then, some one of the things ‘which are’ constantly disappearing, why has not

the whole of ‘what is’ been used up long ago and vanished away assuming of

course  that  the  material  of  all  the  several  comings-to-be  was  finite?  For,

presumably, the unfailing continuity of coming-to-be cannot be attributed to

the infinity of the material. That is impossible, for nothing is actually infinite.

A  thing  is  infinite  only  potentially,  i.e.  the  dividing  of  it  can  continue

indefinitely: so that we should have to suppose there is only one kind of

coming-to-be in the world-viz. one which never fails, because it is such that

what comes-to-be is on each successive occasion smaller than before. But in

fact this is not what we see occurring.

Why, then, is this form of change necessarily ceaseless? Is it because the

passing-away of this is a coming-to-be of something else, and the coming-to-

be of this a passing-away of something else?

The cause implied in this solution must no doubt be considered adequate to

account for coming-to-be and passing-away in their general character as theyoccur in all existing things alike. Yet, if the same process is a coming to-be of

this but a passing-away of that, and a passing-away of this but a coming-to-be

of  that,  why  are  some  things  said  to  come-to-be  and  pass-away  without

qualification, but others only with a qualification?

The  distinction  must  be  investigated  once  more,  for  it  demands  some

explanation. (It is applied in a twofold manner.) For (i) we say ‘it is now

passing-away’ without qualification, and not merely ‘this is passing-away’:

and  we  call  this  change  ‘coming-to-be’,  and  that  ‘passing-away’,  without

qualification.  And  (ii)  so-and-so  ‘comes-to-be-something’,  but  does  not

‘come-to-be’ without qualification; for we say that the student ‘comes-to-be-

learned’, not ‘comes-to-be’ without qualification.

(i) Now we often divide terms into those which signify a ‘this somewhat’

and those which do not. And (the first form of) the distinction, which we are

investigating,  results  from  a  similar  division  of  terms:  for  it  makes  a

difference into what the changing thing changes. Perhaps, e.g. the passage

into Fire is ‘coming-to-be’ unqualified, but ‘passingaway-of-something’ (e.g.

Earth):  whilst  the  coming-to-be  of  Earth  is  qualified  (not  unqualified)

‘coming-to-be’, though unqualified ‘passing-away’ (e.g. of Fire). This would

be the case on the theory set forth in Parmenides: for he says that the things

into which change takes place are two, and he asserts that these two, viz.

what is and what is not, are Fire and Earth. Whether we postulate these, or

other things of a similar kind, makes no difference. For we are trying to

discover not what undergoes these changes, but what is their characteristic

manner. The passage, then, into what ‘is’ not except with a qualification is

unqualified  passing-away,  while  the  passage  into  what  ‘is’  without

qualification  is  unqualified  coming-to-be.  Hence  whatever  the  contrasted

‘poles’ of the changes may be whether Fire and Earth, or some other couple-

the one of them will be ‘a being’ and the other ‘a not-being’.

We have thus stated one characteristic manner in which unqualified will be

distinguished from qualified coming-to-be and passing-away: but they are

also  distinguished  according  to  the  special  nature  of  the  material  of  the

changing thing. For a material, whose constitutive differences signify more a

‘this somewhat’, is itself more ‘substantial’ or ‘real’: while a material, whose

constitutive differences signify privation, is ‘not real’. (Suppose, e.g. that ‘the

hot’ is a positive predication, i.e. a ‘form’, whereas ‘cold’ is a privation, and

that Earth and Fire differ from one another by these constitutive differences.)

The opinion, however, which most people are inclined to prefer, is that thedistinction depends upon the difference between ‘the perceptible’ and ‘the

imperceptible’. Thus, when there is a change into perceptible material, people

say  there  is  ‘coming-to-be’;  but  when  there  is  a  change  into  invisible

material, they call it ‘passing-away’. For they distinguish ‘what is’ and ‘what

is not’ by their perceiving and not-perceiving, just as what is knowable ‘is’

and what is unknowable ‘is not’-perception on their view having the force of

knowledge. Hence, just as they deem themselves to live and to ‘be’ in virtue

of their perceiving or their capacity to perceive, so too they deem the things

to ‘be’ qua perceived or perceptible-and in this they are in a sense on the

track of the truth, though what they actually say is not true.

  Thus unqualified coming-to-be and passingaway turn out to be different

according to common opinion from what they are in truth. For Wind and Air

are in truth more real more a ‘this somewhat’ or a ‘form’-than Earth. But they

are less real to perception which explains why things are commonly said to

‘pass-away’ without qualification when they change into Wind and Air, and

to ‘come-to-be’ when they change into what is tangible, i.e. into Earth.

We have now explained why there is ‘unqualified coming-to-be’ (though it

is a passingaway-of-something) and ‘unqualified passingaway (though it is a

  coming-to-be-of-something). For this distinction of appellation depends upon

a difference in the material out of which, and into which, the changes are

effected. It depends either upon whether the material is or is not ‘substantial’,

or upon whether it is more or less ‘substantial’, or upon whether it is more or

less perceptible.

(ii) But why are some things said to ‘come to-be’ without qualification,

and others only to ‘come-to-be-so-and-so’, in cases different from the one we

have been considering where two things come-to-be reciprocally out of one

another? For at present we have explained no more than this:-why, when two

things change reciprocally into one another, we do not attribute coming-to-be

and passing-away uniformly to them both, although every coming-to-be is a

passing-away of something else and every passing-away some other thing’s

coming-to-be. But the question subsequently formulated involves a different

problem-viz. why, although the learning thing is said to ‘come-to-be-learned’

but not to ‘come-tobe’ without qualification, yet the growing thing is said to

‘come-to-be’.

The distinction here turns upon the difference of the Categories. For some

things signify a this somewhat, others a such, and others a so-much. Those

things, then, which do not signify substance, are not said to ‘come-to-be’without qualification, but only to ‘come-to-be-so-and-so’. Nevertheless, in all

changing things alike, we speak of ‘coming-to-be’ when the thing comes-to-

be something in one of the two Columns-e.g. in Substance, if it comes-to-be

Fire but not if it comes-to-be Earth; and in Quality, if it comes-to-be learned

but not when it comes-to-be ignorant.

We have explained why some things come to-be without qualification, but

not others both in general, and also when the changing things are substances

and nothing else; and we have stated that the substratum is the material cause

of the continuous occurrence of coming to-be, because it is such as to change

from contrary to contrary and because, in substances, the coming-to-be of one

thing is always a passing-away of another, and the passing-away of one thing

is always another’s coming-to-be. But there is no need even to discuss the

other question we raised-viz. why coming-to-be continues though things are

constantly  being  destroyed.  For  just  as  people  speak  of  ‘a  passing-away’

without qualification when a thing has passed into what is imperceptible and

what in that sense ‘is not’, so also they speak of ‘a coming-to-be out of a not-

being’ when a thing emerges from an imperceptible. Whether, therefore, the

substratum is or is not something, what comes-tobe emerges out of a ‘not-

being’: so that a thing comes-to-be out of a not-being’ just as much as it

‘passes-away into what is not’. Hence it is reasonable enough that coming-to-

be should never fail. For coming-to-be is a passing-away of ‘what is not’ and

passing-away is a coming to-be of ‘what is not’.

But what about that which ‘is’ not except with a qualification? Is it one of

the two contrary poles of the chang-e.g. Earth (i.e. the heavy) a ‘not-being’,

but Fire (i.e. the light) a ‘being’? Or, on the contrary, does what is ‘include

Earth as well as Fire, whereas what is not’ is matter-the matter of Earth and

Fire alike? And again, is the matter of each different? Or is it the same, since

otherwise they would not come-to-be reciprocally out of one another, i.e.

contraries  out  of  contraries?  For  these  things-Fire,  Earth,  Water,  Air-are

characterized by ‘the contraries’.

  Perhaps the solution is that their matter is in one sense the same, but in

another sense different. For that which underlies them, whatever its nature

may be qua underlying them, is the same: but its actual being is not the same.

So much, then, on these topics.

<

div class="section" title="4">4


Next  we  must  state  what  the  difference  is  between  coming-to-be  and

‘alteration’-for we maintain that these changes are distinct from one another.

  Since, then, we must distinguish (a) the substratum, and (b) the property

whose nature it is to be predicated of the substratum; and since change of

each of these occurs; there is ‘alteration’ when the substratum is perceptible

and persists, but changes in its own properties, the properties in question

being opposed to one another either as contraries or as intermediates. The

body, e.g. although persisting as the same body, is now healthy and now ill;

and the bronze is now spherical and at another time angular, and yet remains

the same bronze. But when nothing perceptible persists in its identity as a

substratum, and the thing changes as a whole (when e.g. the seed as a whole

is converted into blood, or water into air, or air as a whole into water), such

an occurrence is no longer ‘alteration’. It is a coming-to-be of one substance

and a passing-away of the other-especially if the change proceeds from an

imperceptible something to something perceptible (either to touch or to all

the senses), as when water comes-to-be out of, or passes-away into, air: for

air  is  pretty  well  imperceptible.  If,  however,  in  such  cases,  any  property

(being one of a pair of contraries) persists, in the thing that has come-to-be,

the same as it was in the thing which has passedaway-if, e.g. when water

comes-to-be out of air, both are transparent or cold-the second thing, into

which the first changes, must not be a property of this persistent identical

something. Otherwise the change will be ‘alteration.’ Suppose, e.g. that the

musical man passed-away and an unmusical man came-tobe, and that the

man  persists  as  something  identical.  Now,  if  ‘musicalness  and

unmusicalness’ had not been a property essentially inhering in man, these

changes would have been a coming-to-be of unmusicalness and a passing-

away  of  musicalness:  but  in  fact  ‘musicalness  and  unmusicalness’  are  a

property of the persistent identity, viz. man. (Hence, as regards man, these

changes are ‘modifications’; though, as regards musical man and unmusical

man,  they  are  a  passing-away  and  a  coming-to-be.)  Consequently  such

changes are ‘alteration.’ When the change from contrary to contrary is in

quantity, it is ‘growth and diminution’; when it is in place, it is ‘motion’;

when it is in property, i.e. in quality, it is ‘alteration’: but, when nothing

persists, of which the resultant is a property (or an ‘accident’ in any sense of

the term), it is ‘coming-to-be’, and the converse change is ‘passing-away’.  ‘Matter’, in the most proper sense of the term, is to be identified with the

substratum  which  is  receptive  of  coming-to-be  and  passingaway:  but  the

substratum  of  the  remaining  kinds  of  change  is  also,  in  a  certain  sense,

‘matter’, because all these substrata are receptive of ‘contrarieties’ of some

kind. So much, then, as an answer to the questions (i) whether coming-to-be

‘is’ or ‘is not’-i.e. what are the precise conditions of its occurrence and (ii)

what ‘alteration’ is: but we have still to treat of growth.

<

div class="section" title="5">


5


We must explain (i) wherein growth differs from coming-to-be and from

‘alteration’,  and  ii)  what  is  the  process  of  growing  and  the  sprocess  of

diminishing in each and all of the things that grow and diminish.

  Hence our first question is this: Do these changes differ from one another

solely because of a difference in their respective ‘spheres’? In other words,

do they differ because, while a change from this to that (viz. from potential to

actual substance) is coming-to-be, a change in the sphere of magnitude is

growth  and  one  in  the  sphere  of  quality  is  ‘alteration’-both  growth  and

‘alteration’  being  changes  from  what  is-potentially  to  what  is-actually

magnitude  and  quality  respectively?  Or  is  there  also  a  difference  in  the

manner  of  the  change,  since  it  is  evident  that,  whereas  neither  what  is

‘altering’  nor  what  is  coming-to-be  necessarily  changes  its  place,  what  is

growing or diminishing changes its spatial position of necessity, though in a

different manner from that in which the moving thing does so? For that which

is being moved changes its place as a whole: but the growing thing changes

its place like a metal that is being beaten, retaining its position as a whole

while its parts change their places. They change their places, but not in the

same way as the parts of a revolving globe. For the parts of the globe change

their places while the whole continues to occupy an equal place: but the parts

of the rowing thing expand over an ever-increasing place and the parts of the

diminishing thing contract within an ever-diminishing area.

It is clear, then, that these changes-the changes of that which is coming-to-

be, of that which is ‘altering’, and of that which is growing-differ in manner

as well as in sphere. But how are we to conceive the ‘sphere’ of the change

which is growth and diminution? The sphere’ of growing and diminishing isbelieved to be magnitude. Are we to suppose that body and magnitude come-

to-be out of something which, though potentially magnitude and body, is

actually  incorporeal  and  devoid  of  magnitude?  And  since  this  description

may be understood in two different ways, in which of these two ways are we

to apply it to the process of growth? Is the matter, out of which growth takes

place,  (i)  ‘separate’  and  existing  alone  by  itself,  or  (ii)  ‘separate’  but

contained in another body?

  Perhaps it is impossible for growth to take place in either of these ways.

For since the matter is ‘separate’, either (a) it will occupy no place (as if it

were a point), or (b) it will be a ‘void’, i.e. a non-perceptible body. But the

first of these alternatives is impossible. For since what comes-to-be out of

this incorporeal and sizeless something will always be ‘somewhere’, it too

must  be  ‘somewhere’-either  intrinsically  or  indirectly.  And  the  second

alternative  necessarily  implies  that  the  matter  is  contained  in  some  other

body. But if it is to be ‘in’ another body and yet remains ‘separate’ in such a

way that it is in no sense a part of that body (neither a part of its substantial

being nor an ‘accident’ of it), many impossibilities will result. It is as if we

were to suppose that when, e.g. air comes-to-be out of water the process were

due not to a change of the but to the matter of the air being ‘contained in’ the

water as in a vessel. This is impossible. For (i) there is nothing to prevent an

indeterminate number of matters being thus ‘contained in’ the water, so that

they might come-to-be actually an indeterminate quantity of air; and (ii) we

do  not  in  fact  see  air  coming-to-be  out  of  water  in  this  fashion,  viz.

withdrawing out of it and leaving it unchanged.

It is therefore better to suppose that in all instances of coming-to-be the

matter  is  inseparable,  being  numerically  identical  and  one  with  the

‘containing’ body, though isolable from it by definition. But the same reasons

also forbid us to regard the matter, out of which the body comes-to-be, as

points or lines. The matter is that of which points and lines are limits, and it is

something that can never exist without quality and without form.

Now it is no doubt true, as we have also established elsewhere,’ that one

thing ‘comes-tobe’ (in the unqualified sense) out of another thing: and further

it is true that the efficient cause of its coming-to-be is either (i) an actual

thing (which is the same as the effect either generically-or the efficient cause

of the coming-to-be of a hard thing is not a hard thing or specifically, as e.g.

fire is the efficient cause of the coming-to-be of fire or one man of the birth

of another), or (ii) an actuality. Nevertheless, since there is also a matter outof  which  corporeal  substance  itself  comes-to-be  (corporeal  substance,

however,  already  characterized  as  such-and-such  a  determinate  body,  for

there is no such thing as body in general), this same matter is also the matter

of magnitude and quality-being separable from these matters by definition,

but not separable in place unless Qualities are, in their turn, separable.

It  is  evident,  from  the  preceding  development  and  discussion  of

difficulties,  that  growth  is  not  a  change  out  of  something  which,  though

potentially a magnitude, actually possesses no magnitude. For, if it were, the

‘void’ would exist in separation; but we have explained in a former work’

that  this  is  impossible.  Moreover,  a  change  of  that  kind  is  not  peculiarly

distinctive of growth, but characterizes coming-to-be as such or in general.

For growth is an increase, and diminution is a lessening, of the magnitude

which is there already-that, indeed, is why the growing thing must possess

some magnitude. Hence growth must not be regarded as a process from a

matter without magnitude to an actuality of magnitude: for this would be a

body’s coming-to-be rather than its growth.

We must therefore come to closer quarters with the subject of our inquiry.

We must grapple’ with it (as it were) from its beginning, and determine the

precise  character  of  the  growing  and  diminishing  whose  causes  we  are

investigating.

It is evident (i) that any and every part of the growing thing has increased,

and that similarly in diminution every part has become smaller: also (ii) that a

thing grows by the accession, and diminishes by the departure, of something.

Hence it must grow by the accession either (a) of something incorporeal or

(b) of a body. Now, if (a) it grows by the accession of something incorporeal,

there will exist separate a void: but (as we have stated before)’ is impossible

for a matter of magnitude to exist ‘separate’. If, on the other hand (b) it grows

by the accession of a body, there will be two bodies-that which grows and

that which increases it-in the same place: and this too is impossible.

But neither is it open to us to say that growth or diminution occurs in the

way in which e.g. air is generated from water. For, although the volume has

then become greater, the change will not be growth, but a coming to-be of the

one-viz. of that into which the change is taking place-and a passing-away of

the  contrasted  body.  It  is  not  a  growth  of  either.  Nothing  grows  in  the

process; unless indeed there be something common to both things (to that

which is coming-to-be and to that which passed-away), e.g. ‘body’, and this

grows. The water has not grown, nor has the air: but the former has passed-away and the latter has come-to-be, and-if anything has grown-there has been

a growth of ‘body.’ Yet this too is impossible. For our account of growth

must preserve the characteristics of that which is growing and diminishing.

And these characteristics are three: (i) any and every part of the growing

magnitude is made bigger (e.g. if flesh grows, every particle of the flesh gets

bigger), (ii) by the accession of something, and (iii) in such a way that the

growing thing is preserved and persists. For whereas a thing does not persist

in  the  processes  of  unqualified  coming-to-be  or  passing-away,  that  which

grows or ‘alters’ persists in its identity through the ‘altering’ and through the

growing or diminishing, though the quality (in ‘alteration’) and the size (in

growth) do not remain the same. Now if the generation of air from water is to

be regarded as growth, a thing might grow without the accession (and without

the persistence) of anything, and diminish without the departure of anything-

and  that  which  grows  need  not  persist.  But  this  characteristic  must  be

preserved: for the growth we are discussing has been assumed to be thus

characterized.

One might raise a further difficulty. What is ‘that which grows’? Is it that

to which something is added? If, e.g. a man grows in his shin, is it the shin

which is greater-but not that ‘whereby’ he grows, viz. not the food? Then

why have not both ‘grown’? For when A is added to B, both A and B are

greater,  as  when  you  mix  wine  with  water;  for  each  ingredient  is  alike

increased in volume. Perhaps the explanation is that the substance of the one

remains unchanged, but the substance of the other (viz. of the food) does not.

For  indeed,  even  in  the  mixture  of  wine  and  water,  it  is  the  prevailing

ingredient which is said to have increased in volume. We say, e.g. that the

wine has increased, because the whole mixture acts as wine but not as water.

A similar principle applies also to ‘alteration’. Flesh is said to have been

‘altered’ if, while its character and substance remain, some one of its essential

properties, which was not there before, now qualifies it: on the other hand,

that ‘whereby’ it has been ‘altered’ may have undergone no change, though

sometimes  it  too  has  been  affected.  The  altering  agent,  however,  and  the

originative source of the process are in the growing thing and in that which is

being ‘altered’: for the efficient cause is in these. No doubt the food, which

has come in, may sometimes expand as well as the body that has consumed it

(that is so, e.g. if, after having come in, a food is converted into wind), but

when it has undergone this change it has passedaway: and the efficient cause

is not in the food.We have now developed the difficulties sufficiently and must therefore try

to find a solution of the problem. Our solution must preserve intact the three

characteristics of growth-that the growing thing persists, that it grows by the

accession (and diminishes by the departure) of something, and further that

every perceptible particle of it has become either larger or smaller. We must

recognize also (a) that the growing body is not ‘void’ and that yet there are

not two magnitudes in the same place, and (b) that it does not grow by the

accession of something incorporeal.

Two preliminary distinctions will prepare us to grasp the cause of growth.

We must note (i) that the organic parts grow by the growth of the tissues (for

every organ is composed of these as its constituents); and (ii) that flesh, bone,

and every such part-like every other thing which has its form immersed in

matter-has a twofold nature: for the form as well as the matter is called ‘flesh’

or ‘bone’.

Now, that any and every part of the tissue qua form should grow-and grow

by the accession of something-is possible, but not that any and every part of

the tissue qua matter should do so. For we must think of the tissue after the

image  of  flowing  water  that  is  measured  by  one  and  the  same  measure:

particle after particle comes-to-be, and each successive particle is different.

And it is in this sense that the matter of the flesh grows, some flowing out

and some flowing in fresh; not in the sense that fresh matter accedes to every

particle of it. There is, however, an accession to every part of its figure or

‘form’.

That growth has taken place proportionally, is more manifest in the organic

parts-e.g. in the hand. For there the fact that the matter is distinct from the

form is more manifest than in flesh, i.e. than in the tissues. That is why there

is a greater tendency to suppose that a corpse still possesses flesh and bone

than that it still has a hand or an arm.

  Hence in one sense it is true that any and every part of the flesh has grown;

but in another sense it is false. For there has been an accession to every part

of the flesh in respect to its form, but not in respect to its matter. The whole,

however, has become larger. And this increase is due (a) on the one hand to

the accession of something, which is called ‘food’ and is said to be ‘contrary’

to flesh, but (b) on the other hand to the transformation of this food into the

same form as that of flesh as if, e.g. ‘moist’ were to accede to ‘dry’ and,

having acceded, were to be transformed and to become ‘dry’. For in one

sense ‘Like grows by Like’, but in another sense ‘Unlike grows by Unlike’.One might discuss what must be the character of that ‘whereby’ a thing

grows. Clearly it must be potentially that which is growing-potentially flesh,

e.g. if it is flesh that is growing. Actually, therefore, it must be ‘other’ than

the growing thing. This ‘actual other’, then, has passed-away and come-to-be

flesh. But it has not been transformed into flesh alone by itself (for that would

have been a coming-to-be, not a growth): on the contrary, it is the growing

thing which has come-to-be flesh (and grown) by the food. In what way,

then, has the food been modified by the growing thing? Perhaps we should

say that it has been ‘mixed’ with it, as if one were to pour water into wine

and the wine were able to convert the new ingredient into wine. And as fire

lays hold of the inflammable, so the active principle of growth, dwelling in

the growing thing that which is actually flesh), lays hold of an acceding food

which is potentially flesh and converts it into actual flesh. The acceding food,

therefore, must be together with the growing thing: for if it were apart from it,

the change would be a coming-to-be. For it is possible to produce fire by

piling logs on to the already burning fire. That is ‘growth’. But when the logs

themselves are set on fire, that is ‘coming-to-be’.

  ‘Quantum-in-general’ does not come-to-be any more than ‘animal’ which

is neither man nor any other of the specific forms of animal: what ‘animal-in-

general’ is in coming-to-be, that ‘quantum-in-general’ is in growth. But what

does come-to-be in growth is flesh or bone-or a hand or arm (i.e. the tissues

of these organic parts). Such things come-to-be, then, by the accession not of

quantified-flesh but of a quantified-something. In so far as this acceding food

is potentially the double result e.g. is potentially so-much-flesh-it produces

growth: for it is bound to become actually both so-much and flesh. But in so

far as it is potentially flesh only, it nourishes: for it is thus that ‘nutrition’ and

‘growth’ differ by their definition. That is why a body’s’ nutrition’ continues

so  long  as  it  is  kept  alive  (even  when  it  is  diminishing),  though  not  its

‘growth’; and why nutrition, though ‘the same’ as growth, is yet different

from it in its actual being. For in so far as that which accedes is potentially

‘so much-flesh’ it tends to increase flesh: whereas, in so far as it is potentially

‘flesh’ only, it is nourishment.

The form of which we have spoken is a kind of power immersed in matter-

a duct, as it were. If, then, a matter accedes-a matter, which is potentially a

duct and also potentially possesses determinate quantity the ducts to which it

accedes will become bigger. But if it is no longer able to act-if it has been

weakened by the continued influx of matter, just as water, continually mixedin greater and greater quantity with wine, in the end makes the wine watery

and converts it into water-then it will cause a diminution of the quantum;

though still the form persists.

<

div class="section" title="6">


6


(In  discussing  the  causes  of  coming-tobe)  we  must  first  investigate  the

matter, i.e. the so-called ‘elements’. We must ask whether they really are

clements or not, i.e. whether each of them is eternal or whether there is a

sense in which they come-to-be: and, if they do come-to-be, whether all of

them  come-to-be  in  the  same  manner  reciprocally  out  of  one  another,  or

whether one amongst them is something primary. Hence we must begin by

explaining  certain  preliminary  matters,  about  which  the  statements  now

current are vague.

For all (the pluralist philosophers)—those who generate the ‘elements’ as

well as those who generate the bodies that are compounded of the elements—

make use of ‘dissociation’ and ‘association’, and of ‘action’ and ‘passion’.

Now ‘association’ is ‘combination’; but the precise meaning of the process

we call ‘combining’ has not been explained. Again, (all the monists make use

of ‘alteration’: but) without an agent and a patient there cannot be ‘altering’

any more than there can be ‘dissociating’ and ‘associating’. For not only

those who postulate a plurality of elements employ their reciprocal action and

passion to generate the compounds: those who derive things from a single

element  are  equally  compelled  to  introduce  ‘acting’.  And  in  this  respect

Diogenes is right when he argues that ‘unless all things were derived from

one, reciprocal action and passion could not have occurred’. The hot thing,

e.g. would not be cooled and the cold thing in turn be warmed: for heat and

cold do not change reciprocally into one another, but what changes (it is

clear) is the substratum. Hence, whenever there is action and passion between

two things, that which underlies them must be a single something. No doubt,

it is not true to say that all things are of this character: but it is true of all

things between which there is reciprocal action and passion.

But if we must investigate ‘action-passion’ and ‘combination’, we must

also investigate ‘contact’. For action and passion (in the proper sense of the

terms) can only occur between things which are such as to touch one another;nor can things enter into combination at all unless they have come into a

certain kind of contact. Hence we must give a definite account of these three

things—of ‘contact’, ‘combination’, and ‘acting’.

Let us start as follows. All things which admit of ‘combination’ must be

capable  of  reciprocal  contact:  and  the  same  is  true  of  any  two  things,  of

which one ‘acts’ and the other ‘suffers action’ in the proper sense of the

terms.  For  this  reason  we  must  treat  of  ‘contact’  first.  every  term  which

possesses a variety of meaning includes those various meanings either owing

to a mere coincidence of language, or owing to a real order of derivation in

the different things to which it is applied: but, though this may be taken to

hold of ‘contact’ as of all such terms, it is nevertheless true that contact’ in

the proper sense applies only to things which have ‘position’. And ‘position’

belongs only to those things which also have a Place’: for in so far as we

attribute ‘contact’ to the mathematical things, we must also attribute ‘place’

to them, whether they exist in separation or in some other fashion. Assuming,

therefore, that ‘to touch’ is-as we have defined it in a previous work’-’to have

the extremes together’, only those things will touch one another which, being

separate magnitudes and possessing position, have their extremes ‘together’.

And since position belongs only to those things which also have a ‘place’,

while the primary differentiation of ‘place’ is the above’ and ‘the below’ (and

the similar pairs of opposites), all things which touch one another will have

‘weight’ or ‘lightness’ either both these qualities or one or the other of them.

But bodies which are heavy or light are such as to ‘act’ and ‘suffer action’.

Hence it is clear that those things are by nature such as to touch one another,

which (being separate magnitudes) have their extremes ‘together’ and are

able to move, and be moved by, one another.

The manner in which the ‘mover’ moves the moved’ not always the same:

on the contrary, whereas one kind of ‘mover’ can only impart motion by

being itself moved, another kind can do so though remaining itself unmoved.

Clearly therefore we must recognize a corresponding variety in speaking of

the ‘acting’ thing too: for the ‘mover’ is said to ‘act’ (in a sense) and the

‘acting’ thing to ‘impart motion’. Nevertheless there is a difference and we

must  draw  a  distinction.  For  not  every  ‘mover’  can  ‘act’,  if  (a)  the  term

‘agent’ is to be used in contrast to ‘patient’ and (b) ‘patient’ is to be applied

only to those things whose motion is a ‘qualitative affection’-i.e. a quality,

like white’ or ‘hot’, in respect to which they are moved’ only in the sense that

they are ‘altered’: on the contrary, to ‘impart motion’ is a wider term than to‘act’. Still, so much, at any rate, is clear: the things which are ‘such as to

impart motion’, if that description be interpreted in one sense, will touch the

things which are ‘such as to be moved by them’-while they will not touch

them, if the description be interpreted in a different sense. But the disjunctive

definition of ‘touching’ must include and distinguish (a) ‘contact in general’

as the relation between two things which, having position, are such that one is

able to impart motion and the other to be moved, and (b) ‘reciprocal contact’

as the relation between two things, one able to impart motion and the other

able to be moved in such a way that ‘action and passion’ are predicable of

them.

As a rule, no doubt, if A touches B, B touches A. For indeed practically all

the ‘movers’ within our ordinary experience impart motion by being moved:

in their case, what touches inevitably must, and also evidently does, touch

something which reciprocally touches it. Yet, if A moves B, it is possible-as

we sometimes express it-for A ‘merely to touch’ B, and that which touches

need not touch a something which touches it. Nevertheless it is commonly

supposed that ‘touching’ must be reciprocal. The reason of this belief is that

‘movers’ which belong to the same kind as the ‘moved’ impart motion by

being moved. Hence if anything imparts motion without itself being moved,

it may touch the ‘moved’ and yet itself be touched by nothing-for we say

sometimes that the man who grieves us ‘touches’ us, but not that we ‘touch’

him.

The account just given may serve to distinguish and define the ‘contact’

which occurs in the things of Nature.

<

div class="section" title="7">


7


Next  in  order  we  must  discuss  ‘action’  and  ‘passion’.  The  traditional

theories on the subject are conflicting. For (i) most thinkers are unanimous in

maintaining (a) that ‘like’ is always unaffected by ‘like’, because (as they

argue) neither of two ‘likes’ is more apt than the other either to act or to

suffer  action,  since  all  the  properties  which  belong  to  the  one  belong

identically and in the same degree to the other; and (b) that ‘unlikes’, i.e.

‘differents’, are by nature such as to act and suffer action reciprocally. For

even when the smaller fire is destroyed by the greater, it suffers this effect(they say) owing to its ‘contrariety’ since the great is contrary to the small.

But (ii) Democritus dissented from all the other thinkers and maintained a

theory peculiar to himself. He asserts that agent and patient are identical, i.e.

‘like’. It is not possible (he says) that ‘others’, i.e. ‘differents’, should suffer

action from one another: on the contrary, even if two things, being ‘others’,

do act in some way on one another, this happens to them not qua ‘others’ but

qua possessing an identical property.

  Such, then, are the traditional theories, and it looks as if the statements of

their advocates were in manifest conflict. But the reason of this conflict is

that each group is in fact stating a part, whereas they ought to have taken a

comprehensive view of the subject as a whole. For (i) if A and B are ‘like’-

absolutely and in all respects without difference from one another —it is

reasonable to infer that neither is in any way affected by the other. Why,

indeed, should either of them tend to act any more than the other? Moreover,

if ‘like’ can be affected by ‘like’, a thing can also be affected by itself: and

yet if that were so-if ‘like’ tended in fact to act qua ‘like’-there would be

nothing indestructible or immovable, for everything would move itself. And

(ii) the same consequence follows if A and B are absolutely ‘other’, i.e. in no

respect identical. Whiteness could not be affected in any way by line nor line

by whiseness-except perhaps ‘coincidentally’, viz. if the line happened to be

white  or  black:  for  unless  two  things  either  are,  or  are  composed  of,

‘contraries’, neither drives the other out of its natural condition. But (iii) since

only those things which either involve a ‘contrariety’ or are ‘contraries’-and

not any things selected at random-are such as to suffer action and to act,

agent and patient must be ‘like’ (i.e. identical) in kind and yet ‘unlike’ (i.e.

contrary) in species. (For it is a law of nature that body is affected by body,

flavour by flavour, colour by colour, and so in general what belongs to any

kind by a member of the same kind-the reason being that ‘contraries’ are in

every  case  within  a  single  identical  kind,  and  it  is  ‘contraries’  which

reciprocally act and suffer action.) Hence agent and patient must be in one

sense identical, but in another sense other than (i.e. ‘unlike’) one another.

And  since  (a)  patient  and  agent  are  generically  identical  (i.e.  ‘like’)  but

specifically ‘unlike’, while (b) it is ‘contraries’ that exhibit this character: it is

clear that ‘contraries’ and their ‘intermediates’ are such as to suffer action

and to act reciprocally-for indeed it is these that constitute the entire sphere of

passing-away and coming-to-be.

We can now understand why fire heats and the cold thing cools, and ingeneral why the active thing assimilates to itself the patient. For agent and

patient are contrary to one another, and coming-to-be is a process into the

contrary: hence the patient must change into the agent, since it is only thus

that  coming-to  be  will  be  a  process  into  the  contrary.  And,  again,  it  is

intelligible that the advocates of both views, although their theories are not

the same, are yet in contact with the nature of the facts. For sometimes we

speak of the substratum as suffering action (e.g. of ‘the man’ as being healed,

being warmed and chilled, and similarly in all the other cases), but at other

times we say ‘what is cold is ‘being warmed’, ‘what is sick is being healed’:

and in both these ways of speaking we express the truth, since in one sense it

is  the  ‘matter’,  while  in  another  sense  it  is  the  ‘contrary’,  which  suffers

action.  (We  make  the  same  distinction  in  speaking  of  the  agent:  for

sometimes  we  say  that  ‘the  man’,  but  at  other  times  that  ‘what  is  hot’,

produces  heat.)  Now  the  one  group  of  thinkers  supposed  that  agent  and

patient  must  possess  something  identical,  because  they  fastened  their

attention on the substratum: while the other group maintained the opposite

because  their  attention  was  concentrated  on  the  ‘contraries’.  We  must

conceive the same account to hold of action and passion as that which is true

of ‘being moved’ and ‘imparting motion’. For the ‘mover’, like the ‘agent’,

has two meanings. Both (a) that which contains the originative source of the

motion  is  thought  to  ‘impart  motion’  (for  the  originative  source  is  first

amongst the causes), and also (b) that which is last, i.e. immediately next to

the moved thing and to the coming-to-be. A similar distinction holds also of

the agent: for we speak not only (a) of the doctor, but also (b) of the wine, as

healing. Now, in motion, there is nothing to prevent the firs; mover being

unmoved (indeed, as regards some ‘first’ movers’ this is actually necessary)

although the last mover always imparts motion by being itself moved: and, in

action, there is nothing to prevent the first agent being unaffected, while the

last agent only acts by suffering action itself. For agent and patient have not

the same matter, agent acts without being affected: thus the art of healing

produces health without itself being acted upon in any way by that which is

being healed. But (b) the food, in acting, is itself in some way acted upon:

for, in acting, it is simultaneously heated or cooled or otherwise affected.

Now the art of healing corresponds to an ‘originative source’, while the food

corresponds to ‘the last’ (i.e. ‘continuous’) mover.

  Those active powers, then, whose forms are not embodied in matter, are

unaffected: but those whose forms are in matter are such as to be affected inacting. For we maintain that one and the same ‘matter’ is equally, so to say,

the basis of either of the two opposed things-being as it were a ‘kind’; and

that that which can he hot must be made hot, provided the heating agent is

there, i.e. comes near. Hence (as we have said) some of the active powers are

unaffected while others are such as to be affected; and what holds of motion

is  true  also  of  the  active  powers.  For  as  in  motion  ‘the  first  mover’  is

unmoved, so among the active powers ‘the first agent’ is unaffected.

The active power is a ‘cause’ in the sense of that from which the process

originates: but the end, for the sake of which it takes place, is not ‘active’.

(That is why health is not ‘active’, except metaphorically.) For when the

agent is there, the patient he-comes something: but when ‘states’ are there,

the patient no longer becomes but already is-and ‘forms’ (i.e. lends’) are a

kind of ‘state’. As to the ‘matter’, it (qua matter) is passive. Now fire contains

‘the hot’ embodied in matter: but a ‘hot’ separate from matter (if such a thing

existed) could not suffer any action. Perhaps, indeed, it is impossible that ‘the

hot’ should exist in separation from matter: but if there are any entities thus

separable, what we are saying would be true of them.

We have thus explained what action and passion are, what things exhibit

them, why they do so, and in what manner. We must go on to discuss how it

is possible for action and passion to take place.

<

div class="section" title="8">


8


  Some philosophers think that the ‘last’ agent-the ‘agent’ in the strictest

sense-enters in through certain pores, and so the patient suffers action. It is in

this way, they assert, that we see and hear and exercise all our other senses.

Moreover, according to them, things are seen through air and water and other

transparent bodies, because such bodies possess pores, invisible indeed owing

to  their  minuteness,  but  close-set  and  arranged  in  rows:  and  the  more

transparent the body, the more frequent and serial they suppose its pores to

be. Such was the theory which some philosophers (induding Empedocles)

advanced in regard to the structure of certain bodies. They do not restrict it to

the bodies which act and suffer action: but ‘combination’ too, they say, takes

place ‘only between bodies whose pores are in reciprocal symmetry’. The

most systematic and consistent theory, however, and one that applied to allbodies, was advanced by Leucippus and Democritus: and, in maintaining it,

they took as their starting-point what naturally comes first.

For some of the older philosophers thought that ‘what is’ must of necessity

be ‘one’ and immovable. The void, they argue, ‘is not’: but unless there is a

void with a separate being of its own, ‘what is’ cannot be moved-nor again

can it be ‘many’, since there is nothing to keep things apart. And in this

respect,  they  insist,  the  view  that  the  universe  is  not  ‘continuous’  but

‘discretes-in-contact’ is no better than the view that there are ‘many’ (and not

‘one’)  and  a  void.  For  (suppose  that  the  universe  is  discretes-in-contact.

Then), if it is divisible through and through, there is no ‘one’, and therefore

no ‘many’ either, but the Whole is void; while to maintain that it is divisible

at some points, but not at others, looks like an arbitrary fiction. For up to

what  limit  is  it  divisible?  And  for  what  reason  is  part  of  the  Whole

indivisible,  i.e.  a  plenum,  and  part  divided?  Further,  they  maintain,  it  is

equally necessary to deny the existence of motion.

  Reasoning  in  this  way,  therefore,  they  were  led  to  transcend  sense-

perception, and to disregard it on the ground that ‘one ought to follow the

argument’: and so they assert that the universe is ‘one’ and immovable. Some

of them add that it is ‘infinite’, since the limit (if it had one) would be a limit

against the void.

  There were, then, certain thinkers who, for the reasons we have stated,

enunciated views of this kind as their theory of ‘The Truth’… . Moreover,

although these opinions appear to follow logically in a dialectical discussion,

yet to believe them seems next door to madness when one considers the facts.

For indeed no lunatic seems to be so far out of his senses as to suppose that

fire and ice are ‘one’: it is only between what is right and what seems right

from habit, that some people are mad enough to see no difference.

  Leucippus,  however,  thought  he  had  a  theory  which  harmonized  with

sense-perception  and  would  not  abolish  either  coming-to-be  and  passing-

away or motion and the multiplicity of things. He made these concessions to

the facts of perception: on the other hand, he conceded to the Monists that

there could be no motion without a void. The result is a theory which he

states as follows: ‘The void is a “not being”, and no part of “what is” is a

“not-being”;  for  what  “is”  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term  is  an  absolute

plenum. This plenum, however, is not “one”: on the contrary, it is a many”

infinite in number and invisible owing to the minuteness of their bulk. The

“many” move in the void (for there is a void): and by coming together theyproduce “coming to-be”, while by separating they produce “passing-away”.

Moreover, they act and suffer action wherever they chance to be in contact

(for there they are not “one”), and they generate by being put together and

becoming  intertwined.  From  the  genuinely-one,  on  the  other  hand,  there

never could have come-to-be a multiplicity, nor from the genuinely-many a

“one”: that is impossible. But’ (just as Empedocles and some of the other

philosophers  say  that  things  suffer  action  through  their  pores,  so)  ‘all

“alteration” and all “passion” take place in the way that has been explained:

breaking-up (i.e. passing-away) is effected by means of the void, and so too

is  growth-solids  creeping  in  to  fill  the  void  places.’  Empedocles  too  is

practically bound to adopt the same theory as Leucippus. For he must say that

there  are  certain  solids  which,  however,  are  indivisible-unless  there  are

continuous pores all through the body. But this last alternative is impossible:

for then there will be nothing solid in the body (nothing beside the pores) but

all of it will be void. It is necessary, therefore, for his ‘contiguous discretes’

to be indivisible, while the intervals between them-which he calls ‘pores’-

must be void. But this is precisely Leucippus’ theory of action and passion.

  Such, approximately, are the current explanations of the manner in which

some things ‘act’ while others ‘suffer action’. And as regards the Atomists, it

is not only clear what their explanation is: it is also obvious that it follows

with tolerable consistency from the assumptions they employ. But there is

less obvious consistency in the explanation offered by the other thinkers. It is

not  clear,  for  instance,  how,  on  the  theory  of  Empedocles,  there  is  to  be

‘passing-away’  as  well  as  ‘alteration’.  For  the  primary  bodies  of  the

Atomists-the primary constituents of which bodies are composed, and the

ultimate  elements  into  which  they  are  dissolved-are  indivisible,  differing

from one another only in figure. In the philosophy of Empedocles, on the

other hand, it is evident that all the other bodies down to the ‘elements’ have

their  coming-to-be  and  their  passingaway:  but  it  is  not  clear  how  the

‘elements’ themselves, severally in their aggregated masses, come-to-be and

pass-away. Nor is it possible for Empedocles to explain how they do so, since

he  does  not  assert  that  Fire  too  (and  similarly  every  one  of  his  other

‘elements’) possesses ‘elementary constituents’ of itself.

  Such an assertion would commit him to doctrines like those which Plato

has set forth in the Timaeus. For although both Plato and Leucippus postulate

elementary constituents that are indivisible and distinctively characterized by

figures,  there  is  this  great  difference  between  the  two  theories:  the‘indivisibles’ of Leucippus (i) are solids, while those of Plato are planes, and

(ii) are characterized by an infinite variety of figures, while the characterizing

figures employed by Plato are limited in number. Thus the ‘comings-to-be’

and  the  ‘dissociations’  result  from  the  ‘indivisibles’  (a)  according  to

Leucippus  through  the  void  and  through  contact  (for  it  is  at  the  point  of

contact that each of the composite bodies is divisible), but (b) according to

Plato in virtue of contact alone, since he denies there is a void.

Now we have discussed ‘indivisible planes’ in the preceding treatise.’ But

with regard to the assumption of ‘indivisible solids’, although we must not

now enter upon a detailed study of its consequences, the following criticisms

fall within the compass of a short digression: i. The Atomists are committed

to the view that every ‘indivisible’ is incapable alike of receiving a sensible

property  (for  nothing  can  ‘suffer  action’  except  through  the  void)  and  of

producing one-no ‘indivisible’ can be, e.g. either hard or cold. Yet it is surely

a paradox that an exception is made of ‘the hot’-’the hot’ being assigned as

peculiar to the spherical figure: for, that being so, its ‘contrary’ also (’the

cold’)  is  bound  to  belong  to  another  of  the  figures.  If,  however,  these

properties  (heat  and  cold)  do  belong  to  the  ‘indivisibles’,  it  is  a  further

paradox that they should not possess heaviness and lightness, and hardness

and softness. And yet Democritus says ‘the more any indivisible exceeds, the

heavier it is’-to which we must clearly add ‘and the hotter it is’. But if that is

their character, it is impossible they should not be affected by one another:

the ‘slightly-hot indivisible’, e.g. will inevitably suffer action from one which

far exceeds it in heat. Again, if any ‘indivisible’ is ‘hard’, there must also be

one which is ‘soft’: but ‘the soft’ derives its very name from the fact that it

suffers a certain action-for ‘soft’ is that which yields to pressure.

II. But further, not only is it paradoxical (i) that no property except figure

should belong to the ‘indivisibles’: it is also paradoxical (ii) that, if other

properties do belong to them, one only of these additional properties should

attach to each-e.g. that this ‘indivisible’ should be cold and that ‘indivisible’

hot. For, on that supposition, their substance would not even be uniform. And

it is equally impossible (iii) that more than one of these additional properties

should belong to the single ‘indivisible’. For, being indivisible, it will possess

these  properties  in  the  same  point-so  that,  if  it  ‘suffers  action’  by  being

chilled, it will also, qua chilled, ‘act’ or ‘suffer action’ in some other way.

And the same line of argument applies to all the other properties too: for the

difficulty we have just raised confronts, as a necessary consequence, all whoadvocate ‘indivisibles’ (whether solids or planes), since their ‘indivisibles’

cannot become either ‘rarer’ or ‘derser’ inasmuch as there is no void in them.

III. It is a further paradox that there should be small ‘indivisibles’, but not

large ones. For it is natural enough, from the ordinary point of view, that the

larger bodies should be more liable to fracture than the small ones, since they

(viz. the large bodies) are easily broken up because they collide with many

other bodies. But why should indivisibility as such be the property of small,

rather than of large, bodies?

IV. Again, is the substance of all those solids uniform, or do they fall into

sets  which  differ  from  one  another-as  if,  e.g.  some  of  them,  in  their

aggregated  bulk,  were  ‘fiery’,  others  earthy’?  For  (i)  if  all  of  them  are

uniform in substance, what is it that separated one from another? Or why,

when they come into contact, do they not coalesce into one, as drops of water

run  together  when  drop  touches  drop  (for  the  two  cases  are  precisely

parallel)? On the other hand (ii) if they fall into differing sets, how are these

characterized? It is clear, too, that these, rather than the ‘figures’, ought to be

postulated as ‘original reals’, i.e. causes from which the phenomena result.

Moreover, if they differed in substance, they would both act and suffer action

on coming into reciprocal contact.

V. Again, what is it which sets them moving? For if their ‘mover’ is other

than themselves, they are such as to ‘suffer action’. If, on the other hand,

each of them sets itself in motion, either (a) it will be divisible (’imparting

motion’ qua this, ‘being moved’ qua that), or (b) contrary properties will

attach to it in the same respect-i.e. ‘matter’ will be identical in-potentiality as

well as numerically-identical.

As  to  the  thinkers  who  explain  modification  of  property  through  the

movement  facilitated  by  the  pores,  if  this  is  supposed  to  occur

notwithstanding the fact that the pores are filled, their postulate of pores is

superfluous. For if the whole body suffers action under these conditions, it

would suffer action in the same way even if it had no pores but were just its

own continuous self. Moreover, how can their account of ‘vision through a

medium’ be correct? It is impossible for (the visual ray) to penetrate the

transparent bodies at their ‘contacts’; and impossible for it to pass through

their pores if every pore be full. For how will that differ from having no pores

at all? The body will be uniformly ‘full’ throughout. But, further, even if

these  passages,  though  they  must  contain  bodies,  are  ‘void’,  the  same

consequence will follow once more. And if they are ‘too minute to admit anybody’, it is absurd to suppose there is a ‘minute’ void and yet to deny the

existence of a ‘big’ one (no matter how small the ‘big’ may be), or to imagine

‘the void’ means anything else than a body’s place-whence it clearly follows

that to every body there will correspond a void of equal cubic capacity.

As a general criticism we must urge that to postulate pores is superfluous.

For if the agent produces no effect by touching the patient, neither will it

produce any by passing through its pores. On the other hand, if it acts by

contact, then-even without pores-some things will ‘suffer action’ and others

will  ‘act’,  provided  they  are  by  nature  adapted  for  reciprocal  action  and

passion. Our arguments have shown that it is either false or futile to advocate

pores in the sense in which some thinkers conceive them. But since bodies

are divisible through and through, the postulate of pores is ridiculous: for,

qua divisible, a body can fall into separate parts.

<

div class="section" title="9">


9


Let  explain  the  way  in  which  things  in  fact  possess  the  power  of

generating,  and  of  acting  and  suffering  action:  and  let  us  start  from  the

principle we have often enunciated. For, assuming the distinction between (a)

that which is potentially and (b) that which is actually such-and-such, it is the

nature of the first, precisely in so far as it is what it is, to suffer action through

and through, not merely to be susceptible in some parts while insusceptible in

others. But its susceptibility varies in degree, according as it is more or less;

such-and such, and one would be more justified in speaking of ‘pores’ in this

connexion: for instance, in the metals there are veins of ‘the susceptible’

stretching continuously through the substance.

So  long,  indeed,  as  any  body  is  naturally  coherent  and  one,  it  is

insusceptible. So, too, bodies are insusceptible so long as they are not in

contact either with one another or with other bodies which are by nature such

as to act and suffer action. (To illustrate my meaning: Fire heats not only

when in contact, but also from a distance. For the fire heats the air, and the

air-being by nature such as both to act and suffer action-heats the body.) But

the supposition that a body is ‘susceptible in some parts, but insusceptible in

others’ (is only possible for those who hold an erroneous view concerning the

divisibility  of  magnitudes.  For  us)  the  following  account  results  from  thedistinctions we established at the beginning. For (i) if magnitudes are not

divisible through and through-if, on the contrary, there are indivisible solids

or planes-then indeed no body would be susceptible through and through :but

neither would any be continuous. Since, however, (ii) this is false, i.e. since

every body is divisible, there is no difference between ‘having been divided

into parts which remain in contact’ and ‘being divisible’. For if a body ‘can

be separated at the contacts’ (as some thinkers express it), then, even though

it has not yet been divided, it will be in a state of dividedness-since, as it can

be divided, nothing inconceivable results. And (iii) the suposition is open to

this  general  objection-it  is  a  paradox  that  ‘passion’  should  occur  in  this

manner  only,  viz.  by  the  bodies  being  split.  For  this  theory  abolishes

‘alteration’: but we see the same body liquid at one time and solid at another,

without losing its continuity. It has suffered this change not by ‘division’ and

composition’, nor yet by ‘turning’ and ‘intercontact’ as Democritus asserts;

for it has passed from the liquid to the solid state without any change of

‘grouping’ or ‘position’ in the constituents of its substance. Nor are there

contained within it those ‘hard’ (i.e. congealed) particles ‘indivisible in their

bulk’: on the contrary, it is liquid-and again, solid and congealed-uniformly

all through. This theory, it must be added, makes growth and diminution

impossible also. For if there is to be opposition (instead of the growing thing

having changed as a whole, either by the admixture of something or by its

own transformation), increase of size will not have resulted in any and every

part.

So much, then, to establish that things generate and are generated, act and

suffer  action,  reciprocally;  and  to  distinguish  the  way  in  which  these

processes can occur from the (impossible) way in which some thinkers say

they occur.

<

div class="section" title="10">


10


But we have still to explain ‘combination’, for that was the third of the

subjects we originally proposed to discuss. Our explanation will proceed on

the same method as before. We must inquire: What is ‘combination’, and

what  is  that  which  can  ‘combine’?  Of  what  things,  and  under  what

conditions,  is  ‘combination’  a  property?  And,  further,  does  ‘combination’exist in fact, or is it false to assert its existence?

  For,  according  to  some  thinkers,  it  is  impossible  for  one  thing  to  be

combined  with  another.  They  argue  that  (i)  if  both  the  ‘combined’

constituents persist unaltered, they are no more ‘combined’ now than they

were  before,  but  are  in  the  same  condition:  while  (ii)  if  one  has  been

destroyed, the constituents have not been ‘combined’-on the contrary, one

constituent  is  and  the  other  is  not,  whereas  ‘combination’  demands

uniformity of condition in them both: and on the same principle (iii) even if

both the combining constituents have been destroyed as the result of their

coalescence, they cannot ‘have been combined’ since they have no being at

all.

  What we have in this argument is, it would seem, a demand for the precise

distinction of ‘combination’ from coming-to-be and passingaway (for it is

obvious that ‘combination’, if it exists, must differ from these processes) and

for the precise distinction of the ‘combinable’ from that which is such as to

come-to-be and pass-away. As soon, therefore, as these distinctions are clear,

the difficulties raised by the argument would be solved.

Now (i) we do not speak of the wood as ‘combined’ with the fire, nor of its

burning as a ‘combining’ either of its particles with one another or of itself

with the fire: what we say is that ‘the fire is coming-to-be, but the wood is

‘passing-away’. Similarly, we speak neither (ii) of the food as ‘combining’

with the body, nor (iii) of the shape as ‘combining’ with the wax and thus

fashioning the lump. Nor can body ‘combine’ with white, nor (to generalize)

‘properties’ and ‘states’ with ‘things’: for we see them persisting unaltered.

But again (iv) white and knowledge cannot be ‘combined’ either, nor any

other of the ‘adjectivals’. (Indeed, this is a blemish in the theory of those who

assert that ‘once upon a time all things were together and combined’. For not

everything  can  ‘combine’  with  everything.  On  the  contrary,  both  of  the

constituents that are combined in the compound must originally have existed

in separation: but no property can have separate existence.)

  Since, however, some things are-potentially while others are-actually, the

constituents combined in a compound can ‘be’ in a sense and yet ‘not-be’.

The compound may he-actually other than the constituents from which it has

resulted; nevertheless each of them may still he-potentially what it was before

they were combined, and both of them may survive undestroyed. (For this

was the difficulty that emerged in the previous argument: and it is evident

that the combining constituents not only coalesce, having formerly existed inseparation, but also can again be separated out from the compound.) The

constituents,  therefore,  neither  (a)  persist  actually,  as  ‘body’  and  ‘white’

persist:  nor  (b)  are  they  destroyed  (either  one  of  them  or  both),  for  their

‘power of action’ is preserved. Hence these difficulties may be dismissed: but

the  problem  immediately  connected  with  them-whether  combination  is

something relative to perception’ must be set out and discussed.

  When the combining constituents have been divided into parts so small,

and  have  been  juxtaposed  in  such  a  manner,  that  perception  fails  to

discriminate them one from another, have they then ‘been combined Or ought

we to say ‘No, not until any and every part of one constituent is juxtaposed to

a part of the other’? The term, no doubt, is applied in the former sense: we

speak, e.g. of wheat having been ‘combined’ with barley when each grain of

the one is juxtaposed to a grain of the other. But every body is divisible and

therefore, since body ‘combined’ with body is uniform in texture throughout,

any and every part of each constituent ought to be juxtaposed to a part of the

other.

No body, however, can be divided into its ‘least’ parts: and ‘composition’

is not identical with ‘combination’, but other than it. From these premises it

clearly  follows  (i)  that  so  long  as  the  constituents  are  preserved  in  small

particles,  we  must  not  speak  of  them  as  ‘combined’.  (For  this  will  be  a

‘composition’ instead of a ‘blending’ or ‘combination’: nor will every portion

of the resultant exhibit the same ratio between its constituents as the whole.

But we maintain that, if ‘combination’ has taken place, the compound must

be uniform in texture throughout-any part of such a compound being the

same  as  the  whole,  just  as  any  part  of  water  is  water:  whereas,  if

‘combination’ is ‘composition of the small particles’, nothing of the kind will

happen. On the contrary, the constituents will only be ‘combined’ relatively

to perception: and the same thing will be ‘combined’ to one percipient, if his

sight is not sharp, (but not to another,) while to the eye of Lynceus nothing

will be ‘combined’.) It clearly follows (ii) that we must not speak of the

constituents as ‘combined in virtue of a division such that any and every part

of each is juxtaposed to a part of the other: for it is impossible for them to be

thus  divided.  Either,  then,  there  is  no  ‘combination’,  or  we  have  still  to

explain the manner in which it can take place.

Now, as we maintain, some things are such as to act and others such as to

suffer action from them. Moreover, some things-viz. those Which have the

same matter-’reciprocate’, i.e. are such as to act upon one another and tosuffer action from one another; while other things, viz. agents which have not

the same matter as their patients, act without themselves suffering action.

Such agents cannot ‘combine’-that is why neither the art of healing nor health

produces health by ‘combining’ with the bodies of the patients. Amongst

those things, however, which are reciprocally active and passive, some are

easily-divisible. Now (i) if a great quantity (or a large bulk) of one of these

easily-divisible ‘reciprocating’ materials be brought together with a little (or

with a small piece) of another, the effect produced is not ‘combination’, but

increase  of  the  dominant:  for  the  other  material  is  transformed  into  the

dominant. (That is why a drop of wine does not ‘combine’ with ten thousand

gallons of water: for its form is dissolved, and it is changed so as to merge in

the total volume of water.) On the other hand (ii) when there is a certain

equilibrium between their ‘powers of action’, then each of them changes out

of its own nature towards the dominant: yet neither becomes the other, but

both become an intermediate with properties common to both.

  Thus it is clear that only those agents are ‘combinable’ which involve a

contrariety-for these are such as to suffer action reciprocally. And, further,

they combine more freely if small pieces of each of them are juxtaposed. For

in that condition they change one another more easily and more quickly;

whereas this effect takes a long time when agent and patient are present in

bulk.

  Hence, amongst the divisible susceptible materials, those whose shape is

readily adaptable have a tendency to combine: for they are easily divided into

small particles, since that is precisely what ‘being readily adaptable in shape’

implies.  For  instance,  liquids  are  the  most  ‘combinable’  of  all  bodies-

because,  of  all  divisible  materials,  the  liquid  is  most  readily  adaptable  in

shape,  unless  it  be  viscous.  Viscous  liquids,  it  is  true,  produce  no  effect

except to increase the volume and bulk. But when one of the constituents is

alone susceptible-or superlatively susceptible, the other being susceptible in a

very slight degree-the compound resulting from their combination is either no

greater in volume or only a little greater. This is what happens when tin is

combined with bronze. For some things display a hesitating and ambiguous

attitude towards one another-showing a slight tendency to combine and also

an inclination to behave as ‘receptive matter’ and ‘form’ respectively. The

behaviour of these metals is a case in point. For the tin almost vanishes,

behaving as if it were an immaterial property of the bronze: having been

combined, it disappears, leaving no trace except the colour it has imparted to