                            The Complete Aristotle

                                          Aristotle







Published: -322
Categorie(s): Non-Fiction, Philosophy
Source: http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/a/aristotleAbout Aristotle:

  Aristotle (384 BC – 322 BC) was a Greek philosopher, a student of Plato

and  teacher  of  Alexander  the  Great.  His  writings  cover  many  subjects,

including  physics,  metaphysics,  poetry,  theater,  music,  logic,  rhetoric,

politics, government, ethics, biology, and zoology. Together with Plato and

Socrates (Plato's teacher), Aristotle is one of the most important founding

figures  in  Western  philosophy.  Aristotle's  writings  constitute  a  first  at

creating  a  comprehensive  system  of  Western  philosophy,  encompassing

morality  and  aesthetics,  logic  and  science,  politics  and  metaphysics.

Aristotle's  views  on  the  physical  sciences  profoundly  shaped  medieval

scholarship, and their influence extended well into the Renaissance, although

they  were  ultimately  replaced  by  Newtonian  physics.  In  the  biological

sciences, some of his observations were confirmed to be accurate only in the

nineteenth century. His works contain the earliest known formal study of

logic,  which  was  incorporated  in  the  late  nineteenth  century  into  modern

formal logic. In metaphysics, Aristotelianism had a profound influence on

philosophical and theological thinking in the Islamic and Jewish traditions in

the Middle Ages, and it continues to influence Christian theology, especially

Eastern  Orthodox  theology,  and  the  scholastic  tradition  of  the  Catholic

Church. His ethics, though always influential, gained renewed interest with

the  modern  advent  of  virtue  ethics.  All  aspects  of  Aristotle's  philosophy

continue to be the object of active academic study today. Though Aristotle

wrote many elegant treatises and dialogues (Cicero described his literary style

as "a river of gold"), it is thought that the majority of his writings are now

lost and only about one-third of the original works have survived. Despite the

far-reaching appeal that Aristotle's works have traditionally enjoyed, today

modern scholarship questions a substantial portion of the Aristotelian corpus

as authentically Aristotle's own.


Note: This book is brought to you by Feedbooks

http://www.feedbooks.com

Strictly for personal use, do not use this file for commercial purposes.                            About this Publication


This  publication  was  adapted  from  the  web  edition  published  by

eBooks@Adelaide  (http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/a/aristotle/),  which  is  part

of  the  online  ebook  library  of  The  University  of  Adelaide  Library  at  the

University of Adelaide in South Australia.  That edition was rendered into

HTML by Steve Thomas and last updated in 2007.  The complete works of

Aristotle  and  their  translations  in  the  web  edition  are  reproduced  in  this

compilation under a Creative Commons License, and ergo this publication

falls under the same license.  The English translations for many of the works

can also be found elsewhere on the Internet; especially at Project Gutenberg

  (http://www.gutenberg.org/).  The University of Adelaide Library is located

on North Terrace in Adelaide, South Australia 5005, AUSTRALIA.  It may

be reached by telephone (+61 8 8303 5372), fax (+61 8 8303 4369), or email

(ebooks@adelaide.edu.au). The license

    (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/2.5/au/) states the following:


You are free to copy, distribute, display, and perform the work, and to

  make derivative works under the following conditions: you must

  attribute the work in the manner specified by the licensor; you may not

use this work for commercial purposes; if you alter, transform, or build

  upon this work, you may distribute the resulting work only under a

  license identical to this one.  For any reuse or distribution, you must

  make clear to others the license terms of this work.  Any of these

  conditions can be waived if you get permission from the licensor.  Your

fair use and other rights are in no way affected by the above.


  Compilation and organization of this publication, and creation of the book

cover,  is  all  courtesy  of  atheologic@gmail.com.    To  learn  more  about

Aristotle, his works, and the translators, check out Wikipedia (but only trust

what you can verify).  A note should be made that none of the writings have

been  edited  from  its  online  source.      However,  some  words  have  been

changed to lowercase lettering, and any errors found by readers should be

reported to eBooks@Adelaide.                                Table of Contents


  The Complete Aristotle


  Part 1: Logic (Organon)

  Categories, translated by E. M. Edghill

On Interpretation, translated by E. M. Edghill

  Prior Analytics (2 Books), translated by A. J. Jenkinson

  Posterior Analytics (2 Books), translated by G. R. G. Mure

Topics (8 Books), translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge

  Sophistical Refutations, translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge

  Part 2: Universal Physics

  Physics (8 Books), translated by R. P. Hardie and R. K. Gaye

On the Heavens (4 Books), translated by J. L. Stocks

On Gerneration and Corruption (2 Books), translated by H. H. Joachim

  Meteorology (4 Books), translated by E. W. Webster

  Part 3: Human Physics

On the Soul (3 Books), translated by J. A. Smith

On Sense and the Sensible, translated by J. I. Beare

On Memory and Reminiscence, translated by J. I. Beare

On Sleep and Sleeplessness, translated by J. I. Beare

On Dreams, translated by J. I. Beare

On Prophesying by Dreams, translated by J. I. Beare

On Longevity and Shortness of Life, translated by G. R. T. Ross

On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration, translated by G. R.

T. Ross

  Part 4: Animal Physics

The  History  of  Animals  (9  Books),  translated  by  D'Arcy  Wentworth

Thompson

On the Parts of Animals (4 Books), translated by William Ogle

On the Motion of Animals, translated by A. S. L. Farquharson

On the Gait of Animals, translated by A. S. L. Farquharson

On the Generation of Animals (5 Books), translated by Arthur Platt

  Part 5: Metaphysics

(15 Books), translated by W. D. Ross

  Part 6: Ethics and Politics  Nicomachean Ethics (10 Books), translated by W. D. Ross

  Politics (8 Books), translated by Benjamin Jowett

The Athenian Constitution, translated by Sir Frederic G. Kenyon

  Part 7: Aesthetic Writings

  Rhetoric (3 Books), translated by W. Rhys Roberts

  Poetics, translated by S. H. Butcher

 


  eBooks@Adelaide, 2007

  Steve Thomas                                    Part 1


                        Logic (Organon)                                      Categories


Translated by E. M. Edghill


1


  Things  are  said  to  be  named  ‘equivocally’  when,  though  they  have  a

common name, the definition corresponding with the name differs for each.

Thus, a real man and a figure in a picture can both lay claim to the name

‘animal’;  yet  these  are  equivocally  so  named,  for,  though  they  have  a

common name, the definition corresponding with the name differs for each.

For should any one define in what sense each is an animal, his definition in

the one case will be appropriate to that case only.

On the other hand, things are said to be named ‘univocally’ which have

both the name and the definition answering to the name in common. A man

and an ox are both ‘animal’, and these are univocally so named, inasmuch as

not only the name, but also the definition, is the same in both cases: for if a

man should state in what sense each is an animal, the statement in the one

case would be identical with that in the other.

  Things are said to be named ‘derivatively’, which derive their name from

some other name, but differ from it in termination. Thus the grammarian

derives his name from the word ‘grammar’, and the courageous man from the

word ‘courage’.


2


  Forms of speech are either simple or composite. Examples of the latter are

such expressions as ‘the man runs’, ‘the man wins’; of the former ‘man’,

‘ox’, ‘runs’, ‘wins’.

Of  things  themselves  some  are  predicable  of  a  subject,  and  are  never

present in a subject. Thus ‘man’ is predicable of the individual man, and is

never present in a subject.

By being ‘present in a subject’ I do not mean present as parts are present in

a whole, but being incapable of existence apart from the said subject.

  Some things, again, are present in a subject, but are never predicable of asubject. For instance, a certain point of grammatical knowledge is present in

the mind, but is not predicable of any subject; or again, a certain whiteness

may be present in the body (for colour requires a material basis), yet it is

never predicable of anything.

  Other  things,  again,  are  both  predicable  of  a  subject  and  present  in  a

subject. Thus while knowledge is present in the human mind, it is predicable

of grammar.

  There is, lastly, a class of things which are neither present in a subject nor

predicable of a subject, such as the individual man or the individual horse.

But, to speak more generally, that which is individual and has the character of

a unit is never predicable of a subject. Yet in some cases there is nothing to

prevent such being present in a subject. Thus a certain point of grammatical

knowledge is present in a subject.


3


  When one thing is predicated of another, all that which is predicable of the

predicate will be predicable also of the subject. Thus, ‘man’ is predicated of

the individual man; but ‘animal’ is predicated of ‘man’; it will, therefore, be

predicable of the individual man also: for the individual man is both ‘man’

and ‘animal’.

If genera are different and co-ordinate, their differentiae are themselves

different  in  kind.  Take  as  an  instance  the  genus  ‘animal’  and  the  genus

‘knowledge’. ‘With feet’, ‘two-footed’, ‘winged’, ‘aquatic’, are differentiae

of  ‘animal’;  the  species  of  knowledge  are  not  distinguished  by  the  same

differentiae. One species of knowledge does not differ from another in being

‘two-footed’.

But where one genus is subordinate to another, there is nothing to prevent

their having the same differentiae: for the greater class is predicated of the

lesser, so that all the differentiae of the predicate will be differentiae also of

the subject.


4


  Expressions which are in no way composite signify substance, quantity,

quality, relation, place, time, position, state, action, or affection. To sketchmy  meaning  roughly,  examples  of  substance  are  ‘man’  or  ‘the  horse’,  of

quantity, such terms as ‘two cubits long’ or ‘three cubits long’, of quality,

such  attributes  as  ‘white’,  ‘grammatical’.  ‘Double’,  ‘half’,  ‘greater’,  fall

under the category of relation; ‘in a the market place’, ‘in the Lyceum’, under

that of place; ‘yesterday’, ‘last year’, under that of time. ‘Lying’, ‘sitting’, are

terms indicating position, ‘shod’, ‘armed’, state; ‘to lance’, ‘to cauterize’,

action; ‘to be lanced’, ‘to be cauterized’, affection.

No one of these terms, in and by itself, involves an affirmation; it is by the

combination  of  such  terms  that  positive  or  negative  statements  arise.  For

every  assertion  must,  as  is  admitted,  be  either  true  or  false,  whereas

expressions  which  are  not  in  any  way  composite  such  as  ‘man’,  ‘white’,

‘runs’, ‘wins’, cannot be either true or false.


5


  Substance, in the truest and primary and most definite sense of the word, is

that which is neither predicable of a subject nor present in a subject; for

instance, the individual man or horse. But in a secondary sense those things

are called substances within which, as species, the primary substances are

included; also those which, as genera, include the species. For instance, the

individual man is included in the species ‘man’, and the genus to which the

species belongs is ‘animal’; these, therefore-that is to say, the species ‘man’

and the genus ‘animal,-are termed secondary substances.

It is plain from what has been said that both the name and the definition of

the  predicate  must  be  predicable  of  the  subject.  For  instance,  ‘man’  is

predicted of the individual man. Now in this case the name of the species

man’ is applied to the individual, for we use the term ‘man’ in describing the

individual;  and  the  definition  of  ‘man’  will  also  be  predicated  of  the

individual man, for the individual man is both man and animal. Thus, both

the name and the definition of the species are predicable of the individual.

  With regard, on the other hand, to those things which are present in a

subject, it is generally the case that neither their name nor their definition is

predicable of that in which they are present. Though, however, the definition

is never predicable, there is nothing in certain cases to prevent the name

being used. For instance, ‘white’ being present in a body is predicated of that

in which it is present, for a body is called white: the definition, however, of

the colour white’ is never predicable of the body.  Everything  except  primary  substances  is  either  predicable  of  a  primary

substance  or  present  in  a  primary  substance.  This  becomes  evident  by

reference to particular instances which occur. ‘Animal’ is predicated of the

species ‘man’, therefore of the individual man, for if there were no individual

man of whom it could be predicated, it could not be predicated of the species

‘man’ at all. Again, colour is present in body, therefore in individual bodies,

for if there were no individual body in which it was present, it could not be

present in body at all. Thus everything except primary substances is either

predicated of primary substances, or is present in them, and if these last did

not exist, it would be impossible for anything else to exist.

Of  secondary  substances,  the  species  is  more  truly  substance  than  the

genus, being more nearly related to primary substance. For if any one should

render an account of what a primary substance is, he would render a more

instructive account, and one more proper to the subject, by stating the species

than by stating the genus. Thus, he would give a more instructive account of

an individual man by stating that he was man than by stating that he was

animal, for the former description is peculiar to the individual in a greater

degree, while the latter is too general. Again, the man who gives an account

of the nature of an individual tree will give a more instructive account by

mentioning the species ‘tree’ than by mentioning the genus ‘plant’.

  Moreover,  primary  substances  are  most  properly  called  substances  in

virtue of the fact that they are the entities which underlie every. else, and that

everything else is either predicated of them or present in them. Now the same

relation  which  subsists  between  primary  substance  and  everything  else

subsists also between the species and the genus: for the species is to the

genus as subject is to predicate, since the genus is predicated of the species,

whereas  the  species  cannot  be  predicated  of  the  genus.  Thus  we  have  a

second ground for asserting that the species is more truly substance than the

genus.

Of species themselves, except in the case of such as are genera, no one is

more truly substance than another. We should not give a more appropriate

account of the individual man by stating the species to which he belonged,

than  we  should  of  an  individual  horse  by  adopting  the  same  method  of

definition.  In  the  same  way,  of  primary  substances,  no  one  is  more  truly

substance than another; an individual man is not more truly substance than an

individual ox.

It is, then, with good reason that of all that remains, when we excludeprimary  substances,  we  concede  to  species  and  genera  alone  the  name

‘secondary  substance’,  for  these  alone  of  all  the  predicates  convey  a

knowledge of primary substance. For it is by stating the species or the genus

that  we  appropriately  define  any  individual  man;  and  we  shall  make  our

definition more exact by stating the former than by stating the latter. All other

things that we state, such as that he is white, that he runs, and so on, are

irrelevant to the definition. Thus it is just that these alone, apart from primary

substances, should be called substances.

  Further,  primary  substances  are  most  properly  so  called,  because  they

underlie and are the subjects of everything else. Now the same relation that

subsists between primary substance and everything else subsists also between

the species and the genus to which the primary substance belongs, on the one

hand, and every attribute which is not included within these, on the other. For

these are the subjects of all such. If we call an individual man ‘skilled in

grammar’, the predicate is applicable also to the species and to the genus to

which he belongs. This law holds good in all cases.

It is a common characteristic of all sub. stance that it is never present in a

subject. For primary substance is neither present in a subject nor predicated

of a subject; while, with regard to secondary substances, it is clear from the

following arguments (apart from others) that they are not present in a subject.

For  ‘man’  is  predicated  of  the  individual  man,  but  is  not  present  in  any

subject: for manhood is not present in the individual man. In the same way,

‘animal’ is also predicated of the individual man, but is not present in him.

Again, when a thing is present in a subject, though the name may quite well

be applied to that in which it is present, the definition cannot be applied. Yet

of secondary substances, not only the name, but also the definition, applies to

the subject: we should use both the definition of the species and that of the

genus with reference to the individual man. Thus substance cannot be present

in a subject.

Yet this is not peculiar to substance, for it is also the case that differentiae

cannot  be  present  in  subjects.  The  characteristics  ‘terrestrial’  and  ‘two-

footed’ are predicated of the species ‘man’, but not present in it. For they are

not in man. Moreover, the definition of the differentia may be predicated of

that  of  which  the  differentia  itself  is  predicated.  For  instance,  if  the

characteristic ‘terrestrial’ is predicated of the species ‘man’, the definition

also of that characteristic may be used to form the predicate of the species

‘man’: for ‘man’ is terrestrial.The fact that the parts of substances appear to be present in the whole, as in

a subject, should not make us apprehensive lest we should have to admit that

such parts are not substances: for in explaining the phrase ‘being present in a

subject’, we stated’ that we meant ‘otherwise than as parts in a whole’.

It is the mark of substances and of differentiae that, in all propositions of

which they form the predicate, they are predicated univocally. For all such

propositions have for their subject either the individual or the species. It is

true that, inasmuch as primary substance is not predicable of anything, it can

never form the predicate of any proposition. But of secondary substances, the

species is predicated of the individual, the genus both of the species and of

the individual. Similarly the differentiae are predicated of the species and of

the individuals. Moreover, the definition of the species and that of the genus

are applicable to the primary substance, and that of the genus to the species.

For  all  that  is  predicated  of  the  predicate  will  be  predicated  also  of  the

subject. Similarly, the definition of the differentiae will be applicable to the

species  and  to  the  individuals.  But  it  was  stated  above  that  the  word

‘univocal’ was applied to those things which had both name and definition in

common. It is, therefore, established that in every proposition, of which either

substance or a differentia forms the predicate, these are predicated univocally.

All substance appears to signify that which is individual. In the case of

primary substance this is indisputably true, for the thing is a unit. In the case

of secondary substances, when we speak, for instance, of ‘man’ or ‘animal’,

our form of speech gives the impression that we are here also indicating that

which is individual, but the impression is not strictly true; for a secondary

substance is not an individual, but a class with a certain qualification; for it is

not one and single as a primary substance is; the words ‘man’, ‘animal’, are

predicable of more than one subject.

Yet species and genus do not merely indicate quality, like the term ‘white’;

‘white’ indicates quality and nothing further, but species and genus determine

the quality with reference to a substance: they signify substance qualitatively

differentiated. The determinate qualification covers a larger field in the case

of the genus that in that of the species: he who uses the word ‘animal’ is

herein using a word of wider extension than he who uses the word ‘man’.

  Another mark of substance is that it has no contrary. What could be the

contrary of any primary substance, such as the individual man or animal? It

has  none.  Nor  can  the  species  or  the  genus  have  a  contrary.  Yet  this

characteristic is not peculiar to substance, but is true of many other things,such as quantity. There is nothing that forms the contrary of ‘two cubits long’

or of ‘three cubits long’, or of ‘ten’, or of any such term. A man may contend

that ‘much’ is the contrary of ‘little’, or ‘great’ of ‘small’, but of definite

quantitative terms no contrary exists.

  Substance, again, does not appear to admit of variation of degree. I do not

mean by this that one substance cannot be more or less truly substance than

another, for it has already been stated’ that this is the case; but that no single

substance admits of varying degrees within itself. For instance, one particular

substance, ‘man’, cannot be more or less man either than himself at some

other  time  or  than  some  other  man.  One  man  cannot  be  more  man  than

another, as that which is white may be more or less white than some other

white object, or as that which is beautiful may be more or less beautiful than

some other beautiful object. The same quality, moreover, is said to subsist in

a thing in varying degrees at different times. A body, being white, is said to

be whiter at one time than it was before, or, being warm, is said to be warmer

or less warm than at some other time. But substance is not said to be more or

less that which it is: a man is not more truly a man at one time than he was

before, nor is anything, if it is substance, more or less what it is. Substance,

then, does not admit of variation of degree.

The most distinctive mark of substance appears to be that, while remaining

numerically one and the same, it is capable of admitting contrary qualities.

From among things other than substance, we should find ourselves unable to

bring forward any which possessed this mark. Thus, one and the same colour

cannot be white and black. Nor can the same one action be good and bad: this

law  holds  good  with  everything  that  is  not  substance.  But  one  and  the

selfsame substance, while retaining its identity, is yet capable of admitting

contrary qualities. The same individual person is at one time white, at another

black, at one time warm, at another cold, at one time good, at another bad.

This capacity is found nowhere else, though it might be maintained that a

statement or opinion was an exception to the rule. The same statement, it is

agreed, can be both true and false. For if the statement ‘he is sitting’ is true,

yet, when the person in question has risen, the same statement will be false.

The same applies to opinions. For if any one thinks truly that a person is

sitting, yet, when that person has risen, this same opinion, if still held, will be

false. Yet although this exception may be allowed, there is, nevertheless, a

difference in the manner in which the thing takes place. It is by themselves

changing that substances admit contrary qualities. It is thus that that whichwas hot becomes cold, for it has entered into a different state. Similarly that

which was white becomes black, and that which was bad good, by a process

of change; and in the same way in all other cases it is by changing that

substances are capable of admitting contrary qualities. But statements and

opinions themselves remain unaltered in all respects: it is by the alteration in

the  facts  of  the  case  that  the  contrary  quality  comes  to  be  theirs.  The

statement ‘he is sitting’ remains unaltered, but it is at one time true, at another

false, according to circumstances. What has been said of statements applies

also to opinions. Thus, in respect of the manner in which the thing takes

place,  it  is  the  peculiar  mark  of  substance  that  it  should  be  capable  of

admitting contrary qualities; for it is by itself changing that it does so.

If, then, a man should make this exception and contend that statements and

opinions  are  capable  of  admitting  contrary  qualities,  his  contention  is

unsound.  For  statements  and  opinions  are  said  to  have  this  capacity,  not

because they themselves undergo modification, but because this modification

occurs  in  the  case  of  something  else.  The  truth  or  falsity  of  a  statement

depends on facts, and not on any power on the part of the statement itself of

admitting contrary qualities. In short, there is nothing which can alter the

nature  of  statements  and  opinions.  As,  then,  no  change  takes  place  in

themselves, these cannot be said to be capable of admitting contrary qualities.

But  it  is  by  reason  of  the  modification  which  takes  place  within  the

substance itself that a substance is said to be capable of admitting contrary

qualities;  for  a  substance  admits  within  itself  either  disease  or  health,

whiteness or blackness. It is in this sense that it is said to be capable of

admitting contrary qualities.

To sum up, it is a distinctive mark of substance, that, while remaining

numerically one and the same, it is capable of admitting contrary qualities,

the modification taking place through a change in the substance itself.

Let these remarks suffice on the subject of substance.


6


  Quantity is either discrete or continuous. Moreover, some quantities are

such that each part of the whole has a relative position to the other parts:

others have within them no such relation of part to part.

  Instances  of  discrete  quantities  are  number  and  speech;  of  continuous,

lines, surfaces, solids, and, besides these, time and place.In the case of the parts of a number, there is no common boundary at

which they join. For example: two fives make ten, but the two fives have no

common boundary, but are separate; the parts three and seven also do not join

at any boundary. Nor, to generalize, would it ever be possible in the case of

number that there should be a common boundary among the parts; they are

always separate. Number, therefore, is a discrete quantity.

The same is true of speech. That speech is a quantity is evident: for it is

measured in long and short syllables. I mean here that speech which is vocal.

Moreover, it is a discrete quantity for its parts have no common boundary.

There  is  no  common  boundary  at  which  the  syllables  join,  but  each  is

separate and distinct from the rest.

A line, on the other hand, is a continuous quantity, for it is possible to find

a  common  boundary  at  which  its  parts  join.  In  the  case  of  the  line,  this

common boundary is the point; in the case of the plane, it is the line: for the

parts of the plane have also a common boundary. Similarly you can find a

common boundary in the case of the parts of a solid, namely either a line or a

plane.

  Space and time also belong to this class of quantities. Time, past, present,

and  future,  forms  a  continuous  whole.  Space,  likewise,  is  a  continuous

quantity; for the parts of a solid occupy a certain space, and these have a

common boundary; it follows that the parts of space also, which are occupied

by the parts of the solid, have the same common boundary as the parts of the

solid. Thus, not only time, but space also, is a continuous quantity, for its

parts have a common boundary.

  Quantities consist either of parts which bear a relative position each to

each, or of parts which do not. The parts of a line bear a relative position to

each other, for each lies somewhere, and it would be possible to distinguish

each, and to state the position of each on the plane and to explain to what sort

of part among the rest each was contiguous. Similarly the parts of a plane

have position, for it could similarly be stated what was the position of each

and what sort of parts were contiguous. The same is true with regard to the

solid and to space. But it would be impossible to show that the arts of a

number had a relative position each to each, or a particular position, or to

state what parts were contiguous. Nor could this be done in the case of time,

for none of the parts of time has an abiding existence, and that which does

not abide can hardly have position. It would be better to say that such parts

had a relative order, in virtue of one being prior to another. Similarly withnumber: in counting, ‘one’ is prior to ‘two’, and ‘two’ to ‘three’, and thus the

parts of number may be said to possess a relative order, though it would be

impossible to discover any distinct position for each. This holds good also in

the case of speech. None of its parts has an abiding existence: when once a

syllable is pronounced, it is not possible to retain it, so that, naturally, as the

parts do not abide, they cannot have position. Thus, some quantities consist

of parts which have position, and some of those which have not.

  Strictly speaking, only the things which I have mentioned belong to the

category of quantity: everything else that is called quantitative is a quantity in

a  secondary  sense.  It  is  because  we  have  in  mind  some  one  of  these

quantities, properly so called, that we apply quantitative terms to other things.

We speak of what is white as large, because the surface over which the white

extends is large; we speak of an action or a process as lengthy, because the

time  covered  is  long;  these  things  cannot  in  their  own  right  claim  the

quantitative epithet. For instance, should any one explain how long an action

was, his statement would be made in terms of the time taken, to the effect that

it lasted a year, or something of that sort. In the same way, he would explain

the size of a white object in terms of surface, for he would state the area

which it covered. Thus the things already mentioned, and these alone, are in

their intrinsic nature quantities; nothing else can claim the name in its own

right, but, if at all, only in a secondary sense.

  Quantities  have  no  contraries.  In  the  case  of  definite  quantities  this  is

obvious; thus, there is nothing that is the contrary of ‘two cubits long’ or of

‘three cubits long’, or of a surface, or of any such quantities. A man might,

indeed, argue that ‘much’ was the contrary of ‘little’, and ‘great’ of ‘small’.

But  these  are  not  quantitative,  but  relative;  things  are  not  great  or  small

absolutely, they are so called rather as the result of an act of comparison. For

instance, a mountain is called small, a grain large, in virtue of the fact that the

latter  is  greater  than  others  of  its  kind,  the  former  less.  Thus  there  is  a

reference here to an external standard, for if the terms ‘great’ and ‘small’

were used absolutely, a mountain would never be called small or a grain

large. Again, we say that there are many people in a village, and few in

Athens, although those in the city are many times as numerous as those in the

village: or we say that a house has many in it, and a theatre few, though those

in the theatre far outnumber those in the house. The terms ‘two cubits long,

“three cubits long,’ and so on indicate quantity, the terms ‘great’ and ‘small’

indicate  relation,  for  they  have  reference  to  an  external  standard.  It  is,therefore, plain that these are to be classed as relative.

  Again,  whether  we  define  them  as  quantitative  or  not,  they  have  no

contraries: for how can there be a contrary of an attribute which is not to be

apprehended in or by itself, but only by reference to something external?

Again, if ‘great’ and ‘small’ are contraries, it will come about that the same

subject can admit contrary qualities at one and the same time, and that things

will themselves be contrary to themselves. For it happens at times that the

same  thing  is  both  small  and  great.  For  the  same  thing  may  be  small  in

comparison with one thing, and great in comparison with another, so that the

same thing comes to be both small and great at one and the same time, and is

of such a nature as to admit contrary qualities at one and the same moment.

Yet it was agreed, when substance was being discussed, that nothing admits

contrary  qualities  at  one  and  the  same  moment.  For  though  substance  is

capable of admitting contrary qualities, yet no one is at the same time both

sick and healthy, nothing is at the same time both white and black. Nor is

there anything which is qualified in contrary ways at one and the same time.

  Moreover, if these were contraries, they would themselves be contrary to

themselves. For if ‘great’ is the contrary of ‘small’, and the same thing is

both great and small at the same time, then ‘small’ or ‘great’ is the contrary

of itself. But this is impossible. The term ‘great’, therefore, is not the contrary

of the term ‘small’, nor ‘much’ of ‘little’. And even though a man should call

these terms not relative but quantitative, they would not have contraries.

It is in the case of space that quantity most plausibly appears to admit of a

contrary. For men define the term ‘above’ as the contrary of ‘below’, when it

is the region at the centre they mean by ‘below’; and this is so, because

nothing is farther from the extremities of the universe than the region at the

centre. Indeed, it seems that in defining contraries of every kind men have

recourse to a spatial metaphor, for they say that those things are contraries

which, within the same class, are separated by the greatest possible distance.

  Quantity  does  not,  it  appears,  admit  of  variation  of  degree.  One  thing

cannot be two cubits long in a greater degree than another. Similarly with

regard to number: what is ‘three’ is not more truly three than what is ‘five’ is

five; nor is one set of three more truly three than another set. Again, one

period of time is not said to be more truly time than another. Nor is there any

other kind of quantity, of all that have been mentioned, with regard to which

variation of degree can be predicated. The category of quantity, therefore,

does not admit of variation of degree.The most distinctive mark of quantity is that equality and inequality are

predicated  of  it.  Each  of  the  aforesaid  quantities  is  said  to  be  equal  or

unequal. For instance, one solid is said to be equal or unequal to another;

number, too, and time can have these terms applied to them, indeed can all

those kinds of quantity that have been mentioned.

That which is not a quantity can by no means, it would seem, be termed

equal or unequal to anything else. One particular disposition or one particular

quality, such as whiteness, is by no means compared with another in terms of

equality  and  inequality  but  rather  in  terms  of  similarity.  Thus  it  is  the

distinctive mark of quantity that it can be called equal and unequal.


7


  Those  things  are  called  relative,  which,  being  either  said  to  be  of

something else or related to something else, are explained by reference to that

other thing. For instance, the word ‘superior’ is explained by reference to

something  else,  for  it  is  superiority  over  something  else  that  is  meant.

Similarly, the expression ‘double’ has this external reference, for it is the

double of something else that is meant. So it is with everything else of this

kind. There are, moreover, other relatives, e.g. habit, disposition, perception,

knowledge,  and  attitude.  The  significance  of  all  these  is  explained  by  a

reference to something else and in no other way. Thus, a habit is a habit of

something, knowledge is knowledge of something, attitude is the attitude of

something. So it is with all other relatives that have been mentioned. Those

terms, then, are called relative, the nature of which is explained by reference

to something else, the preposition ‘of’ or some other preposition being used

to indicate the relation. Thus, one mountain is called great in comparison

with son with another; for the mountain claims this attribute by comparison

with  something.  Again,  that  which  is  called  similar  must  be  similar  to

something else, and all other such attributes have this external reference. It is

to be noted that lying and standing and sitting are particular attitudes, but

attitude  is  itself  a  relative  term.  To  lie,  to  stand,  to  be  seated,  are  not

themselves attitudes, but take their name from the aforesaid attitudes.

It is possible for relatives to have contraries. Thus virtue has a contrary,

vice, these both being relatives; knowledge, too, has a contrary, ignorance.

But this is not the mark of all relatives; ‘double’ and ‘triple’ have no contrary,

nor indeed has any such term.It also appears that relatives can admit of variation of degree. For ‘like’ and

‘unlike’,  ‘equal’  and  ‘unequal’,  have  the  modifications  ‘more’  and  ‘less’

applied to them, and each of these is relative in character: for the terms ‘like’

and ‘unequal’ bear ‘unequal’ bear a reference to something external. Yet,

again, it is not every relative term that admits of variation of degree. No term

such as ‘double’ admits of this modification. All relatives have correlatives:

by the term ‘slave’ we mean the slave of a master, by the term ‘master’, the

master of a slave; by ‘double’, the double of its hall; by ‘half’, the half of its

double; by ‘greater’, greater than that which is less; by ‘less,’ less than that

which is greater.

So it is with every other relative term; but the case we use to express the

correlation  differs  in  some  instances.  Thus,  by  knowledge  we  mean

knowledge the knowable; by the knowable, that which is to be apprehended

by  knowledge;  by  perception,  perception  of  the  perceptible;  by  the

perceptible, that which is apprehended by perception.

  Sometimes, however, reciprocity of correlation does not appear to exist.

This comes about when a blunder is made, and that to which the relative is

related is not accurately stated. If a man states that a wing is necessarily

relative to a bird, the connexion between these two will not be reciprocal, for

it will not be possible to say that a bird is a bird by reason of its wings. The

reason is that the original statement was inaccurate, for the wing is not said to

be  relative  to  the  bird  qua  bird,  since  many  creatures  besides  birds  have

wings, but qua winged creature. If, then, the statement is made accurate, the

connexion will be reciprocal, for we can speak of a wing, having reference

necessarily to a winged creature, and of a winged creature as being such

because of its wings.

  Occasionally, perhaps, it is necessary to coin words, if no word exists by

which a correlation can adequately be explained. If we define a rudder as

necessarily having reference to a boat, our definition will not be appropriate,

for the rudder does not have this reference to a boat qua boat, as there are

boats which have no rudders. Thus we cannot use the terms reciprocally, for

the word ‘boat’ cannot be said to find its explanation in the word ‘rudder’. As

there is no existing word, our definition would perhaps be more accurate if

we coined some word like ‘ruddered’ as the correlative of ‘rudder’. If we

express  ourselves  thus  accurately,  at  any  rate  the  terms  are  reciprocally

connected, for the ‘ruddered’ thing is ‘ruddered’ in virtue of its rudder. So it

is in all other cases. A head will be more accurately defined as the correlativeof that which is ‘headed’, than as that of an animal, for the animal does not

have a head qua animal, since many animals have no head.

  Thus we may perhaps most easily comprehend that to which a thing is

related, when a name does not exist, if, from that which has a name, we

derive a new name, and apply it to that with which the first is reciprocally

connected, as in the aforesaid instances, when we derived the word ‘winged’

from ‘wing’ and from ‘rudder’.

All  relatives,  then,  if  properly  defined,  have  a  correlative.  I  add  this

condition because, if that to which they are related is stated as haphazard and

not accurately, the two are not found to be interdependent. Let me state what

I mean more clearly. Even in the case of acknowledged correlatives, and

where names exist for each, there will be no interdependence if one of the

two is denoted, not by that name which expresses the correlative notion, but

by one of irrelevant significance. The term ‘slave,’ if defined as related, not

to  a  master,  but  to  a  man,  or  a  biped,  or  anything  of  that  sort,  is  not

reciprocally connected with that in relation to which it is defined, for the

statement is not exact. Further, if one thing is said to be correlative with

another,  and  the  terminology  used  is  correct,  then,  though  all  irrelevant

attributes should be removed, and only that one attribute left in virtue of

which  it  was  correctly  stated  to  be  correlative  with  that  other,  the  stated

correlation will still exist. If the correlative of ‘the slave’ is said to be ‘the

master’, then, though all irrelevant attributes of the said ‘master’, such as

‘biped’,  ‘receptive  of  knowledge’,  ‘human’,  should  be  removed,  and  the

attribute ‘master’ alone left, the stated correlation existing between him and

the slave will remain the same, for it is of a master that a slave is said to be

the  slave.  On  the  other  hand,  if,  of  two  correlatives,  one  is  not  correctly

termed, then, when all other attributes are removed and that alone is left in

virtue of which it was stated to be correlative, the stated correlation will be

found to have disappeared.

For suppose the correlative of ‘the slave’ should be said to be ‘the man’, or

the correlative of ‘the wing”the bird’; if the attribute ‘master’ be withdrawn

from’ the man’, the correlation between ‘the man’ and ‘the slave’ will cease

to exist, for if the man is not a master, the slave is not a slave. Similarly, if

the attribute ‘winged’ be withdrawn from ‘the bird’, ‘the wing’ will no longer

be relative; for if the so-called correlative is not winged, it follows that ‘the

wing’ has no correlative.

  Thus it is essential that the correlated terms should be exactly designated;if there is a name existing, the statement will be easy; if not, it is doubtless

our  duty  to  construct  names.  When  the  terminology  is  thus  correct,  it  is

evident that all correlatives are interdependent.

  Correlatives are thought to come into existence simultaneously. This is for

the most part true, as in the case of the double and the half. The existence of

the half necessitates the existence of that of which it is a half. Similarly the

existence of a master necessitates the existence of a slave, and that of a slave

implies  that  of  a  master;  these  are  merely  instances  of  a  general  rule.

Moreover, they cancel one another; for if there is no double it follows that

there is no half, and vice versa; this rule also applies to all such correlatives.

Yet  it  does  not  appear  to  be  true  in  all  cases  that  correlatives  come  into

existence  simultaneously.  The  object  of  knowledge  would  appear  to  exist

before knowledge itself, for it is usually the case that we acquire knowledge

of objects already existing; it would be difficult, if not impossible, to find a

branch  of  knowledge  the  beginning  of  the  existence  of  which  was

contemporaneous with that of its object.

  Again, while the object of knowledge, if it ceases to exist, cancels at the

same time the knowledge which was its correlative, the converse of this is not

true. It is true that if the object of knowledge does not exist there can be no

knowledge: for there will no longer be anything to know. Yet it is equally

true that, if knowledge of a certain object does not exist, the object may

nevertheless quite well exist. Thus, in the case of the squaring of the circle, if

indeed that process is an object of knowledge, though it itself exists as an

object of knowledge, yet the knowledge of it has not yet come into existence.

Again, if all animals ceased to exist, there would be no knowledge, but there

might yet be many objects of knowledge.

This  is  likewise  the  case  with  regard  to  perception:  for  the  object  of

perception is, it appears, prior to the act of perception. If the perceptible is

annihilated,  perception  also  will  cease  to  exist;  but  the  annihilation  of

perception does not cancel the existence of the perceptible. For perception

implies a body perceived and a body in which perception takes place. Now if

that which is perceptible is annihilated, it follows that the body is annihilated,

for the body is a perceptible thing; and if the body does not exist, it follows

that perception also ceases to exist. Thus the annihilation of the perceptible

involves that of perception.

But the annihilation of perception does not involve that of the perceptible.

For if the animal is annihilated, it follows that perception also is annihilated,but perceptibles such as body, heat, sweetness, bitterness, and so on, will

remain.

  Again, perception is generated at the same time as the perceiving subject,

for it comes into existence at the same time as the animal. But the perceptible

surely exists before perception; for fire and water and such elements, out of

which the animal is itself composed, exist before the animal is an animal at

all, and before perception. Thus it would seem that the perceptible exists

before perception.

It may be questioned whether it is true that no substance is relative, as

seems to be the case, or whether exception is to be made in the case of certain

secondary substances. With regard to primary substances, it is quite true that

there  is  no  such  possibility,  for  neither  wholes  nor  parts  of  primary

substances  are  relative.  The  individual  man  or  ox  is  not  defined  with

reference to something external. Similarly with the parts: a particular hand or

head is not defined as a particular hand or head of a particular person, but as

the hand or head of a particular person. It is true also, for the most part at

least, in the case of secondary substances; the species ‘man’ and the species

‘ox’ are not defined with reference to anything outside themselves. Wood,

again, is only relative in so far as it is some one’s property, not in so far as it

is wood. It is plain, then, that in the cases mentioned substance is not relative.

But  with  regard  to  some  secondary  substances  there  is  a  difference  of

opinion; thus, such terms as ‘head’ and ‘hand’ are defined with reference to

that of which the things indicated are a part, and so it comes about that these

appear to have a relative character. Indeed, if our definition of that which is

relative was complete, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to prove that no

substance is relative. If, however, our definition was not complete, if those

things only are properly called relative in the case of which relation to an

external  object  is  a  necessary  condition  of  existence,  perhaps  some

explanation of the dilemma may be found.

The former definition does indeed apply to all relatives, but the fact that a

thing  is  explained  with  reference  to  something  else  does  not  make  it

essentially relative.

  From this it is plain that, if a man definitely apprehends a relative thing, he

will also definitely apprehend that to which it is relative. Indeed this is self-

evident: for if a man knows that some particular thing is relative, assuming

that we call that a relative in the case of which relation to something is a

necessary condition of existence, he knows that also to which it is related. Forif he does not know at all that to which it is related, he will not know whether

or not it is relative. This is clear, moreover, in particular instances. If a man

knows definitely that such and such a thing is ‘double’, he will also forthwith

know definitely that of which it is the double. For if there is nothing definite

of which he knows it to be the double, he does not know at all that it is

double.  Again,  if  he  knows  that  a  thing  is  more  beautiful,  it  follows

necessarily that he will forthwith definitely know that also than which it is

more beautiful. He will not merely know indefinitely that it is more beautiful

than something which is less beautiful, for this would be supposition, not

knowledge. For if he does not know definitely that than which it is more

beautiful, he can no longer claim to know definitely that it is more beautiful

than something else which is less beautiful: for it might be that nothing was

less beautiful. It is, therefore, evident that if a man apprehends some relative

thing  definitely,  he  necessarily  knows  that  also  definitely  to  which  it  is

related.

Now the head, the hand, and such things are substances, and it is possible

to know their essential character definitely, but it does not necessarily follow

that we should know that to which they are related. It is not possible to know

forthwith whose head or hand is meant. Thus these are not relatives, and, this

being  the  case,  it  would  be  true  to  say  that  no  substance  is  relative  in

character. It is perhaps a difficult matter, in such cases, to make a positive

statement without more exhaustive examination, but to have raised questions

with regard to details is not without advantage.


8


By ‘quality’ I mean that in virtue of which people are said to be such and

such.

  Quality is a term that is used in many senses. One sort of quality let us call

‘habit’ or ‘disposition’. Habit differs from disposition in being more lasting

and more firmly established. The various kinds of knowledge and of virtue

are habits, for knowledge, even when acquired only in a moderate degree, is,

it is agreed, abiding in its character and difficult to displace, unless some

great mental upheaval takes place, through disease or any such cause. The

virtues, also, such as justice, self-restraint, and so on, are not easily dislodged

or dismissed, so as to give place to vice.

By a disposition, on the other hand, we mean a condition that is easilychanged and quickly gives place to its opposite. Thus, heat, cold, disease,

health,  and  so  on  are  dispositions.  For  a  man  is  disposed  in  one  way  or

another with reference to these, but quickly changes, becoming cold instead

of warm, ill instead of well. So it is with all other dispositions also, unless

through lapse of time a disposition has itself become inveterate and almost

impossible to dislodge: in which case we should perhaps go so far as to call it

a habit.

It is evident that men incline to call those conditions habits which are of a

more or less permanent type and difficult to displace; for those who are not

retentive of knowledge, but volatile, are not said to have such and such a

‘habit’ as regards knowledge, yet they are disposed, we may say, either better

or worse, towards knowledge. Thus habit differs from disposition in this, that

while the latter in ephemeral, the former is permanent and difficult to alter.

  Habits  are  at  the  same  time  dispositions,  but  dispositions  are  not

necessarily habits. For those who have some specific habit may be said also,

in virtue of that habit, to be thus or thus disposed; but those who are disposed

in some specific way have not in all cases the corresponding habit.

  Another sort of quality is that in virtue of which, for example, we call men

good boxers or runners, or healthy or sickly: in fact it includes all those terms

which refer to inborn capacity or incapacity. Such things are not predicated of

a person in virtue of his disposition, but in virtue of his inborn capacity or

incapacity to do something with ease or to avoid defeat of any kind. Persons

are called good boxers or good runners, not in virtue of such and such a

disposition, but in virtue of an inborn capacity to accomplish something with

ease.  Men  are  called  healthy  in  virtue  of  the  inborn  capacity  of  easy

resistance to those unhealthy influences that may ordinarily arise; unhealthy,

in virtue of the lack of this capacity. Similarly with regard to softness and

hardness. Hardness is predicated of a thing because it has that capacity of

resistance  which  enables  it  to  withstand  disintegration;  softness,  again,  is

predicated of a thing by reason of the lack of that capacity.

A  third  class  within  this  category  is  that  of  affective  qualities  and

affections.  Sweetness,  bitterness,  sourness,  are  examples  of  this  sort  of

quality,  together  with  all  that  is  akin  to  these;  heat,  moreover,  and  cold,

whiteness, and blackness are affective qualities. It is evident that these are

qualities, for those things that possess them are themselves said to be such

and  such  by  reason  of  their  presence.  Honey  is  called  sweet  because  it

contains sweetness; the body is called white because it contains whiteness;and so in all other cases.

The  term  ‘affective  quality’  is  not  used  as  indicating  that  those  things

which  admit  these  qualities  are  affected  in  any  way.  Honey  is  not  called

sweet because it is affected in a specific way, nor is this what is meant in any

other  instance.  Similarly  heat  and  cold  are  called  affective  qualities,  not

because those things which admit them are affected. What is meant is that

these said qualities are capable of producing an ‘affection’ in the way of

perception. For sweetness has the power of affecting the sense of taste; heat,

that of touch; and so it is with the rest of these qualities.

  Whiteness and blackness, however, and the other colours, are not said to be

affective qualities in this sense, but —because they themselves are the results

of an affection. It is plain that many changes of colour take place because of

affections.  When  a  man  is  ashamed,  he  blushes;  when  he  is  afraid,  he

becomes pale, and so on. So true is this, that when a man is by nature liable

to  such  affections,  arising  from  some  concomitance  of  elements  in  his

constitution,  it  is  a  probable  inference  that  he  has  the  corresponding

complexion of skin. For the same disposition of bodily elements, which in the

former instance was momentarily present in the case of an access of shame,

might  be  a  result  of  a  man’s  natural  temperament,  so  as  to  produce  the

corresponding  colouring  also  as  a  natural  characteristic.  All  conditions,

therefore, of this kind, if caused by certain permanent and lasting affections,

are  called  affective  qualities.  For  pallor  and  duskiness  of  complexion  are

called qualities, inasmuch as we are said to be such and such in virtue of

them, not only if they originate in natural constitution, but also if they come

about through long disease or sunburn, and are difficult to remove, or indeed

remain throughout life. For in the same way we are said to be such and such

because of these.

  Those conditions, however, which arise from causes which may easily be

rendered  ineffective  or  speedily  removed,  are  called,  not  qualities,  but

affections:  for  we  are  not  said  to  be  such  virtue  of  them.  The  man  who

blushes through shame is not said to be a constitutional blusher, nor is the

man who becomes pale through fear said to be constitutionally pale. He is

said rather to have been affected.

  Thus such conditions are called affections, not qualities.

In like manner there are affective qualities and affections of the soul. That

temper with which a man is born and which has its origin in certain deep-

seated  affections  is  called  a  quality.  I  mean  such  conditions  as  insanity,irascibility, and so on: for people are said to be mad or irascible in virtue of

these. Similarly those abnormal psychic states which are not inborn, but arise

from the concomitance of certain other elements, and are difficult to remove,

or altogether permanent, are called qualities, for in virtue of them men are

said to be such and such.

  Those, however, which arise from causes easily rendered ineffective are

called affections, not qualities. Suppose that a man is irritable when vexed: he

is not even spoken of as a bad-tempered man, when in such circumstances he

loses his temper somewhat, but rather is said to be affected. Such conditions

are therefore termed, not qualities, but affections.

The fourth sort of quality is figure and the shape that belongs to a thing;

and besides this, straightness and curvedness and any other qualities of this

type; each of these defines a thing as being such and such. Because it is

triangular or quadrangular a thing is said to have a specific character, or again

because it is straight or curved; in fact a thing’s shape in every case gives rise

to a qualification of it.

  Rarity and density, roughness and smoothness, seem to be terms indicating

quality: yet these, it would appear, really belong to a class different from that

of quality. For it is rather a certain relative position of the parts composing

the thing thus qualified which, it appears, is indicated by each of these terms.

A thing is dense, owing to the fact that its parts are closely combined with

one another; rare, because there are interstices between the parts; smooth,

because its parts lie, so to speak, evenly; rough, because some parts project

beyond others.

  There may be other sorts of quality, but those that are most properly so

called have, we may safely say, been enumerated.

These, then, are qualities, and the things that take their name from them as

derivatives,  or  are  in  some  other  way  dependent  on  them,  are  said  to  be

qualified in some specific way. In most, indeed in almost all cases, the name

of that which is qualified is derived from that of the quality. Thus the terms

‘whiteness’,  ‘grammar’,  ‘justice’,  give  us  the  adjectives  ‘white’,

‘grammatical’, ‘just’, and so on.

  There  are  some  cases,  however,  in  which,  as  the  quality  under

consideration has no name, it is impossible that those possessed of it should

have a name that is derivative. For instance, the name given to the runner or

boxer, who is so called in virtue of an inborn capacity, is not derived from

that of any quality; for lob those capacities have no name assigned to them. Inthis, the inborn capacity is distinct from the science, with reference to which

men  are  called,  e.g.  boxers  or  wrestlers.  Such  a  science  is  classed  as  a

disposition; it has a name, and is called ‘boxing’ or ‘wrestling’ as the case

may be, and the name given to those disposed in this way is derived from that

of the science. Sometimes, even though a name exists for the quality, that

which takes its character from the quality has a name that is not a derivative.

For instance, the upright man takes his character from the possession of the

quality of integrity, but the name given him is not derived from the word

‘integrity’. Yet this does not occur often.

We may therefore state that those things are said to be possessed of some

specific quality which have a name derived from that of the aforesaid quality,

or which are in some other way dependent on it.

One quality may be the contrary of another; thus justice is the contrary of

injustice, whiteness of blackness, and so on. The things, also, which are said

to be such and such in virtue of these qualities, may be contrary the one to the

other; for that which is unjust is contrary to that which is just, that which is

white to that which is black. This, however, is not always the case. Red,

yellow, and such colours, though qualities, have no contraries.

If one of two contraries is a quality, the other will also be a quality. This

will  be  evident  from  particular  instances,  if  we  apply  the  names  used  to

denote the other categories; for instance, granted that justice is the contrary of

injustice  and  justice  is  a  quality,  injustice  will  also  be  a  quality:  neither

quantity, nor relation, nor place, nor indeed any other category but that of

quality,  will  be  applicable  properly  to  injustice.  So  it  is  with  all  other

contraries falling under the category of quality.

  Qualities admit of variation of degree. Whiteness is predicated of one thing

in a greater or less degree than of another. This is also the case with reference

to  justice.  Moreover,  one  and  the  same  thing  may  exhibit  a  quality  in  a

greater degree than it did before: if a thing is white, it may become whiter.

  Though this is generally the case, there are exceptions. For if we should

say that justice admitted of variation of degree, difficulties might ensue, and

this is true with regard to all those qualities which are dispositions. There are

some, indeed, who dispute the possibility of variation here. They maintain

that  justice  and  health  cannot  very  well  admit  of  variation  of  degree

themselves, but that people vary in the degree in which they possess these

qualities, and that this is the case with grammatical learning and all those

qualities which are classed as dispositions. However that may be, it is anincontrovertible fact that the things which in virtue of these qualities are said

to be what they are vary in the degree in which they possess them; for one

man is said to be better versed in grammar, or more healthy or just, than

another, and so on.

The qualities expressed by the terms ‘triangular’ and ‘quadrangular’ do not

appear to admit of variation of degree, nor indeed do any that have to do with

figure. For those things to which the definition of the triangle or circle is

applicable are all equally triangular or circular. Those, on the other hand, to

which the same definition is not applicable, cannot be said to differ from one

another in degree; the square is no more a circle than the rectangle, for to

neither is the definition of the circle appropriate. In short, if the definition of

the term proposed is not applicable to both objects, they cannot be compared.

Thus it is not all qualities which admit of variation of degree.

  Whereas  none  of  the  characteristics  I  have  mentioned  are  peculiar  to

quality, the fact that likeness and unlikeness can be predicated with reference

to quality only, gives to that category its distinctive feature. One thing is like

another only with reference to that in virtue of which it is such and such; thus

this forms the peculiar mark of quality.

We must not be disturbed because it may be argued that, though proposing

to discuss the category of quality, we have included in it many relative terms.

We did say that habits and dispositions were relative. In practically all such

cases the genus is relative, the individual not. Thus knowledge, as a genus, is

explained  by  reference  to  something  else,  for  we  mean  a  knowledge  of

something. But particular branches of knowledge are not thus explained. The

knowledge  of  grammar  is  not  relative  to  anything  external,  nor  is  the

knowledge of music, but these, if relative at all, are relative only in virtue of

their genera; thus grammar is said be the knowledge of something, not the

grammar of something; similarly music is the knowledge of something, not

the music of something.

  Thus individual branches of knowledge are not relative. And it is because

we possess these individual branches of knowledge that we are said to be

such and such. It is these that we actually possess: we are called experts

because we possess knowledge in some particular branch. Those particular

branches, therefore, of knowledge, in virtue of which we are sometimes said

to be such and such, are themselves qualities, and are not relative. Further, if

anything should happen to fall within both the category of quality and that of

relation, there would be nothing extraordinary in classing it under both theseheads.


9


Action  and  affection  both  admit  of  contraries  and  also  of  variation  of

degree.  Heating  is  the  contrary  of  cooling,  being  heated  of  being  cooled,

being glad of being vexed. Thus they admit of contraries. They also admit of

variation of degree: for it is possible to heat in a greater or less degree; also to

be heated in a greater or less degree. Thus action and affection also admit of

variation of degree. So much, then, is stated with regard to these categories.

We spoke, moreover, of the category of position when we were dealing

with that of relation, and stated that such terms derived their names from

those of the corresponding attitudes.

As for the rest, time, place, state, since they are easily intelligible, I say no

more about them than was said at the beginning, that in the category of state

are included such states as ‘shod’, ‘armed’, in that of place ‘in the Lyceum’

and so on, as was explained before.


10


The proposed categories have, then, been adequately dealt with.

We must next explain the various senses in which the term ‘opposite’ is

used. Things are said to be opposed in four senses: (i) as correlatives to one

another, (ii) as contraries to one another, (iii) as privatives to positives, (iv) as

affirmatives to negatives.

Let me sketch my meaning in outline. An instance of the use of the word

‘opposite’  with  reference  to  correlatives  is  afforded  by  the  expressions

‘double’  and  ‘half’;  with  reference  to  contraries  by  ‘bad’  and  ‘good’.

Opposites  in  the  sense  of  ‘privatives’  and  ‘positives’  are’  blindness’  and

‘sight’; in the sense of affirmatives and negatives, the propositions ‘he sits’,

‘he does not sit’.

(i)  Pairs  of  opposites  which  fall  under  the  category  of  relation  are

explained by a reference of the one to the other, the reference being indicated

by  the  preposition  ‘of’  or  by  some  other  preposition.  Thus,  double  is  a

relative  term,  for  that  which  is  double  is  explained  as  the  double  of

something. Knowledge, again, is the opposite of the thing known, in the samesense; and the thing known also is explained by its relation to its opposite,

knowledge.  For  the  thing  known  is  explained  as  that  which  is  known  by

something, that is, by knowledge. Such things, then, as are opposite the one

to the other in the sense of being correlatives are explained by a reference of

the one to the other.

(ii)  Pairs  of  opposites  which  are  contraries  are  not  in  any  way

interdependent, but are contrary the one to the other. The good is not spoken

of as the good of the had, but as the contrary of the bad, nor is white spoken

of as the white of the black, but as the contrary of the black. These two types

of opposition are therefore distinct. Those contraries which are such that the

subjects in which they are naturally present, or of which they are predicated,

must  necessarily  contain  either  the  one  or  the  other  of  them,  have  no

intermediate, but those in the case of which no such necessity obtains, always

have an intermediate. Thus disease and health are naturally present in the

body of an animal, and it is necessary that either the one or the other should

be present in the body of an animal. Odd and even, again, are predicated of

number, and it is necessary that the one or the other should be present in

numbers. Now there is no intermediate between the terms of either of these

two pairs. On the other hand, in those contraries with regard to which no such

necessity  obtains,  we  find  an  intermediate.  Blackness  and  whiteness  are

naturally present in the body, but it is not necessary that either the one or the

other should be present in the body, inasmuch as it is not true to say that

everybody  must  be  white  or  black.  Badness  and  goodness,  again,  are

predicated of man, and of many other things, but it is not necessary that either

the  one  quality  or  the  other  should  be  present  in  that  of  which  they  are

predicated: it is not true to say that everything that may be good or bad must

be  either  good  or  bad.  These  pairs  of  contraries  have  intermediates:  the

intermediates between white and black are grey, sallow, and all the other

colours that come between; the intermediate between good and bad is that

which is neither the one nor the other.

  Some intermediate qualities have names, such as grey and sallow and all

the  other  colours  that  come  between  white  and  black;  in  other  cases,

however, it is not easy to name the intermediate, but we must define it as that

which is not either extreme, as in the case of that which is neither good nor

bad, neither just nor unjust.

(iii) ‘privatives’ and ‘Positives’ have reference to the same subject. Thus,

sight and blindness have reference to the eye. It is a universal rule that eachof a pair of opposites of this type has reference to that to which the particular

‘positive’ is natural. We say that that is capable of some particular faculty or

possession has suffered privation when the faculty or possession in question

is in no way present in that in which, and at the time at which, it should

naturally be present. We do not call that toothless which has not teeth, or that

blind which has not sight, but rather that which has not teeth or sight at the

time when by nature it should. For there are some creatures which from birth

are without sight, or without teeth, but these are not called toothless or blind.

To  be  without  some  faculty  or  to  possess  it  is  not  the  same  as  the

corresponding ‘privative’ or ‘positive’. ‘Sight’ is a ‘positive’, ‘blindness’ a

‘privative’, but ‘to possess sight’ is not equivalent to ‘sight’, ‘to be blind’ is

not equivalent to ‘blindness’. Blindness is a ‘privative’, to be blind is to be in

a state of privation, but is not a ‘privative’. Moreover, if ‘blindness’ were

equivalent to ‘being blind’, both would be predicated of the same subject; but

though a man is said to be blind, he is by no means said to be blindness.

To be in a state of ‘possession’ is, it appears, the opposite of being in a

state  of  ‘privation’,  just  as  ‘positives’  and  ‘privatives’  themselves  are

opposite.  There  is  the  same  type  of  antithesis  in  both  cases;  for  just  as

blindness is opposed to sight, so is being blind opposed to having sight.

That which is affirmed or denied is not itself affirmation or denial. By

‘affirmation’  we  mean  an  affirmative  proposition,  by  ‘denial’  a  negative.

Now, those facts which form the matter of the affirmation or denial are not

propositions; yet these two are said to be opposed in the same sense as the

affirmation and denial, for in this case also the type of antithesis is the same.

For as the affirmation is opposed to the denial, as in the two propositions ‘he

sits’, ‘he does not sit’, so also the fact which constitutes the matter of the

proposition in one case is opposed to that in the other, his sitting, that is to

say, to his not sitting.

It is evident that ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’ are not opposed each to each

in the same sense as relatives. The one is not explained by reference to the

other; sight is not sight of blindness, nor is any other preposition used to

indicate the relation. Similarly blindness is not said to be blindness of sight,

but rather, privation of sight. Relatives, moreover, reciprocate; if blindness,

therefore, were a relative, there would be a reciprocity of relation between it

and that with which it was correlative. But this is not the case. Sight is not

called the sight of blindness.

That those terms which fall under the heads of ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’are not opposed each to each as contraries, either, is plain from the following

facts: Of a pair of contraries such that they have no intermediate, one or the

other must needs be present in the subject in which they naturally subsist, or

of which they are predicated; for it is those, as we proved,’ in the case of

which this necessity obtains, that have no intermediate. Moreover, we cited

health and disease, odd and even, as instances. But those contraries which

have an intermediate are not subject to any such necessity. It is not necessary

that every substance, receptive of such qualities, should be either black or

white, cold or hot, for something intermediate between these contraries may

very  well  be  present  in  the  subject.  We  proved,  moreover,  that  those

contraries have an intermediate in the case of which the said necessity does

not obtain. Yet when one of the two contraries is a constitutive property of

the subject, as it is a constitutive property of fire to be hot, of snow to be

white, it is necessary determinately that one of the two contraries, not one or

the other, should be present in the subject; for fire cannot be cold, or snow

black. Thus, it is not the case here that one of the two must needs be present

in every subject receptive of these qualities, but only in that subject of which

the  one  forms  a  constitutive  property.  Moreover,  in  such  cases  it  is  one

member of the pair determinately, and not either the one or the other, which

must be present.

In the case of ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’, on the other hand, neither of the

aforesaid  statements  holds  good.  For  it  is  not  necessary  that  a  subject

receptive of the qualities should always have either the one or the other; that

which has not yet advanced to the state when sight is natural is not said either

to be blind or to see. Thus ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’ do not belong to that

class of contraries which consists of those which have no intermediate. On

the  other  hand,  they  do  not  belong  either  to  that  class  which  consists  of

contraries  which  have  an  intermediate.  For  under  certain  conditions  it  is

necessary that either the one or the other should form part of the constitution

of every appropriate subject. For when a thing has reached the stage when it

is by nature capable of sight, it will be said either to see or to be blind, and

that  in  an  indeterminate  sense,  signifying  that  the  capacity  may  be  either

present or absent; for it is not necessary either that it should see or that it

should be blind, but that it should be either in the one state or in the other.

Yet in the case of those contraries which have an intermediate we found that

it was never necessary that either the one or the other should be present in

every appropriate subject, but only that in certain subjects one of the pairshould be present, and that in a determinate sense. It is, therefore, plain that

‘positives’  and  ‘privatives’  are  not  opposed  each  to  each  in  either  of  the

senses in which contraries are opposed.

  Again, in the case of contraries, it is possible that there should be changes

from either into the other, while the subject retains its identity, unless indeed

one of the contraries is a constitutive property of that subject, as heat is of

fire. For it is possible that that that which is healthy should become diseased,

that which is white, black, that which is cold, hot, that which is good, bad,

that which is bad, good. The bad man, if he is being brought into a better way

of  life  and  thought,  may  make  some  advance,  however  slight,  and  if  he

should once improve, even ever so little, it is plain that he might change

completely, or at any rate make very great progress; for a man becomes more

and more easily moved to virtue, however small the improvement was at

first. It is, therefore, natural to suppose that he will make yet greater progress

than he has made in the past; and as this process goes on, it will change him

completely  and  establish  him  in  the  contrary  state,  provided  he  is  not

hindered by lack of time. In the case of ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’, however,

change  in  both  directions  is  impossible.  There  may  be  a  change  from

possession to privation, but not from privation to possession. The man who

has become blind does not regain his sight; the man who has become bald

does not regain his hair; the man who has lost his teeth does not grow his

grow a new set. (iv) Statements opposed as affirmation and negation belong

manifestly to a class which is distinct, for in this case, and in this case only, it

is necessary for the one opposite to be true and the other false.

  Neither in the case of contraries, nor in the case of correlatives, nor in the

case of ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’, is it necessary for one to be true and the

other false. Health and disease are contraries: neither of them is true or false.

‘Double’ and ‘half’ are opposed to each other as correlatives: neither of them

is true or false. The case is the same, of course, with regard to ‘positives’ and

‘privatives’ such as ‘sight’ and ‘blindness’. In short, where there is no sort of

combination of words, truth and falsity have no place, and all the opposites

we have mentioned so far consist of simple words.

At the same time, when the words which enter into opposed statements are

contraries, these, more than any other set of opposites, would seem to claim

this characteristic. ‘Socrates is ill’ is the contrary of ‘Socrates is well’, but not

even of such composite expressions is it true to say that one of the pair must

always be true and the other false. For if Socrates exists, one will be true andthe  other  false,  but  if  he  does  not  exist,  both  will  be  false;  for  neither

‘Socrates is ill’ nor ‘Socrates is well’ is true, if Socrates does not exist at all.

In the case of ‘positives’ and ‘privatives’, if the subject does not exist at

all, neither proposition is true, but even if the subject exists, it is not always

the fact that one is true and the other false. For ‘Socrates has sight’ is the

opposite of ‘Socrates is blind’ in the sense of the word ‘opposite’ which

applies to possession and privation. Now if Socrates exists, it is not necessary

that one should be true and the other false, for when he is not yet able to

acquire the power of vision, both are false, as also if Socrates is altogether

non-existent.

But in the case of affirmation and negation, whether the subject exists or

not, one is always false and the other true. For manifestly, if Socrates exists,

one of the two propositions ‘Socrates is ill’, ‘Socrates is not ill’, is true, and

the other false. This is likewise the case if he does not exist; for if he does not

exist, to say that he is ill is false, to say that he is not ill is true. Thus it is in

the case of those opposites only, which are opposite in the sense in which the

term is used with reference to affirmation and negation, that the rule holds

good, that one of the pair must be true and the other false.


11


That the contrary of a good is an evil is shown by induction: the contrary

of health is disease, of courage, cowardice, and so on. But the contrary of an

evil is sometimes a good, sometimes an evil. For defect, which is an evil, has

excess for its contrary, this also being an evil, and the mean. which is a good,

is equally the contrary of the one and of the other. It is only in a few cases,

however, that we see instances of this: in most, the contrary of an evil is a

good.

In the case of contraries, it is not always necessary that if one exists the

other should also exist: for if all become healthy there will be health and no

disease,  and  again,  if  everything  turns  white,  there  will  be  white,  but  no

black. Again, since the fact that Socrates is ill is the contrary of the fact that

Socrates is well, and two contrary conditions cannot both obtain in one and

the same individual at the same time, both these contraries could not exist at

once: for if that Socrates was well was a fact, then that Socrates was ill could

not possibly be one.

It is plain that contrary attributes must needs be present in subjects whichbelong  to  the  same  species  or  genus.  Disease  and  health  require  as  their

subject  the  body  of  an  animal;  white  and  black  require  a  body,  without

further qualification; justice and injustice require as their subject the human

soul.

  Moreover, it is necessary that pairs of contraries should in all cases either

belong  to  the  same  genus  or  belong  to  contrary  genera  or  be  themselves

genera.  White  and  black  belong  to  the  same  genus,  colour;  justice  and

injustice, to contrary genera, virtue and vice; while good and evil do not

belong to genera, but are themselves actual genera, with terms under them.


12


  There  are  four  senses  in  which  one  thing  can  be  said  to  be  ‘prior’  to

another. Primarily and most properly the term has reference to time: in this

sense the word is used to indicate that one thing is older or more ancient than

another, for the expressions ‘older’ and ‘more ancient’ imply greater length

of time.

  Secondly, one thing is said to be ‘prior’ to another when the sequence of

their being cannot be reversed. In this sense ‘one’ is ‘prior’ to ‘two’. For if

‘two’ exists, it follows directly that ‘one’ must exist, but if ‘one’ exists, it

does not follow necessarily that ‘two’ exists: thus the sequence subsisting

cannot be reversed. It is agreed, then, that when the sequence of two things

cannot be reversed, then that one on which the other depends is called ‘prior’

to that other.

In the third place, the term ‘prior’ is used with reference to any order, as in

the case of science and of oratory. For in sciences which use demonstration

there is that which is prior and that which is posterior in order; in geometry,

the elements are prior to the propositions; in reading and writing, the letters

of the alphabet are prior to the syllables. Similarly, in the case of speeches,

the exordium is prior in order to the narrative.

  Besides these senses of the word, there is a fourth. That which is better and

more honourable is said to have a natural priority. In common parlance men

speak of those whom they honour and love as ‘coming first’ with them. This

sense of the word is perhaps the most far-fetched.

  Such, then, are the different senses in which the term ‘prior’ is used.

Yet it would seem that besides those mentioned there is yet another. For in

those things, the being of each of which implies that of the other, that whichis in any way the cause may reasonably be said to be by nature ‘prior’ to the

effect. It is plain that there are instances of this. The fact of the being of a

man carries with it the truth of the proposition that he is, and the implication

is reciprocal: for if a man is, the proposition wherein we allege that he is true,

and conversely, if the proposition wherein we allege that he is true, then he is.

The true proposition, however, is in no way the cause of the being of the

man, but the fact of the man’s being does seem somehow to be the cause of

the truth of the proposition, for the truth or falsity of the proposition depends

on the fact of the man’s being or not being.

  Thus the word ‘prior’ may be used in five senses.


13


The term ‘simultaneous’ is primarily and most appropriately applied to

those things the genesis of the one of which is simultaneous with that of the

other; for in such cases neither is prior or posterior to the other. Such things

are  said  to  be  simultaneous  in  point  of  time.  Those  things,  again,  are

‘simultaneous’ in point of nature, the being of each of which involves that of

the other, while at the same time neither is the cause of the other’s being.

This  is  the  case  with  regard  to  the  double  and  the  half,  for  these  are

reciprocally dependent, since, if there is a double, there is also a half, and if

there is a half, there is also a double, while at the same time neither is the

cause of the being of the other.

  Again,  those  species  which  are  distinguished  one  from  another  and

opposed one to another within the same genus are said to be ‘simultaneous’

in nature. I mean those species which are distinguished each from each by

one  and  the  same  method  of  division.  Thus  the  ‘winged’  species  is

simultaneous  with  the  ‘terrestrial’  and  the  ‘water’  species.  These  are

distinguished within the same genus, and are opposed each to each, for the

genus ‘animal’ has the ‘winged’, the ‘terrestrial’, and the ‘water’ species, and

no one of these is prior or posterior to another; on the contrary, all such

things  appear  to  be  ‘simultaneous’  in  nature.  Each  of  these  also,  the

terrestrial,  the  winged,  and  the  water  species,  can  be  divided  again  into

subspecies. Those species, then, also will be ‘simultaneous’ point of nature,

which, belonging to the same genus, are distinguished each from each by one

and the same method of differentiation.

But genera are prior to species, for the sequence of their being cannot bereversed.  If  there  is  the  species  ‘water-animal’,  there  will  be  the  genus

‘animal’,  but  granted  the  being  of  the  genus  ‘animal’,  it  does  not  follow

necessarily that there will be the species ‘water-animal’.

  Those things, therefore, are said to be ‘simultaneous’ in nature, the being

of each of which involves that of the other, while at the same time neither is

in any way the cause of the other’s being; those species, also, which are

distinguished  each  from  each  and  opposed  within  the  same  genus.  Those

things, moreover, are ‘simultaneous’ in the unqualified sense of the word

which come into being at the same time.


14


  There  are  six  sorts  of  movement:  generation,  destruction,  increase,

diminution, alteration, and change of place.

It is evident in all but one case that all these sorts of movement are distinct

each from each. Generation is distinct from destruction, increase and change

of place from diminution, and so on. But in the case of alteration it may be

argued that the process necessarily implies one or other of the other five sorts

of motion. This is not true, for we may say that all affections, or nearly all,

produce in us an alteration which is distinct from all other sorts of motion, for

that which is affected need not suffer either increase or diminution or any of

the other sorts of motion. Thus alteration is a distinct sort of motion; for, if it

were not, the thing altered would not only be altered, but would forthwith

necessarily suffer increase or diminution or some one of the other sorts of

motion in addition; which as a matter of fact is not the case. Similarly that

which was undergoing the process of increase or was subject to some other

sort  of  motion  would,  if  alteration  were  not  a  distinct  form  of  motion,

necessarily be subject to alteration also. But there are some things which

undergo increase but yet not alteration. The square, for instance, if a gnomon

is applied to it, undergoes increase but not alteration, and so it is with all

other figures of this sort. Alteration and increase, therefore, are distinct.

  Speaking generally, rest is the contrary of motion. But the different forms

of motion have their own contraries in other forms; thus destruction is the

contrary of generation, diminution of increase, rest in a place, of change of

place. As for this last, change in the reverse direction would seem to be most

truly its contrary; thus motion upwards is the contrary of motion downwards

and vice versa.In the case of that sort of motion which yet remains, of those that have

been enumerated, it is not easy to state what is its contrary. It appears to have

no contrary, unless one should define the contrary here also either as ‘rest in

its quality’ or as ‘change in the direction of the contrary quality’, just as we

defined the contrary of change of place either as rest in a place or as change

in the reverse direction. For a thing is altered when change of quality takes

place; therefore either rest in its quality or change in the direction of the

contrary may be called the contrary of this qualitative form of motion. In this

way becoming white is the contrary of becoming black; there is alteration in

the contrary direction, since a change of a qualitative nature takes place.


15


The term ‘to have’ is used in various senses. In the first place it is used

with reference to habit or disposition or any other quality, for we are said to

‘have’  a  piece  of  knowledge  or  a  virtue.  Then,  again,  it  has  reference  to

quantity, as, for instance, in the case of a man’s height; for he is said to

‘have’ a height of three or four cubits. It is used, moreover, with regard to

apparel, a man being said to ‘have’ a coat or tunic; or in respect of something

which we have on a part of ourselves, as a ring on the hand: or in respect of

something which is a part of us, as hand or foot. The term refers also to

content, as in the case of a vessel and wheat, or of a jar and wine; a jar is said

to ‘have’ wine, and a corn-measure wheat. The expression in such cases has

reference to content. Or it refers to that which has been acquired; we are said

to ‘have’ a house or a field. A man is also said to ‘have’ a wife, and a wife a

husband, and this appears to be the most remote meaning of the term, for by

the use of it we mean simply that the husband lives with the wife.

  Other senses of the word might perhaps be found, but the most ordinary

ones have all been enumerated.                                On Interpretation


Translated by E. M. Edghill


1


First we must define the terms ‘noun’ and ‘verb’, then the terms ‘denial’

and ‘affirmation’, then ‘proposition’ and ‘sentence.’

  Spoken words are the symbols of mental experience and written words are

the symbols of spoken words. Just as all men have not the same writing, so

all men have not the same speech sounds, but the mental experiences, which

these directly symbolize, are the same for all, as also are those things of

which  our  experiences  are  the  images.  This  matter  has,  however,  been

discussed in my treatise about the soul, for it belongs to an investigation

distinct from that which lies before us.

As there are in the mind thoughts which do not involve truth or falsity, and

also those which must be either true or false, so it is in speech. For truth and

falsity imply combination and separation. Nouns and verbs, provided nothing

is  added,  are  like  thoughts  without  combination  or  separation;  ‘man’  and

‘white’, as isolated terms, are not yet either true or false. In proof of this,

consider the word ‘goat-stag.’ It has significance, but there is no truth or

falsity about it, unless ‘is’ or ‘is not’ is added, either in the present or in some

other tense.


2


By  a  noun  we  mean  a  sound  significant  by  convention,  which  has  no

reference to time, and of which no part is significant apart from the rest. In

the noun ‘Fairsteed,’ the part ‘steed’ has no significance in and by itself, as in

the  phrase  ‘fair  steed.’  Yet  there  is  a  difference  between  simple  and

composite nouns; for in the former the part is in no way significant, in the

latter  it  contributes  to  the  meaning  of  the  whole,  although  it  has  not  an

independent meaning. Thus in the word ‘pirate-boat’ the word ‘boat’ has no

meaning except as part of the whole word.

The  limitation  ‘by  convention’  was  introduced  because  nothing  is  bynature a noun or name-it is only so when it becomes a symbol; inarticulate

sounds, such as those which brutes produce, are significant, yet none of these

constitutes a noun.

The expression ‘not-man’ is not a noun. There is indeed no recognized

term by which we may denote such an expression, for it is not a sentence or a

denial. Let it then be called an indefinite noun.

The expressions ‘of Philo’, ‘to Philo’, and so on, constitute not nouns, but

cases of a noun. The definition of these cases of a noun is in other respects

the same as that of the noun proper, but, when coupled with ‘is’, ‘was’, or

will be’, they do not, as they are, form a proposition either true or false, and

this the noun proper always does, under these conditions. Take the words ‘of

Philo is’ or ‘of or ‘of Philo is not’; these words do not, as they stand, form

either a true or a false proposition.


3


A verb is that which, in addition to its proper meaning, carries with it the

notion of time. No part of it has any independent meaning, and it is a sign of

something said of something else.

I will explain what I mean by saying that it carries with it the notion of

time. ‘Health’ is a noun, but ‘is healthy’ is a verb; for besides its proper

meaning it indicates the present existence of the state in question.

  Moreover, a verb is always a sign of something said of something else, i.e.

of something either predicable of or present in some other thing.

  Such expressions as ‘is not-healthy’, ‘is not, ill’, I do not describe as verbs;

for  though  they  carry  the  additional  note  of  time,  and  always  form  a

predicate, there is no specified name for this variety; but let them be called

indefinite verbs, since they apply equally well to that which exists and to that

which does not.

  Similarly ‘he was healthy’, ‘he will be healthy’, are not verbs, but tenses of

a verb; the difference lies in the fact that the verb indicates present time,

while the tenses of the verb indicate those times which lie outside the present.

  Verbs in and by themselves are substantival and have significance, for he

who uses such expressions arrests the hearer’s mind, and fixes his attention;

but  they  do  not,  as  they  stand,  express  any  judgement,  either  positive  or

negative.  For  neither  are  ‘to  be’  and  ‘not  to  be’  the  participle  ‘being’

significant of any fact, unless something is added; for they do not themselvesindicate  anything,  but  imply  a  copulation,  of  which  we  cannot  form  a

conception apart from the things coupled.


4


A sentence is a significant portion of speech, some parts of which have an

independent  meaning,  that  is  to  say,  as  an  utterance,  though  not  as  the

expression of any positive judgement. Let me explain. The word ‘human’ has

meaning, but does not constitute a proposition, either positive or negative. It

is only when other words are added that the whole will form an affirmation or

denial. But if we separate one syllable of the word ‘human’ from the other, it

has  no  meaning;  similarly  in  the  word  ‘mouse’,  the  part  ‘ouse’  has  no

meaning in itself, but is merely a sound. In composite words, indeed, the

parts contribute to the meaning of the whole; yet, as has been pointed out,

they have not an independent meaning.

  Every sentence has meaning, not as being the natural means by which a

physical faculty is realized, but, as we have said, by convention. Yet every

sentence is not a proposition; only such are propositions as have in them

either truth or falsity. Thus a prayer is a sentence, but is neither true nor false.

Let us therefore dismiss all other types of sentence but the proposition, for

this last concerns our present inquiry, whereas the investigation of the others

belongs rather to the study of rhetoric or of poetry.


5


The first class of simple propositions is the simple affirmation, the next,

the simple denial; all others are only one by conjunction.

  Every proposition must contain a verb or the tense of a verb. The phrase

which defines the species ‘man’, if no verb in present, past, or future time be

added, is not a proposition. It may be asked how the expression ‘a footed

animal with two feet’ can be called single; for it is not the circumstance that

the words follow in unbroken succession that effects the unity. This inquiry,

however, finds its place in an investigation foreign to that before us.

We  call  those  propositions  single  which  indicate  a  single  fact,  or  the

conjunction of the parts of which results in unity: those propositions, on the

other hand, are separate and many in number, which indicate many facts, orwhose parts have no conjunction.

Let us, moreover, consent to call a noun or a verb an expression only, and

not a proposition, since it is not possible for a man to speak in this way when

he is expressing something, in such a way as to make a statement, whether

his utterance is an answer to a question or an act of his own initiation.

To return: of propositions one kind is simple, i.e. that which asserts or

denies  something  of  something,  the  other  composite,  i.e.  that  which  is

compounded  of  simple  propositions.  A  simple  proposition  is  a  statement,

with meaning, as to the presence of something in a subject or its absence, in

the present, past, or future, according to the divisions of time.


6


An  affirmation  is  a  positive  assertion  of  something  about  something,  a

denial a negative assertion.

Now it is possible both to affirm and to deny the presence of something

which  is  present  or  of  something  which  is  not,  and  since  these  same

affirmations and denials are possible with reference to those times which lie

outside  the  present,  it  would  be  possible  to  contradict  any  affirmation  or

denial. Thus it is plain that every affirmation has an opposite denial, and

similarly every denial an opposite affirmation.

We will call such a pair of propositions a pair of contradictories. Those

positive and negative propositions are said to be contradictory which have the

same subject and predicate. The identity of subject and of predicate must not

be ‘equivocal’. Indeed there are definitive qualifications besides this, which

we make to meet the casuistries of sophists.


7


  Some  things  are  universal,  others  individual.  By  the  term  ‘universal’  I

mean that which is of such a nature as to be predicated of many subjects, by

‘individual’  that  which  is  not  thus  predicated.  Thus  ‘man’  is  a  universal,

‘Callias’ an individual.

Our  propositions  necessarily  sometimes  concern  a  universal  subject,

sometimes an individual.

If, then, a man states a positive and a negative proposition of universalcharacter with regard to a universal, these two propositions are ‘contrary’. By

the  expression  ‘a  proposition  of  universal  character  with  regard  to  a

universal’, such propositions as ‘every man is white’, ‘no man is white’ are

meant.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  the  positive  and  negative  propositions,

though they have regard to a universal, are yet not of universal character, they

will not be contrary, albeit the meaning intended is sometimes contrary. As

instances of propositions made with regard to a universal, but not of universal

character, we may take the ‘propositions ‘man is white’, ‘man is not white’.

‘Man’  is  a  universal,  but  the  proposition  is  not  made  as  of  universal

character; for the word ‘every’ does not make the subject a universal, but

rather gives the proposition a universal character. If, however, both predicate

and  subject  are  distributed,  the  proposition  thus  constituted  is  contrary  to

truth; no affirmation will, under such circumstances, be true. The proposition

‘every man is every animal’ is an example of this type.

An affirmation is opposed to a denial in the sense which I denote by the

term  ‘contradictory’,  when,  while  the  subject  remains  the  same,  the

affirmation is of universal character and the denial is not. The affirmation

‘every man is white’ is the contradictory of the denial ‘not every man is

white’, or again, the proposition ‘no man is white’ is the contradictory of the

proposition ‘some men are white’. But propositions are opposed as contraries

when both the affirmation and the denial are universal, as in the sentences

‘every man is white’, ‘no man is white’, ‘every man is just’, ‘no man is just’.

We see that in a pair of this sort both propositions cannot be true, but the

contradictories  of  a  pair  of  contraries  can  sometimes  both  be  true  with

reference to the same subject; for instance ‘not every man is white’ and some

men are white’ are both true. Of such corresponding positive and negative

propositions as refer to universals and have a universal character, one must be

true  and  the  other  false.  This  is  the  case  also  when  the  reference  is  to

individuals, as in the propositions ‘Socrates is white’, ‘Socrates is not white’.

When,  on  the  other  hand,  the  reference  is  to  universals,  but  the

propositions are not universal, it is not always the case that one is true and the

other false, for it is possible to state truly that man is white and that man is

not white and that man is beautiful and that man is not beautiful; for if a man

is deformed he is the reverse of beautiful, also if he is progressing towards

beauty he is not yet beautiful.

This statement might seem at first sight to carry with it a contradiction,

owing  to  the  fact  that  the  proposition  ‘man  is  not  white’  appears  to  beequivalent to the proposition ‘no man is white’. This, however, is not the

case, nor are they necessarily at the same time true or false.

It is evident also that the denial corresponding to a single affirmation is

itself single; for the denial must deny just that which the affirmation affirms

concerning the same subject, and must correspond with the affirmation both

in the universal or particular character of the subject and in the distributed or

undistributed sense in which it is understood.

For instance, the affirmation ‘Socrates is white’ has its proper denial in the

proposition ‘Socrates is not white’. If anything else be negatively predicated

of the subject or if anything else be the subject though the predicate remain

the same, the denial will not be the denial proper to that affirmation, but on

that is distinct.

The denial proper to the affirmation ‘every man is white’ is ‘not every man

is white’; that proper to the affirmation ‘some men are white’ is ‘no man is

white’, while that proper to the affirmation ‘man is white’ is ‘man is not

white’.

We have shown further that a single denial is contradictorily opposite to a

single  affirmation  and  we  have  explained  which  these  are;  we  have  also

stated that contrary are distinct from contradictory propositions and which the

contrary are; also that with regard to a pair of opposite propositions it is not

always the case that one is true and the other false. We have pointed out,

moreover, what the reason of this is and under what circumstances the truth

of the one involves the falsity of the other.


8


An affirmation or denial is single, if it indicates some one fact about some

one subject; it matters not whether the subject is universal and whether the

statement has a universal character, or whether this is not so. Such single

propositions  are:  ‘every  man  is  white’,  ‘not  every  man  is  white’;’man  is

white’,’man is not white’; ‘no man is white’, ‘some men are white’; provided

the word ‘white’ has one meaning. If, on the other hand, one word has two

meanings which do not combine to form one, the affirmation is not single.

For instance, if a man should establish the symbol ‘garment’ as significant

both of a horse and of a man, the proposition ‘garment is white’ would not be

a single affirmation, nor its opposite a single denial. For it is equivalent to the

proposition ‘horse and man are white’, which, again, is equivalent to the twopropositions ‘horse is white’, ‘man is white’. If, then, these two propositions

have more than a single significance, and do not form a single proposition, it

is plain that the first proposition either has more than one significance or else

has none; for a particular man is not a horse.

This,  then,  is  another  instance  of  those  propositions  of  which  both  the

positive and the negative forms may be true or false simultaneously.


9


In the case of that which is or which has taken place, propositions, whether

positive or negative, must be true or false. Again, in the case of a pair of

contradictories, either when the subject is universal and the propositions are

of a universal character, or when it is individual, as has been said,’ one of the

two must be true and the other false; whereas when the subject is universal,

but  the  propositions  are  not  of  a  universal  character,  there  is  no  such

necessity. We have discussed this type also in a previous chapter.

  When the subject, however, is individual, and that which is predicated of it

relates  to  the  future,  the  case  is  altered.  For  if  all  propositions  whether

positive or negative are either true or false, then any given predicate must

either belong to the subject or not, so that if one man affirms that an event of

a given character will take place and another denies it, it is plain that the

statement of the one will correspond with reality and that of the other will

not. For the predicate cannot both belong and not belong to the subject at one

and the same time with regard to the future.

  Thus, if it is true to say that a thing is white, it must necessarily be white; if

the reverse proposition is true, it will of necessity not be white. Again, if it is

white, the proposition stating that it is white was true; if it is not white, the

proposition to the opposite effect was true. And if it is not white, the man

who states that it is making a false statement; and if the man who states that it

is white is making a false statement, it follows that it is not white. It may

therefore be argued that it is necessary that affirmations or denials must be

either true or false.

Now  if  this  be  so,  nothing  is  or  takes  place  fortuitously,  either  in  the

present or in the future, and there are no real alternatives; everything takes

place of necessity and is fixed. For either he that affirms that it will take place

or he that denies this is in correspondence with fact, whereas if things did not

take place of necessity, an event might just as easily not happen as happen;for  the  meaning  of  the  word  ‘fortuitous’  with  regard  to  present  or  future

events  is  that  reality  is  so  constituted  that  it  may  issue  in  either  of  two

opposite directions. Again, if a thing is white now, it was true before to say

that it would be white, so that of anything that has taken place it was always

true to say ‘it is’ or ‘it will be’. But if it was always true to say that a thing is

or will be, it is not possible that it should not be or not be about to be, and

when a thing cannot not come to be, it is impossible that it should not come

to be, and when it is impossible that it should not come to be, it must come to

be. All, then, that is about to be must of necessity take place. It results from

this that nothing is uncertain or fortuitous, for if it were fortuitous it would

not be necessary.

  Again,  to  say  that  neither  the  affirmation  nor  the  denial  is  true,

maintaining, let us say, that an event neither will take place nor will not take

place, is to take up a position impossible to defend. In the first place, though

facts  should  prove  the  one  proposition  false,  the  opposite  would  still  be

untrue. Secondly, if it was true to say that a thing was both white and large,

both these qualities must necessarily belong to it; and if they will belong to it

the next day, they must necessarily belong to it the next day. But if an event

is neither to take place nor not to take place the next day, the element of

chance will be eliminated. For example, it would be necessary that a sea-fight

should neither take place nor fail to take place on the next day.

  These  awkward  results  and  others  of  the  same  kind  follow,  if  it  is  an

irrefragable law that of every pair of contradictory propositions, whether they

have regard to universals and are stated as universally applicable, or whether

they have regard to individuals, one must be true and the other false, and that

there are no real alternatives, but that all that is or takes place is the outcome

of necessity. There would be no need to deliberate or to take trouble, on the

supposition that if we should adopt a certain course, a certain result would

follow, while, if we did not, the result would not follow. For a man may

predict an event ten thousand years beforehand, and another may predict the

reverse; that which was truly predicted at the moment in the past will of

necessity take place in the fullness of time.

  Further, it makes no difference whether people have or have not actually

made the contradictory statements. For it is manifest that the circumstances

are  not  influenced  by  the  fact  of  an  affirmation  or  denial  on  the  part  of

anyone. For events will not take place or fail to take place because it was

stated that they would or would not take place, nor is this any more the case ifthe  prediction  dates  back  ten  thousand  years  or  any  other  space  of  time.

Wherefore, if through all time the nature of things was so constituted that a

prediction about an event was true, then through all time it was necessary that

that should find fulfillment; and with regard to all events, circumstances have

always been such that their occurrence is a matter of necessity. For that of

which someone has said truly that it will be, cannot fail to take place; and of

that which takes place, it was always true to say that it would be.

Yet  this  view  leads  to  an  impossible  conclusion;  for  we  see  that  both

deliberation and action are causative with regard to the future, and that, to

speak more generally, in those things which are not continuously actual there

is potentiality in either direction. Such things may either be or not be; events

also  therefore  may  either  take  place  or  not  take  place.  There  are  many

obvious instances of this. It is possible that this coat may be cut in half, and

yet it may not be cut in half, but wear out first. In the same way, it is possible

that it should not be cut in half; unless this were so, it would not be possible

that it should wear out first. So it is therefore with all other events which

possess this kind of potentiality. It is therefore plain that it is not of necessity

that  everything  is  or  takes  place;  but  in  some  instances  there  are  real

alternatives, in which case the affirmation is no more true and no more false

than the denial; while some exhibit a predisposition and general tendency in

one direction or the other, and yet can issue in the opposite direction by

exception.

Now that which is must needs be when it is, and that which is not must

needs not be when it is not. Yet it cannot be said without qualification that all

existence  and  non-existence  is  the  outcome  of  necessity.  For  there  is  a

difference between saying that that which is, when it is, must needs be, and

simply saying that all that is must needs be, and similarly in the case of that

which is not. In the case, also, of two contradictory propositions this holds

good. Everything must either be or not be, whether in the present or in the

future, but it is not always possible to distinguish and state determinately

which of these alternatives must necessarily come about.

Let me illustrate. A sea-fight must either take place to-morrow or not, but

it is not necessary that it should take place to-morrow, neither is it necessary

that it should not take place, yet it is necessary that it either should or should

not  take  place  to-morrow.  Since  propositions  correspond  with  facts,  it  is

evident that when in future events there is a real alternative, and a potentiality

in  contrary  directions,  the  corresponding  affirmation  and  denial  have  thesame character.

This is the case with regard to that which is not always existent or not

always nonexistent. One of the two propositions in such instances must be

true and the other false, but we cannot say determinately that this or that is

false, but must leave the alternative undecided. One may indeed be more

likely to be true than the other, but it cannot be either actually true or actually

false. It is therefore plain that it is not necessary that of an affirmation and a

denial one should be true and the other false. For in the case of that which

exists potentially, but not actually, the rule which applies to that which exists

actually does not hold good. The case is rather as we have indicated.


10


An affirmation is the statement of a fact with regard to a subject, and this

subject is either a noun or that which has no name; the subject and predicate

in an affirmation must each denote a single thing. I have already explained’

what is meant by a noun and by that which has no name; for I stated that the

expression ‘not-man’ was not a noun, in the proper sense of the word, but an

indefinite noun, denoting as it does in a certain sense a single thing. Similarly

the expression ‘does not enjoy health’ is not a verb proper, but an indefinite

verb. Every affirmation, then, and every denial, will consist of a noun and a

verb, either definite or indefinite.

  There can be no affirmation or denial without a verb; for the expressions

‘is’, ‘will be’, ‘was’, ‘is coming to be’, and the like are verbs according to our

definition, since besides their specific meaning they convey the notion of

time. Thus the primary affirmation and denial are ‘as follows: ‘man is’, ‘man

is not’. Next to these, there are the propositions: ‘not-man is’, ‘not-man is

not’. Again we have the propositions: ‘every man is, ‘every man is not’, ‘all

that is not-man is’, ‘all that is not-man is not’. The same classification holds

good with regard to such periods of time as lie outside the present.

  When the verb ‘is’ is used as a third element in the sentence, there can be

positive and negative propositions of two sorts. Thus in the sentence ‘man is

just’ the verb ‘is’ is used as a third element, call it verb or noun, which you

will. Four propositions, therefore, instead of two can be formed with these

materials. Two of the four, as regards their affirmation and denial, correspond

in their logical sequence with the propositions which deal with a condition of

privation; the other two do not correspond with these.I mean that the verb ‘is’ is added either to the term ‘just’ or to the term

‘not-just’, and two negative propositions are formed in the same way. Thus

we have the four propositions. Reference to the subjoined table will make

matters clear:

<

  tbody>

    A. Affirmation. Man is justB. Denial. Man is not just

    \/

    /\

    D. Denial. Man is not not-justC. Affirmation. Man is not-just

Here ‘is’ and ‘is not’ are added either to ‘just’ or to ‘not-just’. This then is

the proper scheme for these propositions, as has been said in the Analytics.

The same rule holds good, if the subject is distributed. Thus we have the

table:

<

  tbody>

    A'. Affirmation. Every man is justB'. Denial. Not every man is just

    \/

    /\

    D'. Denial. Not every man is not-justC'. Affirmation. Every man is not-just.

Yet here it is not possible, in the same way as in the former case, that the

propositions joined in the table by a diagonal line should both be true; though

under certain circumstances this is the case.

We  have  thus  set  out  two  pairs  of  opposite  propositions;  there  are

moreover two other pairs, if a term be conjoined with ‘not-man’, the latter

forming a kind of subject. Thus:

<

  tbody>

    A". Not-man is just.B". Not-man is not just

    \/

    /\

    D". Not-man is not not-just.C". Not-man is not-just.

This is an exhaustive enumeration of all the pairs of opposite propositionsthat can possibly be framed. This last group should remain distinct from those

which preceded it, since it employs as its subject the expression ‘not-man’.

  When the verb ‘is’ does not fit the structure of the sentence (for instance,

when the verbs ‘walks’, ‘enjoys health’ are used), that scheme applies, which

applied when the word ‘is’ was added.

  Thus we have the propositions: ‘every man enjoys health’, ‘every man

does-not-enjoy-health’, ‘all that is not-man enjoys health’, ‘all that is not-man

does-not-enjoy-health’. We must not in these propositions use the expression

‘not every man’. The negative must be attached to the word ‘man’, for the

word ‘every’ does not give to the subject a universal significance, but implies

that, as a subject, it is distributed. This is plain from the following pairs: ‘man

enjoys health’, ‘man does not enjoy health’; ‘not-man enjoys health’, ‘not

man does not enjoy health’. These propositions differ from the former in

being indefinite and not universal in character. Thus the adjectives ‘every’

and no additional significance except that the subject, whether in a positive or

in a negative sentence, is distributed. The rest of the sentence, therefore, will

in each case be the same.

  Since the contrary of the proposition ‘every animal is just’ is ‘no animal is

just’, it is plain that these two propositions will never both be true at the same

time  or  with  reference  to  the  same  subject.  Sometimes,  however,  the

contradictories of these contraries will both be true, as in the instance before

us: the propositions ‘not every animal is just’ and ‘some animals are just’ are

both true.

  Further,  the  proposition  ‘no  man  is  just’  follows  from  the  proposition

‘every man is not just’ and the proposition ‘not every man is not just’, which

is the opposite of ‘every man is not-just’, follows from the proposition ‘some

men are just’; for if this be true, there must be some just men.

It is evident, also, that when the subject is individual, if a question is asked

and the negative answer is the true one, a certain positive proposition is also

true.  Thus,  if  the  question  were  asked  Socrates  wise?’  and  the  negative

answer were the true one, the positive inference ‘Then Socrates is unwise’ is

correct. But no such inference is correct in the case of universals, but rather a

negative proposition. For instance, if to the question ‘Is every man wise?’ the

answer is ‘no’, the inference ‘Then every man is unwise’ is false. But under

these circumstances the inference ‘Not every man is wise’ is correct. This last

is the contradictory, the former the contrary. Negative expressions, which

consist of an indefinite noun or predicate, such as ‘not-man’ or ‘not-just’,may seem to be denials containing neither noun nor verb in the proper sense

of the words. But they are not. For a denial must always be either true or

false, and he that uses the expression ‘not man’, if nothing more be added, is

not nearer but rather further from making a true or a false statement than he

who uses the expression ‘man’.

The propositions ‘everything that is not man is just’, and the contradictory

of this, are not equivalent to any of the other propositions; on the other hand,

the proposition ‘everything that is not man is not just’ is equivalent to the

proposition ‘nothing that is not man is just’.

The  conversion  of  the  position  of  subject  and  predicate  in  a  sentence

involves no difference in its meaning. Thus we say ‘man is white’ and ‘white

is  man’.  If  these  were  not  equivalent,  there  would  be  more  than  one

contradictory to the same proposition, whereas it has been demonstrated’ that

each  proposition  has  one  proper  contradictory  and  one  only.  For  of  the

proposition ‘man is white’ the appropriate contradictory is ‘man is not white’,

and  of  the  proposition  ‘white  is  man’,  if  its  meaning  be  different,  the

contradictory will either be ‘white is not not-man’ or ‘white is not man’. Now

the former of these is the contradictory of the proposition ‘white is not-man’,

and the latter of these is the contradictory of the proposition ‘man is white’;

thus there will be two contradictories to one proposition.

It is evident, therefore, that the inversion of the relative position of subject

and predicate does not affect the sense of affirmations and denials.


11


  There is no unity about an affirmation or denial which, either positively or

negatively, predicates one thing of many subjects, or many things of the same

subject, unless that which is indicated by the many is really some one thing.

do not apply this word ‘one’ to those things which, though they have a single

recognized name, yet do not combine to form a unity. Thus, man may be an

animal, and biped, and domesticated, but these three predicates combine to

form a unity. On the other hand, the predicates ‘white’, ‘man’, and ‘walking’

do not thus combine. Neither, therefore, if these three form the subject of an

affirmation,  nor  if  they  form  its  predicate,  is  there  any  unity  about  that

affirmation. In both cases the unity is linguistic, but not real.

If therefore the dialectical question is a request for an answer, i.e. either for

the admission of a premiss or for the admission of one of two contradictories-and the premiss is itself always one of two contradictories-the answer to such

a question as contains the above predicates cannot be a single proposition.

For as I have explained in the Topics, question is not a single one, even if the

answer asked for is true.

At the same time it is plain that a question of the form ‘what is it?’ is not a

dialectical  question,  for  a  dialectical  questioner  must  by  the  form  of  his

question give his opponent the chance of announcing one of two alternatives,

whichever he wishes. He must therefore put the question into a more definite

form, and inquire, e.g.. whether man has such and such a characteristic or not.

  Some combinations of predicates are such that the separate predicates unite

to form a single predicate. Let us consider under what conditions this is and is

not possible. We may either state in two separate propositions that man is an

animal and that man is a biped, or we may combine the two, and state that

man is an animal with two feet. Similarly we may use ‘man’ and ‘white’ as

separate predicates, or unite them into one. Yet if a man is a shoemaker and is

also good, we cannot construct a composite proposition and say that he is a

good shoemaker. For if, whenever two separate predicates truly belong to a

subject, it follows that the predicate resulting from their combination also

truly belongs to the subject, many absurd results ensue. For instance, a man is

man and white. Therefore, if predicates may always be combined, he is a

white  man.  Again,  if  the  predicate  ‘white’  belongs  to  him,  then  the

combination of that predicate with the former composite predicate will be

permissible.  Thus  it  will  be  right  to  say  that  he  is  a  white  man  so  on

indefinitely. Or, again, we may combine the predicates ‘musical’, ‘white’,

and ‘walking’, and these may be combined many times. Similarly we may

say that Socrates is Socrates and a man, and that therefore he is the man

Socrates, or that Socrates is a man and a biped, and that therefore he is a two-

footed  man.  Thus  it  is  manifest  that  if  man  states  unconditionally  that

predicates can always be combined, many absurd consequences ensue.

We will now explain what ought to be laid down.

  Those predicates, and terms forming the subject of predication, which are

accidental either to the same subject or to one another, do not combine to

form a unity. Take the proposition ‘man is white of complexion and musical’.

Whiteness and being musical do not coalesce to form a unity, for they belong

only accidentally to the same subject. Nor yet, if it were true to say that that

which is white is musical, would the terms ‘musical’ and ‘white’ form a

unity,  for  it  is  only  incidentally  that  that  which  is  musical  is  white;  thecombination of the two will, therefore, not form a unity.

  Thus, again, whereas, if a man is both good and a shoemaker, we cannot

combine the two propositions and say simply that he is a good shoemaker, we

are, at the same time, able to combine the predicates ‘animal’ and ‘biped’ and

say  that  a  man  is  an  animal  with  two  feet,  for  these  predicates  are  not

accidental.

  Those predicates, again, cannot form a unity, of which the one is implicit

in the other: thus we cannot combine the predicate ‘white’ again and again

with that which already contains the notion ‘white’, nor is it right to call a

man an animal-man or a two-footed man; for the notions ‘animal’ and ‘biped’

are implicit in the word ‘man’. On the other hand, it is possible to predicate a

term simply of any one instance, and to say that some one particular man is a

man or that some one white man is a white man.

Yet this is not always possible: indeed, when in the adjunct there is some

opposite which involves a contradiction, the predication of the simple term is

impossible. Thus it is not right to call a dead man a man. When, however, this

is not the case, it is not impossible.

Yet the facts of the case might rather be stated thus: when some such

opposite elements are present, resolution is never possible, but when they are

not  present,  resolution  is  nevertheless  not  always  possible.  Take  the

proposition ‘Homer is so-and-so’, say ‘a poet’; does it follow that Homer is,

or does it not? The verb ‘is’ is here used of Homer only incidentally, the

proposition being that Homer is a poet, not that he is, in the independent

sense of the word.

  Thus,  in  the  case  of  those  predications  which  have  within  them  no

contradiction when the nouns are expanded into definitions, and wherein the

predicates belong to the subject in their own proper sense and not in any

indirect way, the individual may be the subject of the simple propositions as

well as of the composite. But in the case of that which is not, it is not true to

say that because it is the object of opinion, it is; for the opinion held about it

is that it is not, not that it is.


12


As  these  distinctions  have  been  made,  we  must  consider  the  mutual

relation of those affirmations and denials which assert or deny possibility or

contingency,  impossibility  or  necessity:  for  the  subject  is  not  withoutdifficulty.

We admit that of composite expressions those are contradictory each to

each which have the verb ‘to be’ its positive and negative form respectively.

Thus the contradictory of the proposition ‘man is’ is ‘man is not’, not ‘not-

man is’, and the contradictory of ‘man is white’ is ‘man is not white’, not

‘man is not-white’. For otherwise, since either the positive or the negative

proposition is true of any subject, it will turn out true to say that a piece of

wood is a man that is not white.

Now if this is the case, in those propositions which do not contain the verb

‘to be’ the verb which takes its place will exercise the same function. Thus

the  contradictory  of  ‘man  walks’  is  ‘man  does  not  walk’,  not  ‘not-man

walks’; for to say ‘man walks’ merely equivalent to saying ‘man is walking’.

If then this rule is universal, the contradictory of ‘it may be’ is may not be’,

not ‘it cannot be’.

Now it appears that the same thing both may and may not be; for instance,

everything that may be cut or may walk may also escape cutting and refrain

from walking; and the reason is that those things that have potentiality in this

sense are not always actual. In such cases, both the positive and the negative

propositions will be true; for that which is capable of walking or of being

seen has also a potentiality in the opposite direction.

But since it is impossible that contradictory propositions should both be

true  of  the  same  subject,  it  follows  that’  it  may  not  be’  is  not  the

contradictory of ‘it may be’. For it is a logical consequence of what we have

said, either that the same predicate can be both applicable and inapplicable to

one and the same subject at the same time, or that it is not by the addition of

the  verbs  ‘be’  and  ‘not  be’,  respectively,  that  positive  and  negative

propositions are formed. If the former of these alternatives must be rejected,

we must choose the latter.

The contradictory, then, of ‘it may be’ is ‘it cannot be’. The same rule

applies to the proposition ‘it is contingent that it should be’; the contradictory

of this is ‘it is not contingent that it should be’. The similar propositions, such

as ‘it is necessary’ and ‘it is impossible’, may be dealt with in the same

manner. For it comes about that just as in the former instances the verbs ‘is’

and ‘is not’ were added to the subject-matter of the sentence ‘white’ and

‘man’, so here ‘that it should be’ and ‘that it should not be’ are the subject-

matter  and  ‘is  possible’,  ‘is  contingent’,  are  added.  These  indicate  that  a

certain thing is or is not possible, just as in the former instances ‘is’ and ‘isnot’ indicated that certain things were or were not the case.

The contradictory, then, of ‘it may not be’ is not ‘it cannot be’, but ‘it

cannot not be’, and the contradictory of ‘it may be’ is not ‘it may not be’, but

cannot be’. Thus the propositions ‘it may be’ and ‘it may not be’ appear each

to imply the other: for, since these two propositions are not contradictory, the

same thing both may and may not be. But the propositions ‘it may be’ and ‘it

cannot be’ can never be true of the same subject at the same time, for they are

contradictory. Nor can the propositions ‘it may not be’ and ‘it cannot not be’

be at once true of the same subject.

The propositions which have to do with necessity are governed by the

same principle. The contradictory of ‘it is necessary that it should be’, is not

‘it is necessary that it should not be,’ but ‘it is not necessary that it should

be’, and the contradictory of ‘it is necessary that it should not be’ is ‘it is not

necessary that it should not be’.

  Again, the contradictory of ‘it is impossible that it should be’ is not ‘it is

impossible that it should not be’ but ‘it is not impossible that it should be’,

and the contradictory of ‘it is impossible that it should not be’ is ‘it is not

impossible that it should not be’.

To  generalize,  we  must,  as  has  been  stated,  define  the  clauses  ‘that  it

should  be’  and  ‘that  it  should  not  be’  as  the  subject-matter  of  the

propositions,  and  in  making  these  terms  into  affirmations  and  denials  we

must  combine  them  with  ‘that  it  should  be’  and  ‘that  it  should  not  be’

respectively.

We must consider the following pairs as contradictory propositions:

<

  tbody>

    It may be.It cannot be.

    It is contingent.It is not contingent.

    It is impossible.It is not impossible.

    It is necessary.It is not necessary.

    It is true.It is not true.


13


  Logical  sequences  follow  in  due  course  when  we  have  arranged  thepropositions  thus.  From  the  proposition  ‘it  may  be’  it  follows  that  it  is

contingent,  and  the  relation  is  reciprocal.  It  follows  also  that  it  is  not

impossible and not necessary.

  From the proposition ‘it may not be’ or ‘it is contingent that it should not

be’ it follows that it is not necessary that it should not be and that it is not

impossible that it should not be. From the proposition ‘it cannot be’ or ‘it is

not contingent’ it follows that it is necessary that it should not be and that it is

impossible that it should be. From the proposition ‘it cannot not be’ or ‘it is

not contingent that it should not be’ it follows that it is necessary that it

should be and that it is impossible that it should not be.

Let us consider these statements by the help of a table:

<

  tbody>

                      A.B.

    It may be.It cannot be.

    It is contingent.It is not contingent.

    It is not impossible that it should be.It is impossible that it should be.

    It is not necessary that it should be.It is necessary that it should not be.

                      C.D.

    It may not be.It cannot not be.

    It is contingent that it should not be.It is not contingent that it should not be.

    It is not impossible that it should not be.It is impossible that it should not be.

    It is not necessary that it should not be.It is necessary that it should be.

Now  the  propositions  ‘it  is  impossible  that  it  should  be’  and  ‘it  is  not

impossible that it should be’ are consequent upon the propositions ‘it may

be’,  ‘it  is  contingent’,  and  ‘it  cannot  be’,  ‘it  is  not  contingent’,  the

contradictories upon the contradictories. But there is inversion. The negative

of the proposition ‘it is impossible’ is consequent upon the proposition ‘it

may be’ and the corresponding positive in the first case upon the negative in

the  second.  For  ‘it  is  impossible’  is  a  positive  proposition  and  ‘it  is  not

impossible’ is negative.

We must investigate the relation subsisting between these propositions and

those which predicate necessity. That there is a distinction is clear. In this

case,  contrary  propositions  follow  respectively  from  contradictorypropositions,  and  the  contradictory  propositions  belong  to  separate

sequences. For the proposition ‘it is not necessary that it should be’ is not the

negative of ‘it is necessary that it should not be’, for both these propositions

may be true of the same subject; for when it is necessary that a thing should

not be, it is not necessary that it should be. The reason why the propositions

predicating necessity do not follow in the same kind of sequence as the rest,

lies in the fact that the proposition ‘it is impossible’ is equivalent, when used

with a contrary subject, to the proposition ‘it is necessary’. For when it is

impossible that a thing should be, it is necessary, not that it should be, but

that it should not be, and when it is impossible that a thing should not be, it is

necessary that it should be. Thus, if the propositions predicating impossibility

or non-impossibility follow without change of subject from those predicating

possibility or non-possibility, those predicating necessity must follow with

the  contrary  subject;  for  the  propositions  ‘it  is  impossible’  and  ‘it  is

necessary’ are not equivalent, but, as has been said, inversely connected.

Yet perhaps it is impossible that the contradictory propositions predicating

necessity  should  be  thus  arranged.  For  when  it  is  necessary  that  a  thing

should be, it is possible that it should be. (For if not, the opposite follows,

since one or the other must follow; so, if it is not possible, it is impossible,

and it is thus impossible that a thing should be, which must necessarily be;

which is absurd.)

Yet from the proposition ‘it may be’ it follows that it is not impossible, and

from that it follows that it is not necessary; it comes about therefore that the

thing which must necessarily be need not be; which is absurd. But again, the

proposition  ‘it  is  necessary  that  it  should  be’  does  not  follow  from  the

proposition ‘it may be’, nor does the proposition ‘it is necessary that it should

not be’. For the proposition ‘it may be’ implies a twofold possibility, while, if

either of the two former propositions is true, the twofold possibility vanishes.

For if a thing may be, it may also not be, but if it is necessary that it should be

or  that  it  should  not  be,  one  of  the  two  alternatives  will  be  excluded.  It

remains, therefore, that the proposition ‘it is not necessary that it should not

be’ follows from the proposition ‘it may be’. For this is true also of that

which must necessarily be.

  Moreover the proposition ‘it is not necessary that it should not be’ is the

contradictory of that which follows from the proposition ‘it cannot be’; for ‘it

cannot be’ is followed by ‘it is impossible that it should be’ and by ‘it is

necessary  that  it  should  not  be’,  and  the  contradictory  of  this  is  theproposition ‘it is not necessary that it should not be’. Thus in this case also

contradictory propositions follow contradictory in the way indicated, and no

logical impossibilities occur when they are thus arranged.

It may be questioned whether the proposition ‘it may be’ follows from the

proposition ‘it is necessary that it should be’. If not, the contradictory must

follow, namely that it cannot be, or, if a man should maintain that this is not

the contradictory, then the proposition ‘it may not be’.

Now both of these are false of that which necessarily is. At the same time,

it is thought that if a thing may be cut it may also not be cut, if a thing may be

it  may  also  not  be,  and  thus  it  would  follow  that  a  thing  which  must

necessarily be may possibly not be; which is false. It is evident, then, that it is

not always the case that that which may be or may walk possesses also a

potentiality in the other direction. There are exceptions. In the first place we

must except those things which possess a potentiality not in accordance with

a rational principle, as fire possesses the potentiality of giving out heat, that

is,  an  irrational  capacity.  Those  potentialities  which  involve  a  rational

principle are potentialities of more than one result, that is, of contrary results;

those that are irrational are not always thus constituted. As I have said, fire

cannot both heat and not heat, neither has anything that is always actual any

twofold  potentiality.  Yet  some  even  of  those  potentialities  which  are

irrational admit of opposite results. However, thus much has been said to

emphasize the truth that it is not every potentiality which admits of opposite

results, even where the word is used always in the same sense.

But in some cases the word is used equivocally. For the term ‘possible’ is

ambiguous, being used in the one case with reference to facts, to that which is

actualized, as when a man is said to find walking possible because he is

actually walking, and generally when a capacity is predicated because it is

actually  realized;  in  the  other  case,  with  reference  to  a  state  in  which

realization is conditionally practicable, as when a man is said to find walking

possible because under certain conditions he would walk. This last sort of

potentiality belongs only to that which can be in motion, the former can exist

also  in  the  case  of  that  which  has  not  this  power.  Both  of  that  which  is

walking  and  is  actual,  and  of  that  which  has  the  capacity  though  not

necessarily realized, it is true to say that it is not impossible that it should

walk (or, in the other case, that it should be), but while we cannot predicate

this latter kind of potentiality of that which is necessary in the unqualified

sense of the word, we can predicate the former.Our conclusion, then, is this: that since the universal is consequent upon

the particular, that which is necessary is also possible, though not in every

sense in which the word may be used.

We  may  perhaps  state  that  necessity  and  its  absence  are  the  initial

principles of existence and non-existence, and that all else must be regarded

as posterior to these.

It is plain from what has been said that that which is of necessity is actual.

Thus, if that which is eternal is prior, actuality also is prior to potentiality.

Some  things  are  actualities  without  potentiality,  namely,  the  primary

substances; a second class consists of those things which are actual but also

potential,  whose  actuality  is  in  nature  prior  to  their  potentiality,  though

posterior  in  time;  a  third  class  comprises  those  things  which  are  never

actualized, but are pure potentialities.


14


The question arises whether an affirmation finds its contrary in a denial or

in another affirmation; whether the proposition ‘every man is just’ finds its

contrary in the proposition ‘no man is just’, or in the proposition ‘every man

is unjust’. Take the propositions ‘Callias is just’, ‘Callias is not just’, ‘Callias

is unjust’; we have to discover which of these form contraries.

Now if the spoken word corresponds with the judgement of the mind, and

if, in thought, that judgement is the contrary of another, which pronounces a

contrary fact, in the way, for instance, in which the judgement ‘every man is

just’ pronounces a contrary to that pronounced by the judgement ‘every man

is unjust’, the same must needs hold good with regard to spoken affirmations.

But if, in thought, it is not the judgement which pronounces a contrary fact

that is the contrary of another, then one affirmation will not find its contrary

in another, but rather in the corresponding denial. We must therefore consider

which true judgement is the contrary of the false, that which forms the denial

of the false judgement or that which affirms the contrary fact.

Let me illustrate. There is a true judgement concerning that which is good,

that it is good; another, a false judgement, that it is not good; and a third,

which is distinct, that it is bad. Which of these two is contrary to the true?

And  if  they  are  one  and  the  same,  which  mode  of  expression  forms  the

contrary?

It is an error to suppose that judgements are to be defined as contrary invirtue  of  the  fact  that  they  have  contrary  subjects;  for  the  judgement

concerning a good thing, that it is good, and that concerning a bad thing, that

it is bad, may be one and the same, and whether they are so or not, they both

represent the truth. Yet the subjects here are contrary. But judgements are not

contrary because they have contrary subjects, but because they are to the

contrary effect.

Now if we take the judgement that that which is good is good, and another

that it is not good, and if there are at the same time other attributes, which do

not and cannot belong to the good, we must nevertheless refuse to treat as the

contraries of the true judgement those which opine that some other attribute

subsists  which  does  not  subsist,  as  also  those  that  opine  that  some  other

attribute  does  not  subsist  which  does  subsist,  for  both  these  classes  of

judgement are of unlimited content.

  Those judgements must rather be termed contrary to the true judgements,

in  which  error  is  present.  Now  these  judgements  are  those  which  are

concerned with the starting points of generation, and generation is the passing

from one extreme to its opposite; therefore error is a like transition.

Now that which is good is both good and not bad. The first quality is part

of its essence, the second accidental; for it is by accident that it is not bad.

But if that true judgement is most really true, which concerns the subject’s

intrinsic nature, then that false judgement likewise is most really false, which

concerns its intrinsic nature. Now the judgement that that is good is not good

is a false judgement concerning its intrinsic nature, the judgement that it is

bad is one concerning that which is accidental. Thus the judgement which

denies  the  true  judgement  is  more  really  false  than  that  which  positively

asserts the presence of the contrary quality. But it is the man who forms that

judgement which is contrary to the true who is most thoroughly deceived, for

contraries are among the things which differ most widely within the same

class. If then of the two judgements one is contrary to the true judgement, but

that which is contradictory is the more truly contrary, then the latter, it seems,

is  the  real  contrary.  The  judgement  that  that  which  is  good  is  bad  is

composite. For presumably the man who forms that judgement must at the

same time understand that that which is good is not good.

  Further, the contradictory is either always the contrary or never; therefore,

if it must necessarily be so in all other cases, our conclusion in the case just

dealt with would seem to be correct. Now where terms have no contrary, that

judgement is false, which forms the negative of the true; for instance, he whothinks a man is not a man forms a false judgement. If then in these cases the

negative is the contrary, then the principle is universal in its application.

  Again, the judgement that that which is not good is not good is parallel

with the judgement that that which is good is good. Besides these there is the

judgement that that which is good is not good, parallel with the judgement

that that that is not good is good. Let us consider, therefore, what would form

the contrary of the true judgement that that which is not good is not good.

The judgement that it is bad would, of course, fail to meet the case, since two

true judgements are never contrary and this judgement might be true at the

same time as that with which it is connected. For since some things which are

not good are bad, both judgements may be true. Nor is the judgement that it is

not bad the contrary, for this too might be true, since both qualities might be

predicated of the same subject. It remains, therefore, that of the judgement

concerning that which is not good, that it is not good, the contrary judgement

is that it is good; for this is false. In the same way, moreover, the judgement

concerning  that  which  is  good,  that  it  is  not  good,  is  the  contrary  of  the

judgement that it is good.

It is evident that it will make no difference if we universalize the positive

judgement, for the universal negative judgement will form the contrary. For

instance, the contrary of the judgement that everything that is good is good is

that nothing that is good is good. For the judgement that that which is good is

good, if the subject be understood in a universal sense, is equivalent to the

judgement  that  whatever  is  good  is  good,  and  this  is  identical  with  the

judgement that everything that is good is good. We may deal similarly with

judgements concerning that which is not good.

If therefore this is the rule with judgements, and if spoken affirmations and

denials are judgements expressed in words, it is plain that the universal denial

is  the  contrary  of  the  affirmation  about  the  same  subject.  Thus  the

propositions ‘everything good is good’, ‘every man is good’, have for their

contraries the propositions ‘nothing good is good’, ‘no man is good’. The

contradictory propositions, on the other hand, are ‘not everything good is

good’, ‘not every man is good’.

It is evident, also, that neither true judgements nor true propositions can be

contrary the one to the other. For whereas, when two propositions are true, a

man  may  state  both  at  the  same  time  without  inconsistency,  contrary

propositions  are  those  which  state  contrary  conditions,  and  contrary

conditions cannot subsist at one and the same time in the same subject.                            Prior Analytics, Book I


Translated by A. J. Jenkinson


1


We must first state the subject of our inquiry and the faculty to which it

belongs:  its  subject  is  demonstration  and  the  faculty  that  carries  it  out

demonstrative  science.  We  must  next  define  a  premiss,  a  term,  and  a

syllogism, and the nature of a perfect and of an imperfect syllogism; and after

that, the inclusion or noninclusion of one term in another as in a whole, and

what we mean by predicating one term of all, or none, of another.

A premiss then is a sentence affirming or denying one thing of another.

This is either universal or particular or indefinite. By universal I mean the

statement  that  something  belongs  to  all  or  none  of  something  else;  by

particular that it belongs to some or not to some or not to all; by indefinite

that  it  does  or  does  not  belong,  without  any  mark  to  show  whether  it  is

universal or particular, e.g. ‘contraries are subjects of the same science’, or

‘pleasure is not good’. The demonstrative premiss differs from the dialectical,

because  the  demonstrative  premiss  is  the  assertion  of  one  of  two

contradictory statements (the demonstrator does not ask for his premiss, but

lays it down), whereas the dialectical premiss depends on the adversary’s

choice between two contradictories. But this will make no difference to the

production of a syllogism in either case; for both the demonstrator and the

dialectician argue syllogistically after stating that something does or does not

belong  to  something  else.  Therefore  a  syllogistic  premiss  without

qualification  will  be  an  affirmation  or  denial  of  something  concerning

something else in the way we have described; it will be demonstrative, if it is

true and obtained through the first principles of its science; while a dialectical

premiss is the giving of a choice between two contradictories, when a man is

proceeding by question, but when he is syllogizing it is the assertion of that

which is apparent and generally admitted, as has been said in the Topics. The

nature  then  of  a  premiss  and  the  difference  between  syllogistic,

demonstrative, and dialectical premisses, may be taken as sufficiently defined

by us in relation to our present need, but will be stated accurately in thesequel.

I call that a term into which the premiss is resolved, i.e. both the predicate

and  that  of  which  it  is  predicated,  ‘being’  being  added  and  ‘not  being’

removed, or vice versa.

A syllogism is discourse in which, certain things being stated, something

other than what is stated follows of necessity from their being so. I mean by

the last phrase that they produce the consequence, and by this, that no further

term is required from without in order to make the consequence necessary.

I call that a perfect syllogism which needs nothing other than what has

been stated to make plain what necessarily follows; a syllogism is imperfect,

if it needs either one or more propositions, which are indeed the necessary

consequences of the terms set down, but have not been expressly stated as

premisses.

That one term should be included in another as in a whole is the same as

for the other to be predicated of all of the first. And we say that one term is

predicated of all of another, whenever no instance of the subject can be found

of which the other term cannot be asserted: ‘to be predicated of none’ must

be understood in the same way.


2


  Every premiss states that something either is or must be or may be the

attribute  of  something  else;  of  premisses  of  these  three  kinds  some  are

affirmative,  others  negative,  in  respect  of  each  of  the  three  modes  of

attribution;  again  some  affirmative  and  negative  premisses  are  universal,

others  particular,  others  indefinite.  It  is  necessary  then  that  in  universal

attribution the terms of the negative premiss should be convertible, e.g. if no

pleasure is good, then no good will be pleasure; the terms of the affirmative

must  be  convertible,  not  however,  universally,  but  in  part,  e.g.  if  every

pleasure,is good, some good must be pleasure; the particular affirmative must

convert  in  part  (for  if  some  pleasure  is  good,  then  some  good  will  be

pleasure); but the particular negative need not convert, for if some animal is

not man, it does not follow that some man is not animal.

First then take a universal negative with the terms A and B. If no B is A,

neither can any A be B. For if some A (say C) were B, it would not be true

that no B is A; for C is a B. But if every B is A then some A is B. For if no A

were B, then no B could be A. But we assumed that every B is A. Similarlytoo, if the premiss is particular. For if some B is A, then some of the As must

be B. For if none were, then no B would be A. But if some B is not A, there

is no necessity that some of the As should not be B; e.g. let B stand for

animal  and  A  for  man.  Not  every  animal  is  a  man;  but  every  man  is  an

animal.


3


The same manner of conversion will hold good also in respect of necessary

premisses.  The  universal  negative  converts  universally;  each  of  the

affirmatives converts into a particular. If it is necessary that no B is A, it is

necessary also that no A is B. For if it is possible that some A is B, it would

be possible also that some B is A. If all or some B is A of necessity, it is

necessary also that some A is B: for if there were no necessity, neither would

some of the Bs be A necessarily. But the particular negative does not convert,

for the same reason which we have already stated.

In respect of possible premisses, since possibility is used in several senses

(for we say that what is necessary and what is not necessary and what is

potential  is  possible),  affirmative  statements  will  all  convert  in  a  manner

similar to those described. For if it is possible that all or some B is A, it will

be possible that some A is B. For if that were not possible, then no B could

possibly be A. This has been already proved. But in negative statements the

case is different. Whatever is said to be possible, either because B necessarily

is  A,  or  because  B  is  not  necessarily  A,  admits  of  conversion  like  other

negative statements, e.g. if one should say, it is possible that man is not horse,

or that no garment is white. For in the former case the one term necessarily

does not belong to the other; in the latter there is no necessity that it should:

and the premiss converts like other negative statements. For if it is possible

for no man to be a horse, it is also admissible for no horse to be a man; and if

it is admissible for no garment to be white, it is also admissible for nothing

white to be a garment. For if any white thing must be a garment, then some

garment  will  necessarily  be  white.  This  has  been  already  proved.  The

particular negative also must be treated like those dealt with above. But if

anything is said to be possible because it is the general rule and natural (and it

is in this way we define the possible), the negative premisses can no longer

be converted like the simple negatives; the universal negative premiss does

not convert, and the particular does. This will be plain when we speak aboutthe possible. At present we may take this much as clear in addition to what

has been said: the statement that it is possible that no B is A or some B is not

A is affirmative in form: for the expression ‘is possible’ ranks along with ‘is’,

and ‘is’ makes an affirmation always and in every case, whatever the terms to

which it is added, in predication, e.g. ‘it is not-good’ or ‘it is not-white’ or in

a  word  ‘it  is  not-this’.  But  this  also  will  be  proved  in  the  sequel.  In

conversion  these  premisses  will  behave  like  the  other  affirmative

propositions.


4


  After these distinctions we now state by what means, when, and how every

syllogism  is  produced;  subsequently  we  must  speak  of  demonstration.

Syllogism should be discussed before demonstration because syllogism is the

general: the demonstration is a sort of syllogism, but not every syllogism is a

demonstration.

  Whenever  three  terms  are  so  related  to  one  another  that  the  last  is

contained in the middle as in a whole, and the middle is either contained in,

or excluded from, the first as in or from a whole, the extremes must be related

by a perfect syllogism. I call that term middle which is itself contained in

another  and  contains  another  in  itself:  in  position  also  this  comes  in  the

middle.  By  extremes  I  mean  both  that  term  which  is  itself  contained  in

another and that in which another is contained. If A is predicated of all B, and

B of all C, A must be predicated of all C: we have already explained what we

mean by ‘predicated of all’. Similarly also, if A is predicated of no B, and B

of all C, it is necessary that no C will be A.

But if the first term belongs to all the middle, but the middle to none of the

last term, there will be no syllogism in respect of the extremes; for nothing

necessary follows from the terms being so related; for it is possible that the

first  should  belong  either  to  all  or  to  none  of  the  last,  so  that  neither  a

particular nor a universal conclusion is necessary. But if there is no necessary

consequence, there cannot be a syllogism by means of these premisses. As an

example of a universal affirmative relation between the extremes we may

take the terms animal, man, horse; of a universal negative relation, the terms

animal, man, stone. Nor again can syllogism be formed when neither the first

term belongs to any of the middle, nor the middle to any of the last. As an

example of a positive relation between the extremes take the terms science,line, medicine: of a negative relation science, line, unit.

If then the terms are universally related, it is clear in this figure when a

syllogism will be possible and when not, and that if a syllogism is possible

the terms must be related as described, and if they are so related there will be

a syllogism.

But if one term is related universally, the other in part only, to its subject,

there  must  be  a  perfect  syllogism  whenever  universality  is  posited  with

reference  to  the  major  term  either  affirmatively  or  negatively,  and

particularity with reference to the minor term affirmatively: but whenever the

universality is posited in relation to the minor term, or the terms are related in

any other way, a syllogism is impossible. I call that term the major in which

the  middle  is  contained  and  that  term  the  minor  which  comes  under  the

middle. Let all B be A and some C be B. Then if ‘predicated of all’ means

what was said above, it is necessary that some C is A. And if no B is A but

some C is B, it is necessary that some C is not A. The meaning of ‘predicated

of none’ has also been defined. So there will be a perfect syllogism. This

holds good also if the premiss BC should be indefinite, provided that it is

affirmative: for we shall have the same syllogism whether the premiss is

indefinite or particular.

But  if  the  universality  is  posited  with  respect  to  the  minor  term  either

affirmatively  or  negatively,  a  syllogism  will  not  be  possible,  whether  the

major premiss is positive or negative, indefinite or particular: e.g. if some B

is or is not A, and all C is B. As an example of a positive relation between the

extremes take the terms good, state, wisdom: of a negative relation, good,

state, ignorance. Again if no C is B, but some B is or is not A or not every B

is A, there cannot be a syllogism. Take the terms white, horse, swan: white,

horse,  raven.  The  same  terms  may  be  taken  also  if  the  premiss  BA  is

indefinite.

Nor when the major premiss is universal, whether affirmative or negative,

and the minor premiss is negative and particular, can there be a syllogism,

whether the minor premiss be indefinite or particular: e.g. if all B is A and

some C is not B, or if not all C is B. For the major term may be predicable

both of all and of none of the minor, to some of which the middle term cannot

be attributed. Suppose the terms are animal, man, white: next take some of

the white things of which man is not predicated-swan and snow: animal is

predicated of all of the one, but of none of the other. Consequently there

cannot be a syllogism. Again let no B be A, but let some C not be B. Take theterms inanimate, man, white: then take some white things of which man is

not predicated-swan and snow: the term inanimate is predicated of all of the

one, of none of the other.

  Further since it is indefinite to say some C is not B, and it is true that some

C is not B, whether no C is B, or not all C is B, and since if terms are

assumed such that no C is B, no syllogism follows (this has already been

stated) it is clear that this arrangement of terms will not afford a syllogism:

otherwise  one  would  have  been  possible  with  a  universal  negative  minor

premiss.  A  similar  proof  may  also  be  given  if  the  universal  premiss  is

negative.

Nor can there in any way be a syllogism if both the relations of subject and

predicate are particular, either positively or negatively, or the one negative

and the other affirmative, or one indefinite and the other definite, or both

indefinite. Terms common to all the above are animal, white, horse: animal,

white, stone.

It is clear then from what has been said that if there is a syllogism in this

figure with a particular conclusion, the terms must be related as we have

stated: if they are related otherwise, no syllogism is possible anyhow. It is

evident also that all the syllogisms in this figure are perfect (for they are all

completed  by  means  of  the  premisses  originally  taken)  and  that  all

conclusions  are  proved  by  this  figure,  viz.  universal  and  particular,

affirmative and negative. Such a figure I call the first.


5


  Whenever the same thing belongs to all of one subject, and to none of

another, or to all of each subject or to none of either, I call such a figure the

second; by middle term in it I mean that which is predicated of both subjects,

by extremes the terms of which this is said, by major extreme that which lies

near the middle, by minor that which is further away from the middle. The

middle term stands outside the extremes, and is first in position. A syllogism

cannot be perfect anyhow in this figure, but it may be valid whether the terms

are related universally or not.

If  then  the  terms  are  related  universally  a  syllogism  will  be  possible,

whenever the middle belongs to all of one subject and to none of another (it

does not matter which has the negative relation), but in no other way. Let M

be  predicated  of  no  N,  but  of  all  O.  Since,  then,  the  negative  relation  isconvertible, N will belong to no M: but M was assumed to belong to all O:

consequently N will belong to no O. This has already been proved. Again if

M belongs to all N, but to no O, then N will belong to no O. For if M belongs

to no O, O belongs to no M: but M (as was said) belongs to all N: O then will

belong to no N: for the first figure has again been formed. But since the

negative relation is convertible, N will belong to no O. Thus it will be the

same syllogism that proves both conclusions.

It is possible to prove these results also by reductio ad impossibile.

It is clear then that a syllogism is formed when the terms are so related, but

not a perfect syllogism; for necessity is not perfectly established merely from

the original premisses; others also are needed.

But if M is predicated of every N and O, there cannot be a syllogism.

Terms to illustrate a positive relation between the extremes are substance,

animal, man; a negative relation, substance, animal, number-substance being

the middle term.

Nor is a syllogism possible when M is predicated neither of any N nor of

any O. Terms to illustrate a positive relation are line, animal, man: a negative

relation, line, animal, stone.

It is clear then that if a syllogism is formed when the terms are universally

related, the terms must be related as we stated at the outset: for if they are

otherwise related no necessary consequence follows.

If the middle term is related universally to one of the extremes, a particular

negative  syllogism  must  result  whenever  the  middle  term  is  related

universally to the major whether positively or negatively, and particularly to

the minor and in a manner opposite to that of the universal statement: by ‘an

opposite manner’ I mean, if the universal statement is negative, the particular

is affirmative: if the universal is affirmative, the particular is negative. For if

M belongs to no N, but to some O, it is necessary that N does not belong to

some O. For since the negative statement is convertible, N will belong to no

M: but M was admitted to belong to some O: therefore N will not belong to

some O: for the result is reached by means of the first figure. Again if M

belongs to all N, but not to some O, it is necessary that N does not belong to

some O: for if N belongs to all O, and M is predicated also of all N, M must

belong to all O: but we assumed that M does not belong to some O. And if M

belongs to all N but not to all O, we shall conclude that N does not belong to

all O: the proof is the same as the above. But if M is predicated of all O, but

not of all N, there will be no syllogism. Take the terms animal, substance,raven;  animal,  white,  raven.  Nor  will  there  be  a  conclusion  when  M  is

predicated of no O, but of some N. Terms to illustrate a positive relation

between the extremes are animal, substance, unit: a negative relation, animal,

substance, science.

If then the universal statement is opposed to the particular, we have stated

when a syllogism will be possible and when not: but if the premisses are

similar in form, I mean both negative or both affirmative, a syllogism will not

be possible anyhow. First let them be negative, and let the major premiss be

universal, e.g. let M belong to no N, and not to some O. It is possible then for

N to belong either to all O or to no O. Terms to illustrate the negative relation

are black, snow, animal. But it is not possible to find terms of which the

extremes are related positively and universally, if M belongs to some O, and

does not belong to some O. For if N belonged to all O, but M to no N, then M

would belong to no O: but we assumed that it belongs to some O. In this way

then it is not admissible to take terms: our point must be proved from the

indefinite nature of the particular statement. For since it is true that M does

not belong to some O, even if it belongs to no O, and since if it belongs to no

O a syllogism is (as we have seen) not possible, clearly it will not be possible

now either.

  Again let the premisses be affirmative, and let the major premiss as before

be universal, e.g. let M belong to all N and to some O. It is possible then for

N to belong to all O or to no O. Terms to illustrate the negative relation are

white,  swan,  stone.  But  it  is  not  possible  to  take  terms  to  illustrate  the

universal affirmative relation, for the reason already stated: the point must be

proved from the indefinite nature of the particular statement. But if the minor

premiss is universal, and M belongs to no O, and not to some N, it is possible

for N to belong either to all O or to no O. Terms for the positive relation are

white,  animal,  raven:  for  the  negative  relation,  white,  stone,  raven.  If  the

premisses are affirmative, terms for the negative relation are white, animal,

snow;  for  the  positive  relation,  white,  animal,  swan.  Evidently  then,

whenever the premisses are similar in form, and one is universal, the other

particular, a syllogism can, not be formed anyhow. Nor is one possible if the

middle term belongs to some of each of the extremes, or does not belong to

some of either, or belongs to some of the one, not to some of the other, or

belongs to neither universally, or is related to them indefinitely. Common

terms for all the above are white, animal, man: white, animal, inanimate. It is

clear then from what has been said that if the terms are related to one anotherin the way stated, a syllogism results of necessity; and if there is a syllogism,

the terms must be so related. But it is evident also that all the syllogisms in

this figure are imperfect: for all are made perfect by certain supplementary

statements,  which  either  are  contained  in  the  terms  of  necessity  or  are

assumed as hypotheses, i.e. when we prove per impossibile. And it is evident

that an affirmative conclusion is not attained by means of this figure, but all

are negative, whether universal or particular.


6


But if one term belongs to all, and another to none, of a third, or if both

belong to all, or to none, of it, I call such a figure the third; by middle term in

it I mean that of which both the predicates are predicated, by extremes I mean

the predicates, by the major extreme that which is further from the middle, by

the  minor  that  which  is  nearer  to  it.  The  middle  term  stands  outside  the

extremes, and is last in position. A syllogism cannot be perfect in this figure

either, but it may be valid whether the terms are related universally or not to

the middle term.

If they are universal, whenever both P and R belong to S, it follows that P

will necessarily belong to some R. For, since the affirmative statement is

convertible, S will belong to some R: consequently since P belongs to all S,

and S to some R, P must belong to some R: for a syllogism in the first figure

is produced. It is possible to demonstrate this also per impossibile and by

exposition. For if both P and R belong to all S, should one of the Ss, e.g. N,

be taken, both P and R will belong to this, and thus P will belong to some R.

If R belongs to all S, and P to no S, there will be a syllogism to prove that

P will necessarily not belong to some R. This may be demonstrated in the

same way as before by converting the premiss RS. It might be proved also

per impossibile, as in the former cases. But if R belongs to no S, P to all S,

there will be no syllogism. Terms for the positive relation are animal, horse,

man: for the negative relation animal, inanimate, man.

Nor can there be a syllogism when both terms are asserted of no S. Terms

for the positive relation are animal, horse, inanimate; for the negative relation

man, horse, inanimate-inanimate being the middle term.

It is clear then in this figure also when a syllogism will be possible and

when not, if the terms are related universally. For whenever both the terms

are affirmative, there will be a syllogism to prove that one extreme belongs tosome of the other; but when they are negative, no syllogism will be possible.

But when one is negative, the other affirmative, if the major is negative, the

minor affirmative, there will be a syllogism to prove that the one extreme

does  not  belong  to  some  of  the  other:  but  if  the  relation  is  reversed,  no

syllogism will be possible. If one term is related universally to the middle, the

other in part only, when both are affirmative there must be a syllogism, no

matter which of the premisses is universal. For if R belongs to all S, P to

some S, P must belong to some R. For since the affirmative statement is

convertible S will belong to some P: consequently since R belongs to all S,

and S to some P, R must also belong to some P: therefore P must belong to

some R.

  Again if R belongs to some S, and P to all S, P must belong to some R.

This  may  be  demonstrated  in  the  same  way  as  the  preceding.  And  it  is

possible to demonstrate it also per impossibile and by exposition, as in the

former cases. But if one term is affirmative, the other negative, and if the

affirmative  is  universal,  a  syllogism  will  be  possible  whenever  the  minor

term is affirmative. For if R belongs to all S, but P does not belong to some S,

it is necessary that P does not belong to some R. For if P belongs to all R, and

R belongs to all S, then P will belong to all S: but we assumed that it did not.

Proof is possible also without reduction ad impossibile, if one of the Ss be

taken to which P does not belong.

But whenever the major is affirmative, no syllogism will be possible, e.g.

if P belongs to all S and R does not belong to some S. Terms for the universal

affirmative  relation  are  animate,  man,  animal.  For  the  universal  negative

relation it is not possible to get terms, if R belongs to some S, and does not

belong to some S. For if P belongs to all S, and R to some S, then P will

belong to some R: but we assumed that it belongs to no R. We must put the

matter  as  before.’  Since  the  expression  ‘it  does  not  belong  to  some’  is

indefinite, it may be used truly of that also which belongs to none. But if R

belongs to no S, no syllogism is possible, as has been shown. Clearly then no

syllogism will be possible here.

But if the negative term is universal, whenever the major is negative and

the minor affirmative there will be a syllogism. For if P belongs to no S, and

R belongs to some S, P will not belong to some R: for we shall have the first

figure again, if the premiss RS is converted.

But when the minor is negative, there will be no syllogism. Terms for the

positive  relation  are  animal,  man,  wild:  for  the  negative  relation,  animal,science, wild-the middle in both being the term wild.

Nor is a syllogism possible when both are stated in the negative, but one is

universal, the other particular. When the minor is related universally to the

middle, take the terms animal, science, wild; animal, man, wild. When the

major is related universally to the middle, take as terms for a negative relation

raven,  snow,  white.  For  a  positive  relation  terms  cannot  be  found,  if  R

belongs to some S, and does not belong to some S. For if P belongs to all R,

and R to some S, then P belongs to some S: but we assumed that it belongs to

no  S.  Our  point,  then,  must  be  proved  from  the  indefinite  nature  of  the

particular statement.

Nor is a syllogism possible anyhow, if each of the extremes belongs to

some of the middle or does not belong, or one belongs and the other does not

to some of the middle, or one belongs to some of the middle, the other not to

all, or if the premisses are indefinite. Common terms for all are animal, man,

white: animal, inanimate, white.

It is clear then in this figure also when a syllogism will be possible, and

when not; and that if the terms are as stated, a syllogism results of necessity,

and if there is a syllogism, the terms must be so related. It is clear also that all

the syllogisms in this figure are imperfect (for all are made perfect by certain

supplementary  assumptions),  and  that  it  will  not  be  possible  to  reach  a

universal conclusion by means of this figure, whether negative or affirmative.


7


It is evident also that in all the figures, whenever a proper syllogism does

not result, if both the terms are affirmative or negative nothing necessary

follows at all, but if one is affirmative, the other negative, and if the negative

is  stated  universally,  a  syllogism  always  results  relating  the  minor  to  the

major term, e.g. if A belongs to all or some B, and B belongs to no C: for if

the premisses are converted it is necessary that C does not belong to some A.

Similarly also in the other figures: a syllogism always results by means of

conversion.  It  is  evident  also  that  the  substitution  of  an  indefinite  for  a

particular affirmative will effect the same syllogism in all the figures.

It is clear too that all the imperfect syllogisms are made perfect by means

of the first figure. For all are brought to a conclusion either ostensively or per

impossibile. In both ways the first figure is formed: if they are made perfect

ostensively, because (as we saw) all are brought to a conclusion by means ofconversion, and conversion produces the first figure: if they are proved per

impossibile, because on the assumption of the false statement the syllogism

comes about by means of the first figure, e.g. in the last figure, if A and B

belong to all C, it follows that A belongs to some B: for if A belonged to no

B, and B belongs to all C, A would belong to no C: but (as we stated) it

belongs to all C. Similarly also with the rest.

It is possible also to reduce all syllogisms to the universal syllogisms in the

first figure. Those in the second figure are clearly made perfect by these,

though not all in the same way; the universal syllogisms are made perfect by

converting the negative premiss, each of the particular syllogisms by reductio

ad  impossibile.  In  the  first  figure  particular  syllogisms  are  indeed  made

perfect by themselves, but it is possible also to prove them by means of the

second figure, reducing them ad impossibile, e.g. if A belongs to all B, and B

to some C, it follows that A belongs to some C. For if it belonged to no C,

and belongs to all B, then B will belong to no C: this we know by means of

the second figure. Similarly also demonstration will be possible in the case of

the negative. For if A belongs to no B, and B belongs to some C, A will not

belong to some C: for if it belonged to all C, and belongs to no B, then B will

belong to no C: and this (as we saw) is the middle figure. Consequently, since

all syllogisms in the middle figure can be reduced to universal syllogisms in

the  first  figure,  and  since  particular  syllogisms  in  the  first  figure  can  be

reduced  to  syllogisms  in  the  middle  figure,  it  is  clear  that  particular

syllogisms  can  be  reduced  to  universal  syllogisms  in  the  first  figure.

Syllogisms in the third figure, if the terms are universal, are directly made

perfect  by  means  of  those  syllogisms;  but,  when  one  of  the  premisses  is

particular, by means of the particular syllogisms in the first figure: and these

(we have seen) may be reduced to the universal syllogisms in the first figure:

consequently  also  the  particular  syllogisms  in  the  third  figure  may  be  so

reduced. It is clear then that all syllogisms may be reduced to the universal

syllogisms in the first figure.

We have stated then how syllogisms which prove that something belongs

or does not belong to something else are constituted, both how syllogisms of

the  same  figure  are  constituted  in  themselves,  and  how  syllogisms  of

different figures are related to one another.


8  Since there is a difference according as something belongs, necessarily

belongs, or may belong to something else (for many things belong indeed,

but  not  necessarily,  others  neither  necessarily  nor  indeed  at  all,  but  it  is

possible for them to belong), it is clear that there will be different syllogisms

to prove each of these relations, and syllogisms with differently related terms,

one syllogism concluding from what is necessary, another from what is, a

third from what is possible.

  There  is  hardly  any  difference  between  syllogisms  from  necessary

premisses  and  syllogisms  from  premisses  which  merely  assert.  When  the

terms  are  put  in  the  same  way,  then,  whether  something  belongs  or

necessarily belongs (or does not belong) to something else, a syllogism will

or will not result alike in both cases, the only difference being the addition of

the  expression  ‘necessarily’  to  the  terms.  For  the  negative  statement  is

convertible alike in both cases, and we should give the same account of the

expressions  ‘to  be  contained  in  something  as  in  a  whole’  and  ‘to  be

predicated of all of something’. With the exceptions to be made below, the

conclusion will be proved to be necessary by means of conversion, in the

same manner as in the case of simple predication. But in the middle figure

when the universal statement is affirmative, and the particular negative, and

again in the third figure when the universal is affirmative and the particular

negative, the demonstration will not take the same form, but it is necessary by

the ‘exposition’ of a part of the subject of the particular negative proposition,

to which the predicate does not belong, to make the syllogism in reference to

this: with terms so chosen the conclusion will necessarily follow. But if the

relation is necessary in respect of the part taken, it must hold of some of that

term in which this part is included: for the part taken is just some of that. And

each of the resulting syllogisms is in the appropriate figure.


9


It  happens  sometimes  also  that  when  one  premiss  is  necessary  the

conclusion is necessary, not however when either premiss is necessary, but

only when the major is, e.g. if A is taken as necessarily belonging or not

belonging to B, but B is taken as simply belonging to C: for if the premisses

are taken in this way, A will necessarily belong or not belong to C. For since

necessarily belongs, or does not belong, to every B, and since C is one of the

Bs, it is clear that for C also the positive or the negative relation to A willhold necessarily. But if the major premiss is not necessary, but the minor is

necessary, the conclusion will not be necessary. For if it were, it would result

both through the first figure and through the third that A belongs necessarily

to some B. But this is false; for B may be such that it is possible that A

should belong to none of it. Further, an example also makes it clear that the

conclusion not be necessary, e.g. if A were movement, B animal, C man: man

is an animal necessarily, but an animal does not move necessarily, nor does

man. Similarly also if the major premiss is negative; for the proof is the same.

In  particular  syllogisms,  if  the  universal  premiss  is  necessary,  then  the

conclusion will be necessary; but if the particular, the conclusion will not be

necessary, whether the universal premiss is negative or affirmative. First let

the universal be necessary, and let A belong to all B necessarily, but let B

simply belong to some C: it is necessary then that A belongs to some C

necessarily: for C falls under B, and A was assumed to belong necessarily to

all B. Similarly also if the syllogism should be negative: for the proof will be

the same. But if the particular premiss is necessary, the conclusion will not be

necessary:  for  from  the  denial  of  such  a  conclusion  nothing  impossible

results, just as it does not in the universal syllogisms. The same is true of

negative syllogisms. Try the terms movement, animal, white.


10


In  the  second  figure,  if  the  negative  premiss  is  necessary,  then  the

conclusion will be necessary, but if the affirmative, not necessary. First let

the negative be necessary; let A be possible of no B, and simply belong to C.

Since then the negative statement is convertible, B is possible of no A. But A

belongs to all C; consequently B is possible of no C. For C falls under A. The

same result would be obtained if the minor premiss were negative: for if A is

possible  be  of  no  C,  C  is  possible  of  no  A:  but  A  belongs  to  all  B,

consequently C is possible of none of the Bs: for again we have obtained the

first figure. Neither then is B possible of C: for conversion is possible without

modifying the relation.

But  if  the  affirmative  premiss  is  necessary,  the  conclusion  will  not  be

necessary. Let A belong to all B necessarily, but to no C simply. If then the

negative premiss is converted, the first figure results. But it has been proved

in  the  case  of  the  first  figure  that  if  the  negative  major  premiss  is  not

necessary the conclusion will not be necessary either. Therefore the sameresult will obtain here. Further, if the conclusion is necessary, it follows that

C necessarily does not belong to some A. For if B necessarily belongs to no

C, C will necessarily belong to no B. But B at any rate must belong to some

A,  if  it  is  true  (as  was  assumed)  that  A  necessarily  belongs  to  all  B.

Consequently it is necessary that C does not belong to some A. But nothing

prevents such an A being taken that it is possible for C to belong to all of it.

Further one might show by an exposition of terms that the conclusion is not

necessary without qualification, though it is a necessary conclusion from the

premisses.  For  example  let  A  be  animal,  B  man,  C  white,  and  let  the

premisses be assumed to correspond to what we had before: it is possible that

animal should belong to nothing white. Man then will not belong to anything

white, but not necessarily: for it is possible for man to be born white, not

however so long as animal belongs to nothing white. Consequently under

these  conditions  the  conclusion  will  be  necessary,  but  it  is  not  necessary

without qualification.

  Similar results will obtain also in particular syllogisms. For whenever the

negative premiss is both universal and necessary, then the conclusion will be

necessary: but whenever the affirmative premiss is universal, the negative

particular, the conclusion will not be necessary. First then let the negative

premiss be both universal and necessary: let it be possible for no B that A

should belong to it, and let A simply belong to some C. Since the negative

statement is convertible, it will be possible for no A that B should belong to

it: but A belongs to some C; consequently B necessarily does not belong to

some  of  the  Cs.  Again  let  the  affirmative  premiss  be  both  universal  and

necessary, and let the major premiss be affirmative. If then A necessarily

belongs to all B, but does not belong to some C, it is clear that B will not

belong to some C, but not necessarily. For the same terms can be used to

demonstrate  the  point,  which  were  used  in  the  universal  syllogisms.  Nor

again,  if  the  negative  statement  is  necessary  but  particular,  will  the

conclusion be necessary. The point can be demonstrated by means of the

same terms.


11


In the last figure when the terms are related universally to the middle, and

both  premisses  are  affirmative,  if  one  of  the  two  is  necessary,  then  the

conclusion will be necessary. But if one is negative, the other affirmative,whenever the negative is necessary the conclusion also will be necessary, but

whenever the affirmative is necessary the conclusion will not be necessary.

First let both the premisses be affirmative, and let A and B belong to all C,

and let AC be necessary. Since then B belongs to all C, C also will belong to

some B, because the universal is convertible into the particular: consequently

if A belongs necessarily to all C, and C belongs to some B, it is necessary

that A should belong to some B also. For B is under C. The first figure then is

formed.  A  similar  proof  will  be  given  also  if  BC  is  necessary.  For  C  is

convertible with some A: consequently if B belongs necessarily to all C, it

will belong necessarily also to some A.

  Again let AC be negative, BC affirmative, and let the negative premiss be

necessary.  Since  then  C  is  convertible  with  some  B,  but  A  necessarily

belongs to no C, A will necessarily not belong to some B either: for B is

under  C.  But  if  the  affirmative  is  necessary,  the  conclusion  will  not  be

necessary. For suppose BC is affirmative and necessary, while AC is negative

and  not  necessary.  Since  then  the  affirmative  is  convertible,  C  also  will

belong to some B necessarily: consequently if A belongs to none of the Cs,

while C belongs to some of the Bs, A will not belong to some of the Bs-but

not of necessity; for it has been proved, in the case of the first figure, that if

the  negative  premiss  is  not  necessary,  neither  will  the  conclusion  be

necessary. Further, the point may be made clear by considering the terms. Let

the term A be ‘good’, let that which B signifies be ‘animal’, let the term C be

‘horse’. It is possible then that the term good should belong to no horse, and

it is necessary that the term animal should belong to every horse: but it is not

necessary that some animal should not be good, since it is possible for every

animal to be good. Or if that is not possible, take as the term ‘awake’ or

‘asleep’: for every animal can accept these.

If, then, the premisses are universal, we have stated when the conclusion

will be necessary. But if one premiss is universal, the other particular, and if

both are affirmative, whenever the universal is necessary the conclusion also

must be necessary. The demonstration is the same as before; for the particular

affirmative also is convertible. If then it is necessary that B should belong to

all C, and A falls under C, it is necessary that B should belong to some A.

But  if  B  must  belong  to  some  A,  then  A  must  belong  to  some  B:  for

conversion  is  possible.  Similarly  also  if  AC  should  be  necessary  and

universal: for B falls under C. But if the particular premiss is necessary, the

conclusion will not be necessary. Let the premiss BC be both particular andnecessary,  and  let  A  belong  to  all  C,  not  however  necessarily.  If  the

proposition  BC  is  converted  the  first  figure  is  formed,  and  the  universal

premiss  is  not  necessary,  but  the  particular  is  necessary.  But  when  the

premisses  were  thus,  the  conclusion  (as  we  proved  was  not  necessary:

consequently it is not here either. Further, the point is clear if we look at the

terms. Let A be waking, B biped, and C animal. It is necessary that B should

belong to some C, but it is possible for A to belong to C, and that A should

belong to B is not necessary. For there is no necessity that some biped should

be asleep or awake. Similarly and by means of the same terms proof can be

made, should the proposition AC be both particular and necessary.

But  if  one  premiss  is  affirmative,  the  other  negative,  whenever  the

universal  is  both  negative  and  necessary  the  conclusion  also  will  be

necessary. For if it is not possible that A should belong to any C, but B

belongs to some C, it is necessary that A should not belong to some B. But

whenever  the  affirmative  proposition  is  necessary,  whether  universal  or

particular, or the negative is particular, the conclusion will not be necessary.

The proof of this by reduction will be the same as before; but if terms are

wanted,  when  the  universal  affirmative  is  necessary,  take  the  terms

‘waking’-’animal’-’man’, ‘man’ being middle, and when the affirmative is

particular and necessary, take the terms ‘waking’-’animal’-’white’: for it is

necessary that animal should belong to some white thing, but it is possible

that waking should belong to none, and it is not necessary that waking should

not  belong  to  some  animal.  But  when  the  negative  proposition  being

particular is necessary, take the terms ‘biped’, ‘moving’, ‘animal’, ‘animal’

being middle.


12


It  is  clear  then  that  a  simple  conclusion  is  not  reached  unless  both

premisses  are  simple  assertions,  but  a  necessary  conclusion  is  possible

although one only of the premisses is necessary. But in both cases, whether

the syllogisms are affirmative or negative, it is necessary that one premiss

should be similar to the conclusion. I mean by ‘similar’, if the conclusion is a

simple assertion, the premiss must be simple; if the conclusion is necessary,

the  premiss  must  be  necessary.  Consequently  this  also  is  clear,  that  the

conclusion will be neither necessary nor simple unless a necessary or simple

premiss is assumed.13


  Perhaps enough has been said about the proof of necessity, how it comes

about and how it differs from the proof of a simple statement. We proceed to

discuss that which is possible, when and how and by what means it can be

proved. I use the terms ‘to be possible’ and ‘the possible’ of that which is not

necessary but, being assumed, results in nothing impossible. We say indeed

ambiguously of the necessary that it is possible. But that my definition of the

possible is correct is clear from the phrases by which we deny or on the

contrary affirm possibility. For the expressions ‘it is not possible to belong’,

‘it is impossible to belong’, and ‘it is necessary not to belong’ are either

identical or follow from one another; consequently their opposites also, ‘it is

possible to belong’, ‘it is not impossible to belong’, and ‘it is not necessary

not to belong’, will either be identical or follow from one another. For of

everything the affirmation or the denial holds good. That which is possible

then will be not necessary and that which is not necessary will be possible. It

results that all premisses in the mode of possibility are convertible into one

another. I mean not that the affirmative are convertible into the negative, but

that those which are affirmative in form admit of conversion by opposition,

e.g. ‘it is possible to belong’ may be converted into ‘it is possible not to

belong’, and ‘it is possible for A to belong to all B’ into ‘it is possible for A

to belong to no B’ or ‘not to all B’, and ‘it is possible for A to belong to some

B’ into ‘it is possible for A not to belong to some B’. And similarly the other

propositions in this mode can be converted. For since that which is possible is

not necessary, and that which is not necessary may possibly not belong, it is

clear that if it is possible that A should belong to B, it is possible also that it

should not belong to B: and if it is possible that it should belong to all, it is

also possible that it should not belong to all. The same holds good in the case

of particular affirmations: for the proof is identical. And such premisses are

affirmative and not negative; for ‘to be possible’ is in the same rank as ‘to

be’, as was said above.

  Having made these distinctions we next point out that the expression ‘to be

possible’ is used in two ways. In one it means to happen generally and fall

short  of  necessity,  e.g.  man’s  turning  grey  or  growing  or  decaying,  or

generally what naturally belongs to a thing (for this has not its necessity

unbroken, since man’s existence is not continuous for ever, although if a man

does exist, it comes about either necessarily or generally). In another sensethe expression means the indefinite, which can be both thus and not thus, e.g.

an animal’s walking or an earthquake’s taking place while it is walking, or

generally what happens by chance: for none of these inclines by nature in the

one way more than in the opposite.

That which is possible in each of its two senses is convertible into its

opposite, not however in the same way: but what is natural is convertible

because it does not necessarily belong (for in this sense it is possible that a

man should not grow grey) and what is indefinite is convertible because it

inclines this way no more than that. Science and demonstrative syllogism are

not concerned with things which are indefinite, because the middle term is

uncertain; but they are concerned with things that are natural, and as a rule

arguments and inquiries are made about things which are possible in this

sense. Syllogisms indeed can be made about the former, but it is unusual at

any rate to inquire about them.

  These matters will be treated more definitely in the sequel; our business at

present is to state the moods and nature of the syllogism made from possible

premisses. The expression ‘it is possible for this to belong to that’ may be

understood in two senses: ‘that’ may mean either that to which ‘that’ belongs

or that to which it may belong; for the expression ‘A is possible of the subject

of B’ means that it is possible either of that of which B is stated or of that of

which B may possibly be stated. It makes no difference whether we say, A is

possible of the subject of B, or all B admits of A. It is clear then that the

expression ‘A may possibly belong to all B’ might be used in two senses.

First then we must state the nature and characteristics of the syllogism which

arises if B is possible of the subject of C, and A is possible of the subject of

B.  For  thus  both  premisses  are  assumed  in  the  mode  of  possibility;  but

whenever A is possible of that of which B is true, one premiss is a simple

assertion,  the  other  a  problematic.  Consequently  we  must  start  from

premisses which are similar in form, as in the other cases.


14


  Whenever A may possibly belong to all B, and B to all C, there will be a

perfect syllogism to prove that A may possibly belong to all C. This is clear

from the definition: for it was in this way that we explained ‘to be possible

for one term to belong to all of another’. Similarly if it is possible for A to

belong no B, and for B to belong to all C, then it is possible for A to belongto no C. For the statement that it is possible for A not to belong to that of

which B may be true means (as we saw) that none of those things which can

possibly fall under the term B is left out of account. But whenever A may

belong to all B, and B may belong to no C, then indeed no syllogism results

from the premisses assumed, but if the premiss BC is converted after the

manner of problematic propositions, the same syllogism results as before. For

since it is possible that B should belong to no C, it is possible also that it

should belong to all C. This has been stated above. Consequently if B is

possible for all C, and A is possible for all B, the same syllogism again

results. Similarly if in both the premisses the negative is joined with ‘it is

possible’: e.g. if A may belong to none of the Bs, and B to none of the Cs. No

syllogism results from the assumed premisses, but if they are converted we

shall have the same syllogism as before. It is clear then that if the minor

premiss is negative, or if both premisses are negative, either no syllogism

results,  or  if  one  it  is  not  perfect.  For  the  necessity  results  from  the

conversion.

But if one of the premisses is universal, the other particular, when the

major  premiss  is  universal  there  will  be  a  perfect  syllogism.  For  if  A  is

possible for all B, and B for some C, then A is possible for some C. This is

clear from the definition of being possible. Again if A may belong to no B,

and B may belong to some of the Cs, it is necessary that A may possibly not

belong  to  some  of  the  Cs.  The  proof  is  the  same  as  above.  But  if  the

particular premiss is negative, and the universal is affirmative, the major still

being universal and the minor particular, e.g. A is possible for all B, B may

possibly not belong to some C, then a clear syllogism does not result from the

assumed premisses, but if the particular premiss is converted and it is laid

down  that  B  possibly  may  belong  to  some  C,  we  shall  have  the  same

conclusion as before, as in the cases given at the beginning.

But  if  the  major  premiss  is  the  minor  universal,  whether  both  are

affirmative, or negative, or different in quality, or if both are indefinite or

particular, in no way will a syllogism be possible. For nothing prevents B

from reaching beyond A, so that as predicates cover unequal areas. Let C be

that by which B extends beyond A. To C it is not possible that A should

belong-either to all or to none or to some or not to some, since premisses in

the mode of possibility are convertible and it is possible for B to belong to

more things than A can. Further, this is obvious if we take terms; for if the

premisses are as assumed, the major term is both possible for none of theminor and must belong to all of it. Take as terms common to all the cases

under  consideration  ‘animal’-’white’-’man’,  where  the  major  belongs

necessarily to the minor; ‘animal’-’white’-’garment’, where it is not possible

that the major should belong to the minor. It is clear then that if the terms are

related in this manner, no syllogism results. For every syllogism proves that

something belongs either simply or necessarily or possibly. It is clear that

there is no proof of the first or of the second. For the affirmative is destroyed

by the negative, and the negative by the affirmative. There remains the proof

of possibility. But this is impossible. For it has been proved that if the terms

are related in this manner it is both necessary that the major should belong to

all the minor and not possible that it should belong to any. Consequently

there cannot be a syllogism to prove the possibility; for the necessary (as we

stated) is not possible.

It is clear that if the terms are universal in possible premisses a syllogism

always results in the first figure, whether they are affirmative or negative,

only a perfect syllogism results in the first case, an imperfect in the second.

But possibility must be understood according to the definition laid down, not

as covering necessity. This is sometimes forgotten.


15


If one premiss is a simple proposition, the other a problematic, whenever

the major premiss indicates possibility all the syllogisms will be perfect and

establish possibility in the sense defined; but whenever the minor premiss

indicates possibility all the syllogisms will be imperfect, and those which are

negative will establish not possibility according to the definition, but that the

major does not necessarily belong to any, or to all, of the minor. For if this is

so, we say it is possible that it should belong to none or not to all. Let A be

possible for all B, and let B belong to all C. Since C falls under B, and A is

possible for all B, clearly it is possible for all C also. So a perfect syllogism

results.  Likewise  if  the  premiss  AB  is  negative,  and  the  premiss  BC  is

affirmative, the former stating possible, the latter simple attribution, a perfect

syllogism results proving that A possibly belongs to no C.

It is clear that perfect syllogisms result if the minor premiss states simple

belonging: but that syllogisms will result if the modality of the premisses is

reversed, must be proved per impossibile. At the same time it will be evident

that  they  are  imperfect:  for  the  proof  proceeds  not  from  the  premissesassumed. First we must state that if B’s being follows necessarily from A’s

being, B’s possibility will follow necessarily from A’s possibility. Suppose,

the terms being so related, that A is possible, and B is impossible. If then that

which is possible, when it is possible for it to be, might happen, and if that

which is impossible, when it is impossible, could not happen, and if at the

same time A is possible and B impossible, it would be possible for A to

happen without B, and if to happen, then to be. For that which has happened,

when it has happened, is. But we must take the impossible and the possible

not  only  in  the  sphere  of  becoming,  but  also  in  the  spheres  of  truth  and

predicability,  and  the  various  other  spheres  in  which  we  speak  of  the

possible: for it will be alike in all. Further we must understand the statement

that B’s being depends on A’s being, not as meaning that if some single thing

A is, B will be: for nothing follows of necessity from the being of some one

thing, but from two at least, i.e. when the premisses are related in the manner

stated to be that of the syllogism. For if C is predicated of D, and D of F, then

C is necessarily predicated of F. And if each is possible, the conclusion also

is possible. If then, for example, one should indicate the premisses by A, and

the conclusion by B, it would not only result that if A is necessary B is

necessary, but also that if A is possible, B is possible.

  Since  this  is  proved  it  is  evident  that  if  a  false  and  not  impossible

assumption is made, the consequence of the assumption will also be false and

not  impossible:  e.g.  if  A  is  false,  but  not  impossible,  and  if  B  is  the

consequence of A, B also will be false but not impossible. For since it has

been  proved  that  if  B’s  being  is  the  consequence  of  A’s  being,  then  B’s

possibility will follow from A’s possibility (and A is assumed to be possible),

consequently B will be possible: for if it were impossible, the same thing

would at the same time be possible and impossible.

  Since  we  have  defined  these  points,  let  A  belong  to  all  B,  and  B  be

possible for all C: it is necessary then that should be a possible attribute for

all C. Suppose that it is not possible, but assume that B belongs to all C: this

is false but not impossible. If then A is not possible for C but B belongs to all

C, then A is not possible for all B: for a syllogism is formed in the third

degree.  But  it  was  assumed  that  A  is  a  possible  attribute  for  all  B.  It  is

necessary then that A is possible for all C. For though the assumption we

made is false and not impossible, the conclusion is impossible. It is possible

also in the first figure to bring about the impossibility, by assuming that B

belongs to C. For if B belongs to all C, and A is possible for all B, then Awould be possible for all C. But the assumption was made that A is not

possible for all C.

We  must  understand  ‘that  which  belongs  to  all’  with  no  limitation  in

respect  of  time,  e.g.  to  the  present  or  to  a  particular  period,  but  simply

without qualification. For it is by the help of such premisses that we make

syllogisms, since if the premiss is understood with reference to the present

moment, there cannot be a syllogism. For nothing perhaps prevents ‘man’

belonging at a particular time to everything that is moving, i.e. if nothing else

were moving: but ‘moving’ is possible for every horse; yet ‘man’ is possible

for no horse. Further let the major term be ‘animal’, the middle ‘moving’, the

the minor ‘man’. The premisses then will be as before, but the conclusion

necessary, not possible. For man is necessarily animal. It is clear then that the

universal must be understood simply, without limitation in respect of time.

  Again let the premiss AB be universal and negative, and assume that A

belongs to no B, but B possibly belongs to all C. These propositions being

laid down, it is necessary that A possibly belongs to no C. Suppose that it

cannot belong, and that B belongs to C, as above. It is necessary then that A

belongs to some B: for we have a syllogism in the third figure: but this is

impossible. Thus it will be possible for A to belong to no C; for if at is

supposed false, the consequence is an impossible one. This syllogism then

does not establish that which is possible according to the definition, but that

which does not necessarily belong to any part of the subject (for this is the

contradictory of the assumption which was made: for it was supposed that A

necessarily belongs to some C, but the syllogism per impossibile establishes

the contradictory which is opposed to this). Further, it is clear also from an

example that the conclusion will not establish possibility. Let A be ‘raven’, B

‘intelligent’, and C ‘man’. A then belongs to no B: for no intelligent thing is a

raven. But B is possible for all C: for every man may possibly be intelligent.

But  A  necessarily  belongs  to  no  C:  so  the  conclusion  does  not  establish

possibility.  But  neither  is  it  always  necessary.  Let  A  be  ‘moving’,  B

‘science’, C ‘man’. A then will belong to no B; but B is possible for all C.

And the conclusion will not be necessary. For it is not necessary that no man

should move; rather it is not necessary that any man should move. Clearly

then the conclusion establishes that one term does not necessarily belong to

any instance of another term. But we must take our terms better.

If the minor premiss is negative and indicates possibility, from the actual

premisses taken there can be no syllogism, but if the problematic premiss isconverted, a syllogism will be possible, as before. Let A belong to all B, and

let  B  possibly  belong  to  no  C.  If  the  terms  are  arranged  thus,  nothing

necessarily follows: but if the proposition BC is converted and it is assumed

that B is possible for all C, a syllogism results as before: for the terms are in

the same relative positions. Likewise if both the relations are negative, if the

major premiss states that A does not belong to B, and the minor premiss

indicates that B may possibly belong to no C. Through the premisses actually

taken nothing necessary results in any way; but if the problematic premiss is

converted, we shall have a syllogism. Suppose that A belongs to no B, and B

may possibly belong to no C. Through these comes nothing necessary. But if

B is assumed to be possible for all C (and this is true) and if the premiss AB

remains  as  before,  we  shall  again  have  the  same  syllogism.  But  if  it  be

assumed that B does not belong to any C, instead of possibly not belonging,

there cannot be a syllogism anyhow, whether the premiss AB is negative or

affirmative. As common instances of a necessary and positive relation we

may take the terms white-animal-snow: of a necessary and negative relation,

white-animal-pitch. Clearly then if the terms are universal, and one of the

premisses is assertoric, the other problematic, whenever the minor premiss is

problematic a syllogism always results, only sometimes it results from the

premisses that are taken, sometimes it requires the conversion of one premiss.

We have stated when each of these happens and the reason why. But if one of

the  relations  is  universal,  the  other  particular,  then  whenever  the  major

premiss is universal and problematic, whether affirmative or negative, and the

particular is affirmative and assertoric, there will be a perfect syllogism, just

as when the terms are universal. The demonstration is the same as before. But

whenever the major premiss is universal, but assertoric, not problematic, and

the minor is particular and problematic, whether both premisses are negative

or affirmative, or one is negative, the other affirmative, in all cases there will

be  an  imperfect  syllogism.  Only  some  of  them  will  be  proved  per

impossibile, others by the conversion of the problematic premiss, as has been

shown above. And a syllogism will be possible by means of conversion when

the major premiss is universal and assertoric, whether positive or negative,

and the minor particular, negative, and problematic, e.g. if A belongs to all B

or to no B, and B may possibly not belong to some C. For if the premiss BC

is converted in respect of possibility, a syllogism results. But whenever the

particular premiss is assertoric and negative, there cannot be a syllogism. As

instances of the positive relation we may take the terms white-animal-snow;of  the  negative,  white-animal-pitch.  For  the  demonstration  must  be  made

through  the  indefinite  nature  of  the  particular  premiss.  But  if  the  minor

premiss  is  universal,  and  the  major  particular,  whether  either  premiss  is

negative  or  affirmative,  problematic  or  assertoric,  nohow  is  a  syllogism

possible. Nor is a syllogism possible when the premisses are particular or

indefinite,  whether  problematic  or  assertoric,  or  the  one  problematic,  the

other assertoric. The demonstration is the same as above. As instances of the

necessary and positive relation we may take the terms animal-white-man; of

the necessary and negative relation, animal-white-garment. It is evident then

that if the major premiss is universal, a syllogism always results, but if the

minor is universal nothing at all can ever be proved.


16


  Whenever one premiss is necessary, the other problematic, there will be a

syllogism when the terms are related as before; and a perfect syllogism when

the  minor  premiss  is  necessary.  If  the  premisses  are  affirmative  the

conclusion  will  be  problematic,  not  assertoric,  whether  the  premisses  are

universal  or  not:  but  if  one  is  affirmative,  the  other  negative,  when  the

affirmative  is  necessary  the  conclusion  will  be  problematic,  not  negative

assertoric;  but  when  the  negative  is  necessary  the  conclusion  will  be

problematic  negative,  and  assertoric  negative,  whether  the  premisses  are

universal or not. Possibility in the conclusion must be understood in the same

manner as before. There cannot be an inference to the necessary negative

proposition: for ‘not necessarily to belong’ is different from ‘necessarily not

to belong’.

If the premisses are affirmative, clearly the conclusion which follows is not

necessary. Suppose A necessarily belongs to all B, and let B be possible for

all C. We shall have an imperfect syllogism to prove that A may belong to all

C. That it is imperfect is clear from the proof: for it will be proved in the

same  manner  as  above.  Again,  let  A  be  possible  for  all  B,  and  let  B

necessarily belong to all C. We shall then have a syllogism to prove that A

may belong to all C, not that A does belong to all C: and it is perfect, not

imperfect: for it is completed directly through the original premisses.

But  if  the  premisses  are  not  similar  in  quality,  suppose  first  that  the

negative premiss is necessary, and let necessarily A not be possible for any B,

but let B be possible for all C. It is necessary then that A belongs to no C. Forsuppose A to belong to all C or to some C. Now we assumed that A is not

possible for any B. Since then the negative proposition is convertible, B is not

possible for any A. But A is supposed to belong to all C or to some C.

Consequently  B  will  not  be  possible  for  any  C  or  for  all  C.  But  it  was

originally  laid  down  that  B  is  possible  for  all  C.  And  it  is  clear  that  the

possibility of belonging can be inferred, since the fact of not belonging is

inferred. Again, let the affirmative premiss be necessary, and let A possibly

not belong to any B, and let B necessarily belong to all C. The syllogism will

be  perfect,  but  it  will  establish  a  problematic  negative,  not  an  assertoric

negative.  For  the  major  premiss  was  problematic,  and  further  it  is  not

possible to prove the assertoric conclusion per impossibile. For if it were

supposed that A belongs to some C, and it is laid down that A possibly does

not belong to any B, no impossible relation between B and C follows from

these premisses. But if the minor premiss is negative, when it is problematic a

syllogism is possible by conversion, as above; but when it is necessary no

syllogism can be formed. Nor again when both premisses are negative, and

the minor is necessary. The same terms as before serve both for the positive

  relation-white-animal-snow, and for the negative relation-white-animal-pitch.

The  same  relation  will  obtain  in  particular  syllogisms.  Whenever  the

negative proposition is necessary, the conclusion will be negative assertoric:

e.g. if it is not possible that A should belong to any B, but B may belong to

some of the Cs, it is necessary that A should not belong to some of the Cs.

For if A belongs to all C, but cannot belong to any B, neither can B belong to

any A. So if A belongs to all C, to none of the Cs can B belong. But it was

laid down that B may belong to some C. But when the particular affirmative

in  the  negative  syllogism,  e.g.  BC  the  minor  premiss,  or  the  universal

proposition  in  the  affirmative  syllogism,  e.g.  AB  the  major  premiss,  is

necessary, there will not be an assertoric conclusion. The demonstration is the

same  as  before.  But  if  the  minor  premiss  is  universal,  and  problematic,

whether  affirmative  or  negative,  and  the  major  premiss  is  particular  and

necessary, there cannot be a syllogism. Premisses of this kind are possible

both where the relation is positive and necessary, e.g. animal-white-man, and

where it is necessary and negative, e.g. animal-white-garment. But when the

universal is necessary, the particular problematic, if the universal is negative

we may take the terms animal-white-raven to illustrate the positive relation,

or  animal-white-pitch  to  illustrate  the  negative;  and  if  the  universal  is

affirmative  we  may  take  the  terms  animal-white-swan  to  illustrate  thepositive  relation,  and  animal-white-snow  to  illustrate  the  negative  and

necessary relation. Nor again is a syllogism possible when the premisses are

indefinite, or both particular. Terms applicable in either case to illustrate the

positive  relation  are  animal-white-man:  to  illustrate  the  negative,  animal-

white-inanimate. For the relation of animal to some white, and of white to

some inanimate, is both necessary and positive and necessary and negative.

Similarly if the relation is problematic: so the terms may be used for all cases.

  Clearly  then  from  what  has  been  said  a  syllogism  results  or  not  from

similar relations of the terms whether we are dealing with simple existence or

necessity, with this exception, that if the negative premiss is assertoric the

conclusion  is  problematic,  but  if  the  negative  premiss  is  necessary  the

conclusion is both problematic and negative assertoric. [It is clear also that all

the syllogisms are imperfect and are perfected by means of the figures above

mentioned.]


17


In  the  second  figure  whenever  both  premisses  are  problematic,  no

syllogism  is  possible,  whether  the  premisses  are  affirmative  or  negative,

universal  or  particular.  But  when  one  premiss  is  assertoric,  the  other

problematic, if the affirmative is assertoric no syllogism is possible, but if the

universal negative is assertoric a conclusion can always be drawn. Similarly

when one premiss is necessary, the other problematic. Here also we must

understand the term ‘possible’ in the conclusion, in the same sense as before.

First we must point out that the negative problematic proposition is not

convertible, e.g. if A may belong to no B, it does not follow that B may

belong to no A. For suppose it to follow and assume that B may belong to no

A.  Since  then  problematic  affirmations  are  convertible  with  negations,

whether they are contraries or contradictories, and since B may belong to no

A, it is clear that B may belong to all A. But this is false: for if all this can be

that, it does not follow that all that can be this: consequently the negative

proposition  is  not  convertible.  Further,  these  propositions  are  not

incompatible, ‘A may belong to no B’, ‘B necessarily does not belong to

some of the As’; e.g. it is possible that no man should be white (for it is also

possible that every man should be white), but it is not true to say that it is

possible that no white thing should be a man: for many white things are

necessarily not men, and the necessary (as we saw) other than the possible.  Moreover it is not possible to prove the convertibility of these propositions

by a reductio ad absurdum, i.e. by claiming assent to the following argument:

‘since it is false that B may belong to no A, it is true that it cannot belong to

no A, for the one statement is the contradictory of the other. But if this is so,

it  is  true  that  B  necessarily  belongs  to  some  of  the  As:  consequently  A

necessarily belongs to some of the Bs. But this is impossible.’ The argument

cannot be admitted, for it does not follow that some A is necessarily B, if it is

not possible that no A should be B. For the latter expression is used in two

senses, one if A some is necessarily B, another if some A is necessarily not

B. For it is not true to say that that which necessarily does not belong to some

of the As may possibly not belong to any A, just as it is not true to say that

what necessarily belongs to some A may possibly belong to all A. If any one

then should claim that because it is not possible for C to belong to all D, it

necessarily does not belong to some D, he would make a false assumption:

for it does belong to all D, but because in some cases it belongs necessarily,

therefore we say that it is not possible for it to belong to all. Hence both the

propositions ‘A necessarily belongs to some B’ and ‘A necessarily does not

belong  to  some  B’  are  opposed  to  the  proposition  ‘A  belongs  to  all  B’.

Similarly also they are opposed to the proposition ‘A may belong to no B’. It

is clear then that in relation to what is possible and not possible, in the sense

originally defined, we must assume, not that A necessarily belongs to some

B, but that A necessarily does not belong to some B. But if this is assumed,

no absurdity results: consequently no syllogism. It is clear from what has

been said that the negative proposition is not convertible.

This being proved, suppose it possible that A may belong to no B and to all

C. By means of conversion no syllogism will result: for the major premiss, as

has been said, is not convertible. Nor can a proof be obtained by a reductio ad

absurdum:  for  if  it  is  assumed  that  B  can  belong  to  all  C,  no  false

consequence results: for A may belong both to all C and to no C. In general,

if  there  is  a  syllogism,  it  is  clear  that  its  conclusion  will  be  problematic

because  neither  of  the  premisses  is  assertoric;  and  this  must  be  either

affirmative or negative. But neither is possible. Suppose the conclusion is

affirmative: it will be proved by an example that the predicate cannot belong

to the subject. Suppose the conclusion is negative: it will be proved that it is

not problematic but necessary. Let A be white, B man, C horse. It is possible

then for A to belong to all of the one and to none of the other. But it is not

possible for B to belong nor not to belong to C. That it is not possible for it tobelong, is clear. For no horse is a man. Neither is it possible for it not to

belong. For it is necessary that no horse should be a man, but the necessary

we found to be different from the possible. No syllogism then results. A

similar  proof  can  be  given  if  the  major  premiss  is  negative,  the  minor

affirmative, or if both are affirmative or negative. The demonstration can be

made by means of the same terms. And whenever one premiss is universal,

the other particular, or both are particular or indefinite, or in whatever other

way the premisses can be altered, the proof will always proceed through the

same terms. Clearly then, if both the premisses are problematic, no syllogism

results.


18


But if one premiss is assertoric, the other problematic, if the affirmative is

assertoric  and  the  negative  problematic  no  syllogism  will  be  possible,

whether the premisses are universal or particular. The proof is the same as

above, and by means of the same terms. But when the affirmative premiss is

problematic, and the negative assertoric, we shall have a syllogism. Suppose

A belongs to no B, but can belong to all C. If the negative proposition is

converted, B will belong to no A. But ex hypothesi can belong to all C: so a

syllogism is made, proving by means of the first figure that B may belong to

no C. Similarly also if the minor premiss is negative. But if both premisses

are  negative,  one  being  assertoric,  the  other  problematic,  nothing  follows

necessarily from these premisses as they stand, but if the problematic premiss

is  converted  into  its  complementary  affirmative  a  syllogism  is  formed  to

prove that B may belong to no C, as before: for we shall again have the first

figure. But if both premisses are affirmative, no syllogism will be possible.

This arrangement of terms is possible both when the relation is positive, e.g.

health, animal, man, and when it is negative, e.g. health, horse, man.

The same will hold good if the syllogisms are particular. Whenever the

affirmative  proposition  is  assertoric,  whether  universal  or  particular,  no

syllogism is possible (this is proved similarly and by the same examples as

above), but when the negative proposition is assertoric, a conclusion can be

drawn by means of conversion, as before. Again if both the relations are

negative, and the assertoric proposition is universal, although no conclusion

follows from the actual premisses, a syllogism can be obtained by converting

the problematic premiss into its complementary affirmative as before. But ifthe negative proposition is assertoric, but particular, no syllogism is possible,

whether the other premiss is affirmative or negative. Nor can a conclusion be

drawn when both premisses are indefinite, whether affirmative or negative, or

particular. The proof is the same and by the same terms.


19


If one of the premisses is necessary, the other problematic, then if the

negative is necessary a syllogistic conclusion can be drawn, not merely a

negative  problematic  but  also  a  negative  assertoric  conclusion;  but  if  the

affirmative premiss is necessary, no conclusion is possible. Suppose that A

necessarily belongs to no B, but may belong to all C. If the negative premiss

is  converted  B  will  belong  to  no  A:  but  A  ex  hypothesi  is  capable  of

belonging to all C: so once more a conclusion is drawn by the first figure that

B may belong to no C. But at the same time it is clear that B will not belong

to any C. For assume that it does: then if A cannot belong to any B, and B

belongs  to  some  of  the  Cs,  A  cannot  belong  to  some  of  the  Cs:  but  ex

hypothesi it may belong to all. A similar proof can be given if the minor

premiss is negative. Again let the affirmative proposition be necessary, and

the other problematic; i.e. suppose that A may belong to no B, but necessarily

belongs to all C. When the terms are arranged in this way, no syllogism is

possible. For (1) it sometimes turns out that B necessarily does not belong to

C. Let A be white, B man, C swan. White then necessarily belongs to swan,

but may belong to no man; and man necessarily belongs to no swan; Clearly

then we cannot draw a problematic conclusion; for that which is necessary is

admittedly distinct from that which is possible. (2) Nor again can we draw a

necessary conclusion: for that presupposes that both premisses are necessary,

or at any rate the negative premiss. (3) Further it is possible also, when the

terms are so arranged, that B should belong to C: for nothing prevents C

falling under B, A being possible for all B, and necessarily belonging to C;

e.g.  if  C  stands  for  ‘awake’,  B  for  ‘animal’,  A  for  ‘motion’.  For  motion

necessarily belongs to what is awake, and is possible for every animal: and

everything that is awake is animal. Clearly then the conclusion cannot be the

negative assertion, if the relation must be positive when the terms are related

as above. Nor can the opposite affirmations be established: consequently no

syllogism  is  possible.  A  similar  proof  is  possible  if  the  major  premiss  is

affirmative.But  if  the  premisses  are  similar  in  quality,  when  they  are  negative  a

syllogism can always be formed by converting the problematic premiss into

its  complementary  affirmative  as  before.  Suppose  A  necessarily  does  not

belong to B, and possibly may not belong to C: if the premisses are converted

B belongs to no A, and A may possibly belong to all C: thus we have the first

figure. Similarly if the minor premiss is negative. But if the premisses are

affirmative there cannot be a syllogism. Clearly the conclusion cannot be a

negative assertoric or a negative necessary proposition because no negative

premiss has been laid down either in the assertoric or in the necessary mode.

Nor  can  the  conclusion  be  a  problematic  negative  proposition.  For  if  the

terms are so related, there are cases in which B necessarily will not belong to

C;  e.g.  suppose  that  A  is  white,  B  swan,  C  man.  Nor  can  the  opposite

affirmations  be  established,  since  we  have  shown  a  case  in  which  B

necessarily does not belong to C. A syllogism then is not possible at all.

  Similar  relations  will  obtain  in  particular  syllogisms.  For  whenever  the

negative proposition is universal and necessary, a syllogism will always be

possible to prove both a problematic and a negative assertoric proposition

(the proof proceeds by conversion); but when the affirmative proposition is

universal and necessary, no syllogistic conclusion can be drawn. This can be

proved in the same way as for universal propositions, and by the same terms.

Nor is a syllogistic conclusion possible when both premisses are affirmative:

this also may be proved as above. But when both premisses are negative, and

the premiss that definitely disconnects two terms is universal and necessary,

though nothing follows necessarily from the premisses as they are stated, a

conclusion can be drawn as above if the problematic premiss is converted

into its complementary affirmative. But if both are indefinite or particular, no

syllogism can be formed. The same proof will serve, and the same terms.

It is clear then from what has been said that if the universal and negative

premiss is necessary, a syllogism is always possible, proving not merely a

negative problematic, but also a negative assertoric proposition; but if the

affirmative premiss is necessary no conclusion can be drawn. It is clear too

that a syllogism is possible or not under the same conditions whether the

mode of the premisses is assertoric or necessary. And it is clear that all the

syllogisms  are  imperfect,  and  are  completed  by  means  of  the  figures

mentioned.


20In the last figure a syllogism is possible whether both or only one of the

premisses is problematic. When the premisses are problematic the conclusion

will be problematic; and also when one premiss is problematic, the other

assertoric. But when the other premiss is necessary, if it is affirmative the

conclusion will be neither necessary or assertoric; but if it is negative the

syllogism will result in a negative assertoric proposition, as above. In these

also we must understand the expression ‘possible’ in the conclusion in the

same way as before.

First let the premisses be problematic and suppose that both A and B may

possibly  belong  to  every  C.  Since  then  the  affirmative  proposition  is

convertible into a particular, and B may possibly belong to every C, it follows

that C may possibly belong to some B. So, if A is possible for every C, and C

is possible for some of the Bs, then A is possible for some of the Bs. For we

have got the first figure. And A if may possibly belong to no C, but B may

possibly belong to all C, it follows that A may possibly not belong to some B:

for we shall have the first figure again by conversion. But if both premisses

should be negative no necessary consequence will follow from them as they

are  stated,  but  if  the  premisses  are  converted  into  their  corresponding

affirmatives there will be a syllogism as before. For if A and B may possibly

not belong to C, if ‘may possibly belong’ is substituted we shall again have

the  first  figure  by  means  of  conversion.  But  if  one  of  the  premisses  is

universal, the other particular, a syllogism will be possible, or not, under the

arrangement of the terms as in the case of assertoric propositions. Suppose

that A may possibly belong to all C, and B to some C. We shall have the first

figure again if the particular premiss is converted. For if A is possible for all

C, and C for some of the Bs, then A is possible for some of the Bs. Similarly

if the proposition BC is universal. Likewise also if the proposition AC is

negative, and the proposition BC affirmative: for we shall again have the first

figure  by  conversion.  But  if  both  premisses  should  be  negative-the  one

universal  and  the  other  particular-although  no  syllogistic  conclusion  will

follow from the premisses as they are put, it will follow if they are converted,

as above. But when both premisses are indefinite or particular, no syllogism

can be formed: for A must belong sometimes to all B and sometimes to no B.

To  illustrate  the  affirmative  relation  take  the  terms  animal-man-white;  to

illustrate  the  negative,  take  the  terms  horse-man-white—white  being  the

middle term.21


If  one  premiss  is  pure,  the  other  problematic,  the  conclusion  will  be

problematic,  not  pure;  and  a  syllogism  will  be  possible  under  the  same

arrangement of the terms as before. First let the premisses be affirmative:

suppose that A belongs to all C, and B may possibly belong to all C. If the

proposition BC is converted, we shall have the first figure, and the conclusion

that A may possibly belong to some of the Bs. For when one of the premisses

in  the  first  figure  is  problematic,  the  conclusion  also  (as  we  saw)  is

problematic. Similarly if the proposition BC is pure, AC problematic; or if

AC is negative, BC affirmative, no matter which of the two is pure; in both

cases the conclusion will be problematic: for the first figure is obtained once

more, and it has been proved that if one premiss is problematic in that figure

the  conclusion  also  will  be  problematic.  But  if  the  minor  premiss  BC  is

negative, or if both premisses are negative, no syllogistic conclusion can be

drawn from the premisses as they stand, but if they are converted a syllogism

is obtained as before.

If one of the premisses is universal, the other particular, then when both are

affirmative, or when the universal is negative, the particular affirmative, we

shall have the same sort of syllogisms: for all are completed by means of the

first figure. So it is clear that we shall have not a pure but a problematic

syllogistic  conclusion.  But  if  the  affirmative  premiss  is  universal,  the

negative  particular,  the  proof  will  proceed  by  a  reductio  ad  impossibile.

Suppose that B belongs to all C, and A may possibly not belong to some C: it

follows that may possibly not belong to some B. For if A necessarily belongs

to all B, and B (as has been assumed) belongs to all C, A will necessarily

belong to all C: for this has been proved before. But it was assumed at the

outset that A may possibly not belong to some C.

  Whenever both premisses are indefinite or particular, no syllogism will be

possible. The demonstration is the same as was given in the case of universal

premisses, and proceeds by means of the same terms.


22


If  one  of  the  premisses  is  necessary,  the  other  problematic,  when  the

premisses are affirmative a problematic affirmative conclusion can always be

drawn;  when  one  proposition  is  affirmative,  the  other  negative,  if  theaffirmative is necessary a problematic negative can be inferred; but if the

negative  proposition  is  necessary  both  a  problematic  and  a  pure  negative

conclusion  are  possible.  But  a  necessary  negative  conclusion  will  not  be

possible, any more than in the other figures. Suppose first that the premisses

are affirmative, i.e. that A necessarily belongs to all C, and B may possibly

belong to all C. Since then A must belong to all C, and C may belong to some

B, it follows that A may (not does) belong to some B: for so it resulted in the

first figure. A similar proof may be given if the proposition BC is necessary,

and AC is problematic. Again suppose one proposition is affirmative, the

other negative, the affirmative being necessary: i.e. suppose A may possibly

belong to no C, but B necessarily belongs to all C. We shall have the first

figure once more: and-since the negative premiss is problematic-it is clear

that the conclusion will be problematic: for when the premisses stand thus in

the  first  figure,  the  conclusion  (as  we  found)  is  problematic.  But  if  the

negative premiss is necessary, the conclusion will be not only that A may

possibly not belong to some B but also that it does not belong to some B. For

suppose that A necessarily does not belong to C, but B may belong to all C. If

the affirmative proposition BC is converted, we shall have the first figure,

and the negative premiss is necessary. But when the premisses stood thus, it

resulted that A might possibly not belong to some C, and that it did not

belong to some C; consequently here it follows that A does not belong to

some B. But when the minor premiss is negative, if it is problematic we shall

have a syllogism by altering the premiss into its complementary affirmative,

as before; but if it is necessary no syllogism can be formed. For A sometimes

necessarily belongs to all B, and sometimes cannot possibly belong to any B.

To illustrate the former take the terms sleep-sleeping horse-man; to illustrate

the latter take the terms sleep-waking horse-man.

  Similar results will obtain if one of the terms is related universally to the

middle, the other in part. If both premisses are affirmative, the conclusion

will be problematic, not pure; and also when one premiss is negative, the

other affirmative, the latter being necessary. But when the negative premiss is

necessary, the conclusion also will be a pure negative proposition; for the

same kind of proof can be given whether the terms are universal or not. For

the syllogisms must be made perfect by means of the first figure, so that a

result which follows in the first figure follows also in the third. But when the

minor premiss is negative and universal, if it is problematic a syllogism can

be formed by means of conversion; but if it is necessary a syllogism is notpossible. The proof will follow the same course as where the premisses are

universal; and the same terms may be used.

It is clear then in this figure also when and how a syllogism can be formed,

and when the conclusion is problematic, and when it is pure. It is evident also

that all syllogisms in this figure are imperfect, and that they are made perfect

by means of the first figure.


23


It is clear from what has been said that the syllogisms in these figures are

made perfect by means of universal syllogisms in the first figure and are

reduced to them. That every syllogism without qualification can be so treated,

will  be  clear  presently,  when  it  has  been  proved  that  every  syllogism  is

formed through one or other of these figures.

It is necessary that every demonstration and every syllogism should prove

either that something belongs or that it does not, and this either universally or

in  part,  and  further  either  ostensively  or  hypothetically.  One  sort  of

hypothetical  proof  is  the  reductio  ad  impossibile.  Let  us  speak  first  of

ostensive syllogisms: for after these have been pointed out the truth of our

contention  will  be  clear  with  regard  to  those  which  are  proved  per

impossibile, and in general hypothetically.

If then one wants to prove syllogistically A of B, either as an attribute of it

or as not an attribute of it, one must assert something of something else. If

now A should be asserted of B, the proposition originally in question will

have been assumed. But if A should be asserted of C, but C should not be

asserted of anything, nor anything of it, nor anything else of A, no syllogism

will be possible. For nothing necessarily follows from the assertion of some

one thing concerning some other single thing. Thus we must take another

premiss as well. If then A be asserted of something else, or something else of

A, or something different of C, nothing prevents a syllogism being formed,

but it will not be in relation to B through the premisses taken. Nor when C

belongs  to  something  else,  and  that  to  something  else  and  so  on,  no

connexion  however  being  made  with  B,  will  a  syllogism  be  possible

concerning A in its relation to B. For in general we stated that no syllogism

can establish the attribution of one thing to another, unless some middle term

is taken, which is somehow related to each by way of predication. For the

syllogism in general is made out of premisses, and a syllogism referring tothis out of premisses with the same reference, and a syllogism relating this to

that proceeds through premisses which relate this to that. But it is impossible

to take a premiss in reference to B, if we neither affirm nor deny anything of

it; or again to take a premiss relating A to B, if we take nothing common, but

affirm  or  deny  peculiar  attributes  of  each.  So  we  must  take  something

midway between the two, which will connect the predications, if we are to

have  a  syllogism  relating  this  to  that.  If  then  we  must  take  something

common in relation to both, and this is possible in three ways (either by

predicating A of C, and C of B, or C of both, or both of C), and these are the

figures of which we have spoken, it is clear that every syllogism must be

made in one or other of these figures. The argument is the same if several

middle terms should be necessary to establish the relation to B; for the figure

will be the same whether there is one middle term or many.

It is clear then that the ostensive syllogisms are effected by means of the

aforesaid figures; these considerations will show that reductiones ad also are

effected in the same way. For all who effect an argument per impossibile

infer  syllogistically  what  is  false,  and  prove  the  original  conclusion

hypothetically when something impossible results from the assumption of its

contradictory; e.g. that the diagonal of the square is incommensurate with the

side,  because  odd  numbers  are  equal  to  evens  if  it  is  supposed  to  be

commensurate. One infers syllogistically that odd numbers come out equal to

evens, and one proves hypothetically the incommensurability of the diagonal,

since a falsehood results through contradicting this. For this we found to be

reasoning per impossibile, viz. proving something impossible by means of an

hypothesis conceded at the beginning. Consequently, since the falsehood is

established in reductions ad impossibile by an ostensive syllogism, and the

original conclusion is proved hypothetically, and we have already stated that

ostensive syllogisms are effected by means of these figures, it is evident that

syllogisms per impossibile also will be made through these figures. Likewise

all the other hypothetical syllogisms: for in every case the syllogism leads up

to the proposition that is substituted for the original thesis; but the original

thesis is reached by means of a concession or some other hypothesis. But if

this  is  true,  every  demonstration  and  every  syllogism  must  be  formed  by

means of the three figures mentioned above. But when this has been shown it

is clear that every syllogism is perfected by means of the first figure and is

reducible to the universal syllogisms in this figure.24


  Further in every syllogism one of the premisses must be affirmative, and

universality must be present: unless one of the premisses is universal either a

syllogism will not be possible, or it will not refer to the subject proposed, or

the original position will be begged. Suppose we have to prove that pleasure

in music is good. If one should claim as a premiss that pleasure is good

without adding ‘all’, no syllogism will be possible; if one should claim that

some pleasure is good, then if it is different from pleasure in music, it is not

relevant to the subject proposed; if it is this very pleasure, one is assuming

that which was proposed at the outset to be proved. This is more obvious in

geometrical proofs, e.g. that the angles at the base of an isosceles triangle are

equal. Suppose the lines A and B have been drawn to the centre. If then one

should assume that the angle AC is equal to the angle BD, without claiming

generally that angles of semicircles are equal; and again if one should assume

that the angle C is equal to the angle D, without the additional assumption

that  every  angle  of  a  segment  is  equal  to  every  other  angle  of  the  same

segment; and further if one should assume that when equal angles are taken

from the whole angles, which are themselves equal, the remainders E and F

are equal, he will beg the thing to be proved, unless he also states that when

equals are taken from equals the remainders are equal.

It is clear then that in every syllogism there must be a universal premiss,

and  that  a  universal  statement  is  proved  only  when  all  the  premisses  are

universal,  while  a  particular  statement  is  proved  both  from  two  universal

premisses and from one only: consequently if the conclusion is universal, the

premisses  also  must  be  universal,  but  if  the  premisses  are  universal  it  is

possible that the conclusion may not be universal. And it is clear also that in

every  syllogism  either  both  or  one  of  the  premisses  must  be  like  the

conclusion. I mean not only in being affirmative or negative, but also in being

necessary,  pure,  problematic.  We  must  consider  also  the  other  forms  of

predication.

It  is  clear  also  when  a  syllogism  in  general  can  be  made  and  when  it

cannot; and when a valid, when a perfect syllogism can be formed; and that if

a syllogism is formed the terms must be arranged in one of the ways that have

been mentioned.


25It is clear too that every demonstration will proceed through three terms

and no more, unless the same conclusion is established by different pairs of

propositions;  e.g.  the  conclusion  E  may  be  established  through  the

propositions A and B, and through the propositions C and D, or through the

propositions A and B, or A and C, or B and C. For nothing prevents there

being several middles for the same terms. But in that case there is not one but

several  syllogisms.  Or  again  when  each  of  the  propositions  A  and  B  is

obtained by syllogistic inference, e.g. by means of D and E, and again B by

means  of  F  and  G.  Or  one  may  be  obtained  by  syllogistic,  the  other  by

inductive  inference.  But  thus  also  the  syllogisms  are  many;  for  the

conclusions are many, e.g. A and B and C. But if this can be called one

syllogism, not many, the same conclusion may be reached by more than three

terms in this way, but it cannot be reached as C is established by means of A

and B. Suppose that the proposition E is inferred from the premisses A, B, C,

and D. It is necessary then that of these one should be related to another as

whole to part: for it has already been proved that if a syllogism is formed

some of its terms must be related in this way. Suppose then that A stands in

this relation to B. Some conclusion then follows from them. It must either be

E or one or other of C and D, or something other than these.

(1) If it is E the syllogism will have A and B for its sole premisses. But if C

and D are so related that one is whole, the other part, some conclusion will

follow  from  them  also;  and  it  must  be  either  E,  or  one  or  other  of  the

propositions A and B, or something other than these. And if it is (i) E, or (ii)

A or B, either (i) the syllogisms will be more than one, or (ii) the same thing

happens to be inferred by means of several terms only in the sense which we

saw to be possible. But if (iii) the conclusion is other than E or A or B, the

syllogisms will be many, and unconnected with one another. But if C is not

so  related  to  D  as  to  make  a  syllogism,  the  propositions  will  have  been

assumed to no purpose, unless for the sake of induction or of obscuring the

argument or something of the sort.

(2) But if from the propositions A and B there follows not E but some

other conclusion, and if from C and D either A or B follows or something

else,  then  there  are  several  syllogisms,  and  they  do  not  establish  the

conclusion proposed: for we assumed that the syllogism proved E. And if no

conclusion follows from C and D, it turns out that these propositions have

been assumed to no purpose, and the syllogism does not prove the original

proposition.So it is clear that every demonstration and every syllogism will proceed

through three terms only.

This being evident, it is clear that a syllogistic conclusion follows from two

premisses  and  not  from  more  than  two.  For  the  three  terms  make  two

premisses, unless a new premiss is assumed, as was said at the beginning, to

perfect  the  syllogisms.  It  is  clear  therefore  that  in  whatever  syllogistic

argument the premisses through which the main conclusion follows (for some

of the preceding conclusions must be premisses) are not even in number, this

argument either has not been drawn syllogistically or it has assumed more

than was necessary to establish its thesis.

If then syllogisms are taken with respect to their main premisses, every

syllogism will consist of an even number of premisses and an odd number of

terms (for the terms exceed the premisses by one), and the conclusions will

be half the number of the premisses. But whenever a conclusion is reached by

means of prosyllogisms or by means of several continuous middle terms, e.g.

the proposition AB by means of the middle terms C and D, the number of the

terms will similarly exceed that of the premisses by one (for the extra term

must either be added outside or inserted: but in either case it follows that the

relations  of  predication  are  one  fewer  than  the  terms  related),  and  the

premisses  will  be  equal  in  number  to  the  relations  of  predication.  The

premisses however will not always be even, the terms odd; but they will

alternate-when the premisses are even, the terms must be odd; when the terms

are even, the premisses must be odd: for along with one term one premiss is

added, if a term is added from any quarter. Consequently since the premisses

were (as we saw) even, and the terms odd, we must make them alternately

even and odd at each addition. But the conclusions will not follow the same

arrangement either in respect to the terms or to the premisses. For if one term

is added, conclusions will be added less by one than the pre-existing terms:

for the conclusion is drawn not in relation to the single term last added, but in

relation to all the rest, e.g. if to ABC the term D is added, two conclusions are

thereby added, one in relation to A, the other in relation to B. Similarly with

any further additions. And similarly too if the term is inserted in the middle:

for  in  relation  to  one  term  only,  a  syllogism  will  not  be  constructed.

Consequently the conclusions will be much more numerous than the terms or

the premisses.


26  Since we understand the subjects with which syllogisms are concerned,

what sort of conclusion is established in each figure, and in how many moods

this is done, it is evident to us both what sort of problem is difficult and what

sort is easy to prove. For that which is concluded in many figures and through

many moods is easier; that which is concluded in few figures and through

few moods is more difficult to attempt. The universal affirmative is proved

by means of the first figure only and by this in only one mood; the universal

negative  is  proved  both  through  the  first  figure  and  through  the  second,

through  the  first  in  one  mood,  through  the  second  in  two.  The  particular

affirmative is proved through the first and through the last figure, in one

mood  through  the  first,  in  three  moods  through  the  last.  The  particular

negative is proved in all the figures, but once in the first, in two moods in the

second,  in  three  moods  in  the  third.  It  is  clear  then  that  the  universal

affirmative is most difficult to establish, most easy to overthrow. In general,

universals are easier game for the destroyer than particulars: for whether the

predicate  belongs  to  none  or  not  to  some,  they  are  destroyed:  and  the

particular negative is proved in all the figures, the universal negative in two.

Similarly  with  universal  negatives:  the  original  statement  is  destroyed,

whether the predicate belongs to all or to some: and this we found possible in

two  figures.  But  particular  statements  can  be  refuted  in  one  way  only-by

proving  that  the  predicate  belongs  either  to  all  or  to  none.  But  particular

statements are easier to establish: for proof is possible in more figures and

through more moods. And in general we must not forget that it is possible to

refute statements by means of one another, I mean, universal statements by

means of particular, and particular statements by means of universal: but it is

not possible to establish universal statements by means of particular, though

it is possible to establish particular statements by means of universal. At the

same time it is evident that it is easier to refute than to establish.

The manner in which every syllogism is produced, the number of the terms

and premisses through which it proceeds, the relation of the premisses to one

another, the character of the problem proved in each figure, and the number

of the figures appropriate to each problem, all these matters are clear from

what has been said.


27


We  must  now  state  how  we  may  ourselves  always  have  a  supply  ofsyllogisms in reference to the problem proposed and by what road we may

reach the principles relative to the problem: for perhaps we ought not only to

investigate  the  construction  of  syllogisms,  but  also  to  have  the  power  of

making them.

Of all the things which exist some are such that they cannot be predicated

of  anything  else  truly  and  universally,  e.g.  Cleon  and  Callias,  i.e.  the

individual and sensible, but other things may be predicated of them (for each

of these is both man and animal); and some things are themselves predicated

of others, but nothing prior is predicated of them; and some are predicated of

others, and yet others of them, e.g. man of Callias and animal of man. It is

clear then that some things are naturally not stated of anything: for as a rule

each sensible thing is such that it cannot be predicated of anything, save

incidentally: for we sometimes say that that white object is Socrates, or that

that which approaches is Callias. We shall explain in another place that there

is an upward limit also to the process of predicating: for the present we must

assume this. Of these ultimate predicates it is not possible to demonstrate

another predicate, save as a matter of opinion, but these may be predicated of

other things. Neither can individuals be predicated of other things, though

other things can be predicated of them. Whatever lies between these limits

can be spoken of in both ways: they may be stated of others, and others stated

of them. And as a rule arguments and inquiries are concerned with these

things. We must select the premisses suitable to each problem in this manner:

first we must lay down the subject and the definitions and the properties of

the thing; next we must lay down those attributes which follow the thing, and

again those which the thing follows, and those which cannot belong to it. But

those to which it cannot belong need not be selected, because the negative

statement implied above is convertible. Of the attributes which follow we

must  distinguish  those  which  fall  within  the  definition,  those  which  are

predicated as properties, and those which are predicated as accidents, and of

the latter those which apparently and those which really belong. The larger

the supply a man has of these, the more quickly will he reach a conclusion;

and in proportion as he apprehends those which are truer, the more cogently

will  he  demonstrate.  But  he  must  select  not  those  which  follow  some

particular but those which follow the thing as a whole, e.g. not what follows a

particular  man  but  what  follows  every  man:  for  the  syllogism  proceeds

through  universal  premisses.  If  the  statement  is  indefinite,  it  is  uncertain

whether the premiss is universal, but if the statement is definite, the matter isclear. Similarly one must select those attributes which the subject follows as

wholes, for the reason given. But that which follows one must not suppose to

follow as a whole, e.g. that every animal follows man or every science music,

but only that it follows, without qualification, and indeed we state it in a

proposition: for the other statement is useless and impossible, e.g. that every

man is every animal or justice is all good. But that which something follows

receives the mark ‘every’. Whenever the subject, for which we must obtain

the attributes that follow, is contained by something else, what follows or

does not follow the highest term universally must not be selected in dealing

with the subordinate term (for these attributes have been taken in dealing with

the superior term; for what follows animal also follows man, and what does

not belong to animal does not belong to man); but we must choose those

attributes which are peculiar to each subject. For some things are peculiar to

the species as distinct from the genus; for species being distinct there must be

attributes peculiar to each. Nor must we take as things which the superior

term  follows,  those  things  which  the  inferior  term  follows,  e.g.  take  as

subjects of the predicate ‘animal’ what are really subjects of the predicate

‘man’. It is necessary indeed, if animal follows man, that it should follow all

these also. But these belong more properly to the choice of what concerns

man. One must apprehend also normal consequents and normal antecedents-,

for propositions which obtain normally are established syllogistically from

premisses  which  obtain  normally,  some  if  not  all  of  them  having  this

character of normality. For the conclusion of each syllogism resembles its

principles.  We  must  not  however  choose  attributes  which  are  consequent

upon all the terms: for no syllogism can be made out of such premisses. The

reason why this is so will be clear in the sequel.


28


If men wish to establish something about some whole, they must look to

the  subjects  of  that  which  is  being  established  (the  subjects  of  which  it

happens to be asserted), and the attributes which follow that of which it is to

be  predicated.  For  if  any  of  these  subjects  is  the  same  as  any  of  these

attributes,  the  attribute  originally  in  question  must  belong  to  the  subject

originally in question. But if the purpose is to establish not a universal but a

particular proposition, they must look for the terms of which the terms in

question  are  predicable:  for  if  any  of  these  are  identical,  the  attribute  inquestion must belong to some of the subject in question. Whenever the one

term has to belong to none of the other, one must look to the consequents of

the subject, and to those attributes which cannot possibly be present in the

predicate in question: or conversely to the attributes which cannot possibly be

present  in  the  subject,  and  to  the  consequents  of  the  predicate.  If  any

members of these groups are identical, one of the terms in question cannot

possibly belong to any of the other. For sometimes a syllogism in the first

figure results, sometimes a syllogism in the second. But if the object is to

establish a particular negative proposition, we must find antecedents of the

subject  in  question  and  attributes  which  cannot  possibly  belong  to  the

predicate in question. If any members of these two groups are identical, it

follows that one of the terms in question does not belong to some of the

other. Perhaps each of these statements will become clearer in the following

way. Suppose the consequents of A are designated by B, the antecedents of A

by C, attributes which cannot possibly belong to A by D. Suppose again that

the  attributes  of  E  are  designated  by  F,  the  antecedents  of  E  by  G,  and

attributes which cannot belong to E by H. If then one of the Cs should be

identical with one of the Fs, A must belong to all E: for F belongs to all E,

and A to all C, consequently A belongs to all E. If C and G are identical, A

must belong to some of the Es: for A follows C, and E follows all G. If F and

D are identical, A will belong to none of the Es by a prosyllogism: for since

the  negative  proposition  is  convertible,  and  F  is  identical  with  D,  A  will

belong to none of the Fs, but F belongs to all E. Again, if B and H are

identical, A will belong to none of the Es: for B will belong to all A, but to no

E: for it was assumed to be identical with H, and H belonged to none of the

Es. If D and G are identical, A will not belong to some of the Es: for it will

not  belong  to  G,  because  it  does  not  belong  to  D:  but  G  falls  under  E:

consequently A will not belong to some of the Es. If B is identical with G,

there will be a converted syllogism: for E will belong to all A since B belongs

to A and E to B (for B was found to be identical with G): but that A should

belong to all E is not necessary, but it must belong to some E because it is

possible to convert the universal statement into a particular.

It is clear then that in every proposition which requires proof we must look

to  the  aforesaid  relations  of  the  subject  and  predicate  in  question:  for  all

syllogisms proceed through these. But if we are seeking consequents and

antecedents we must look for those which are primary and most universal,

e.g. in reference to E we must look to KF rather than to F alone, and inreference to A we must look to KC rather than to C alone. For if A belongs to

KF, it belongs both to F and to E: but if it does not follow KF, it may yet

follow F. Similarly we must consider the antecedents of A itself: for if a term

follows  the  primary  antecedents,  it  will  follow  those  also  which  are

subordinate, but if it does not follow the former, it may yet follow the latter.

It is clear too that the inquiry proceeds through the three terms and the two

premisses, and that all the syllogisms proceed through the aforesaid figures.

For it is proved that A belongs to all E, whenever an identical term is found

among the Cs and Fs. This will be the middle term; A and E will be the

extremes.  So  the  first  figure  is  formed.  And  A  will  belong  to  some  E,

whenever C and G are apprehended to be the same. This is the last figure: for

G becomes the middle term. And A will belong to no E, when D and F are

identical. Thus we have both the first figure and the middle figure; the first,

because A belongs to no F, since the negative statement is convertible, and F

belongs to all E: the middle figure because D belongs to no A, and to all E.

And A will not belong to some E, whenever D and G are identical. This is the

last figure: for A will belong to no G, and E will belong to all G. Clearly then

all syllogisms proceed through the aforesaid figures, and we must not select

consequents of all the terms, because no syllogism is produced from them.

For  (as  we  saw)  it  is  not  possible  at  all  to  establish  a  proposition  from

consequents, and it is not possible to refute by means of a consequent of both

the terms in question: for the middle term must belong to the one, and not

belong to the other.

It is clear too that other methods of inquiry by selection of middle terms

are useless to produce a syllogism, e.g. if the consequents of the terms in

question  are  identical,  or  if  the  antecedents  of  A  are  identical  with  those

attributes  which  cannot  possibly  belong  to  E,  or  if  those  attributes  are

identical which cannot belong to either term: for no syllogism is produced by

means of these. For if the consequents are identical, e.g. B and F, we have the

middle figure with both premisses affirmative: if the antecedents of A are

identical with attributes which cannot belong to E, e.g. C with H, we have the

first figure with its minor premiss negative. If attributes which cannot belong

to either term are identical, e.g. C and H, both premisses are negative, either

in the first or in the middle figure. But no syllogism is possible in this way.

It is evident too that we must find out which terms in this inquiry are

identical, not which are different or contrary, first because the object of our

investigation is the middle term, and the middle term must be not diverse butidentical. Secondly, wherever it happens that a syllogism results from taking

contraries or terms which cannot belong to the same thing, all arguments can

be reduced to the aforesaid moods, e.g. if B and F are contraries or cannot

belong to the same thing. For if these are taken, a syllogism will be formed to

prove that A belongs to none of the Es, not however from the premisses taken

but  in  the  aforesaid  mood.  For  B  will  belong  to  all  A  and  to  no  E.

Consequently B must be identical with one of the Hs. Again, if B and G

cannot belong to the same thing, it follows that A will not belong to some of

the Es: for then too we shall have the middle figure: for B will belong to all A

and to no G. Consequently B must be identical with some of the Hs. For the

fact that B and G cannot belong to the same thing differs in no way from the

fact that B is identical with some of the Hs: for that includes everything

which cannot belong to E.

It is clear then that from the inquiries taken by themselves no syllogism

results; but if B and F are contraries B must be identical with one of the Hs,

and the syllogism results through these terms. It turns out then that those who

inquire in this manner are looking gratuitously for some other way than the

necessary way because they have failed to observe the identity of the Bs with

the Hs.


29


  Syllogisms which lead to impossible conclusions are similar to ostensive

syllogisms;  they  also  are  formed  by  means  of  the  consequents  and

antecedents  of  the  terms  in  question.  In  both  cases  the  same  inquiry  is

involved.  For  what  is  proved  ostensively  may  also  be  concluded

syllogistically  per  impossibile  by  means  of  the  same  terms;  and  what  is

proved per impossibile may also be proved ostensively, e.g. that A belongs to

none of the Es. For suppose A to belong to some E: then since B belongs to

all A and A to some of the Es, B will belong to some of the Es: but it was

assumed that it belongs to none. Again we may prove that A belongs to some

E: for if A belonged to none of the Es, and E belongs to all G, A will belong

to none of the Gs: but it was assumed to belong to all. Similarly with the

other propositions requiring proof. The proof per impossibile will always and

in all cases be from the consequents and antecedents of the terms in question.

Whatever the problem the same inquiry is necessary whether one wishes to

use  an  ostensive  syllogism  or  a  reduction  to  impossibility.  For  both  thedemonstrations start from the same terms, e.g. suppose it has been proved

that A belongs to no E, because it turns out that otherwise B belongs to some

of the Es and this is impossible-if now it is assumed that B belongs to no E

and to all A, it is clear that A will belong to no E. Again if it has been proved

by an ostensive syllogism that A belongs to no E, assume that A belongs to

some E and it will be proved per impossibile to belong to no E. Similarly

with the rest. In all cases it is necessary to find some common term other than

the  subjects  of  inquiry,  to  which  the  syllogism  establishing  the  false

conclusion  may  relate,  so  that  if  this  premiss  is  converted,  and  the  other

remains as it is, the syllogism will be ostensive by means of the same terms.

For the ostensive syllogism differs from the reductio ad impossibile in this: in

the ostensive syllogism both remisses are laid down in accordance with the

truth, in the reductio ad impossibile one of the premisses is assumed falsely.

  These  points  will  be  made  clearer  by  the  sequel,  when  we  discuss  the

reduction to impossibility: at present this much must be clear, that we must

look to terms of the kinds mentioned whether we wish to use an ostensive

syllogism  or  a  reduction  to  impossibility.  In  the  other  hypothetical

syllogisms,  I  mean  those  which  proceed  by  substitution,  or  by  positing  a

certain quality, the inquiry will be directed to the terms of the problem to be

proved-not the terms of the original problem, but the new terms introduced;

and  the  method  of  the  inquiry  will  be  the  same  as  before.  But  we  must

consider  and  determine  in  how  many  ways  hypothetical  syllogisms  are

possible.

Each of the problems then can be proved in the manner described; but it is

possible  to  establish  some  of  them  syllogistically  in  another  way,  e.g.

universal problems by the inquiry which leads up to a particular conclusion,

with  the  addition  of  an  hypothesis.  For  if  the  Cs  and  the  Gs  should  be

identical, but E should be assumed to belong to the Gs only, then A would

belong to every E: and again if the Ds and the Gs should be identical, but E

should be predicated of the Gs only, it follows that A will belong to none of

the  Es.  Clearly  then  we  must  consider  the  matter  in  this  way  also.  The

method is the same whether the relation is necessary or possible. For the

inquiry  will  be  the  same,  and  the  syllogism  will  proceed  through  terms

arranged in the same order whether a possible or a pure proposition is proved.

We must find in the case of possible relations, as well as terms that belong,

terms which can belong though they actually do not: for we have proved that

the syllogism which establishes a possible relation proceeds through theseterms as well. Similarly also with the other modes of predication.

It is clear then from what has been said not only that all syllogisms can be

formed in this way, but also that they cannot be formed in any other. For

every  syllogism  has  been  proved  to  be  formed  through  one  of  the

aforementioned figures, and these cannot be composed through other terms

than the consequents and antecedents of the terms in question: for from these

we obtain the premisses and find the middle term. Consequently a syllogism

cannot be formed by means of other terms.


30


The method is the same in all cases, in philosophy, in any art or study. We

must look for the attributes and the subjects of both our terms, and we must

supply ourselves with as many of these as possible, and consider them by

means of the three terms, refuting statements in one way, confirming them in

another,  in  the  pursuit  of  truth  starting  from  premisses  in  which  the

arrangement of the terms is in accordance with truth, while if we look for

dialectical syllogisms we must start from probable premisses. The principles

of  syllogisms  have  been  stated  in  general  terms,  both  how  they  are

characterized and how we must hunt for them, so as not to look to everything

that is said about the terms of the problem or to the same points whether we

are confirming or refuting, or again whether we are confirming of all or of

some, and whether we are refuting of all or some. we must look to fewer

points and they must be definite. We have also stated how we must select

with reference to everything that is, e.g. about good or knowledge. But in

each  science  the  principles  which  are  peculiar  are  the  most  numerous.

Consequently it is the business of experience to give the principles which

belong  to  each  subject.  I  mean  for  example  that  astronomical  experience

supplies the principles of astronomical science: for once the phenomena were

adequately apprehended, the demonstrations of astronomy were discovered.

Similarly with any other art or science. Consequently, if the attributes of the

thing  are  apprehended,  our  business  will  then  be  to  exhibit  readily  the

demonstrations. For if none of the true attributes of things had been omitted

in  the  historical  survey,  we  should  be  able  to  discover  the  proof  and

demonstrate  everything  which  admitted  of  proof,  and  to  make  that  clear,

whose nature does not admit of proof.

In  general  then  we  have  explained  fairly  well  how  we  must  selectpremisses: we have discussed the matter accurately in the treatise concerning

dialectic.


31


It is easy to see that division into classes is a small part of the method we

have described: for division is, so to speak, a weak syllogism; for what it

ought to prove, it begs, and it always establishes something more general

than the attribute in question. First, this very point had escaped all those who

used the method of division; and they attempted to persuade men that it was

possible to make a demonstration of substance and essence. Consequently

they  did  not  understand  what  it  is  possible  to  prove  syllogistically  by

division, nor did they understand that it was possible to prove syllogistically

in the manner we have described. In demonstrations, when there is a need to

prove a positive statement, the middle term through which the syllogism is

formed  must  always  be  inferior  to  and  not  comprehend  the  first  of  the

extremes. But division has a contrary intention: for it takes the universal as

middle. Let animal be the term signified by A, mortal by B, and immortal by

C, and let man, whose definition is to be got, be signified by D. The man who

divides assumes that every animal is either mortal or immortal: i.e. whatever

is A is all either B or C. Again, always dividing, he lays it down that man is

an animal, so he assumes A of D as belonging to it. Now the true conclusion

is that every D is either B or C, consequently man must be either mortal or

immortal, but it is not necessary that man should be a mortal animal-this is

begged:  and  this  is  what  ought  to  have  been  proved  syllogistically.  And

again, taking A as mortal animal, B as footed, C as footless, and D as man, he

assumes in the same way that A inheres either in B or in C (for every mortal

animal is either footed or footless), and he assumes A of D (for he assumed

man, as we saw, to be a mortal animal); consequently it is necessary that man

should be either a footed or a footless animal; but it is not necessary that man

should be footed: this he assumes: and it is just this again which he ought to

have demonstrated. Always dividing then in this way it turns out that these

logicians assume as middle the universal term, and as extremes that which

ought  to  have  been  the  subject  of  demonstration  and  the  differentiae.  In

conclusion, they do not make it clear, and show it to be necessary, that this is

man or whatever the subject of inquiry may be: for they pursue the other

method altogether, never even suspecting the presence of the rich supply ofevidence which might be used. It is clear that it is neither possible to refute a

statement  by  this  method  of  division,  nor  to  draw  a  conclusion  about  an

accident or property of a thing, nor about its genus, nor in cases in which it is

unknown  whether  it  is  thus  or  thus,  e.g.  whether  the  diagonal  is

incommensurate. For if he assumes that every length is either commensurate

or  incommensurate,  and  the  diagonal  is  a  length,  he  has  proved  that  the

diagonal is either incommensurate or commensurate. But if he should assume

that  it  is  incommensurate,  he  will  have  assumed  what  he  ought  to  have

proved.  He  cannot  then  prove  it:  for  this  is  his  method,  but  proof  is  not

possible by this method. Let A stand for ‘incommensurate or commensurate’,

B  for  ‘length’,  C  for  ‘diagonal’.  It  is  clear  then  that  this  method  of

investigation is not suitable for every inquiry, nor is it useful in those cases in

which it is thought to be most suitable.

  From what has been said it is clear from what elements demonstrations are

formed  and  in  what  manner,  and  to  what  points  we  must  look  in  each

problem.


32


Our  next  business  is  to  state  how  we  can  reduce  syllogisms  to  the

aforementioned figures: for this part of the inquiry still remains. If we should

investigate the production of the syllogisms and had the power of discovering

them,  and  further  if  we  could  resolve  the  syllogisms  produced  into  the

aforementioned  figures,  our  original  problem  would  be  brought  to  a

conclusion. It will happen at the same time that what has been already said

will be confirmed and its truth made clearer by what we are about to say. For

everything that is true must in every respect agree with itself First then we

must attempt to select the two premisses of the syllogism (for it is easier to

divide into large parts than into small, and the composite parts are larger than

the elements out of which they are made); next we must inquire which are

universal and which particular, and if both premisses have not been stated,

we must ourselves assume the one which is missing. For sometimes men put

forward  the  universal  premiss,  but  do  not  posit  the  premiss  which  is

contained in it, either in writing or in discussion: or men put forward the

premisses of the principal syllogism, but omit those through which they are

inferred, and invite the concession of others to no purpose. We must inquire

then whether anything unnecessary has been assumed, or anything necessaryhas been omitted, and we must posit the one and take away the other, until we

have reached the two premisses: for unless we have these, we cannot reduce

arguments put forward in the way described. In some arguments it is easy to

see  what  is  wanting,  but  some  escape  us,  and  appear  to  be  syllogisms,

because something necessary results from what has been laid down, e.g. if the

assumptions were made that substance is not annihilated by the annihilation

of what is not substance, and that if the elements out of which a thing is made

are  annihilated,  then  that  which  is  made  out  of  them  is  destroyed:  these

propositions being laid down, it is necessary that any part of substance is

substance;  this  has  not  however  been  drawn  by  syllogism  from  the

propositions assumed, but premisses are wanting. Again if it is necessary that

animal should exist, if man does, and that substance should exist, if animal

does, it is necessary that substance should exist if man does: but as yet the

conclusion has not been drawn syllogistically: for the premisses are not in the

shape  we  required.  We  are  deceived  in  such  cases  because  something

necessary results from what is assumed, since the syllogism also is necessary.

But that which is necessary is wider than the syllogism: for every syllogism is

necessary,  but  not  everything  which  is  necessary  is  a  syllogism.

Consequently,  though  something  results  when  certain  propositions  are

assumed, we must not try to reduce it directly, but must first state the two

premisses,  then  divide  them  into  their  terms.  We  must  take  that  term  as

middle which is stated in both the remisses: for it is necessary that the middle

should be found in both premisses in all the figures.

If then the middle term is a predicate and a subject of predication, or if it is

a predicate, and something else is denied of it, we shall have the first figure:

if it both is a predicate and is denied of something, the middle figure: if other

things are predicated of it, or one is denied, the other predicated, the last

figure. For it was thus that we found the middle term placed in each figure. It

is placed similarly too if the premisses are not universal: for the middle term

is determined in the same way. Clearly then, if the same term is not stated

more than once in the course of an argument, a syllogism cannot be made: for

a  middle  term  has  not  been  taken.  Since  we  know  what  sort  of  thesis  is

established  in  each  figure,  and  in  which  the  universal,  in  what  sort  the

particular is described, clearly we must not look for all the figures, but for

that which is appropriate to the thesis in hand. If the thesis is established in

more figures than one, we shall recognize the figure by the position of the

middle term.33


Men  are  frequently  deceived  about  syllogisms  because  the  inference  is

necessary,  as  has  been  said  above;  sometimes  they  are  deceived  by  the

similarity in the positing of the terms; and this ought not to escape our notice.

E.g. if A is stated of B, and B of C: it would seem that a syllogism is possible

since  the  terms  stand  thus:  but  nothing  necessary  results,  nor  does  a

syllogism. Let A represent the term ‘being eternal’, B ‘Aristomenes as an

object of thought’, C ‘Aristomenes’. It is true then that A belongs to B. For

Aristomenes as an object of thought is eternal. But B also belongs to C: for

Aristomenes is Aristomenes as an object of thought. But A does not belong to

C: for Aristomenes is perishable. For no syllogism was made although the

terms  stood  thus:  that  required  that  the  premiss  AB  should  be  stated

universally. But this is false, that every Aristomenes who is an object of

thought is eternal, since Aristomenes is perishable. Again let C stand for

‘Miccalus’, B for ‘musical Miccalus’, A for ‘perishing to-morrow’. It is true

to  predicate  B  of  C:  for  Miccalus  is  musical  Miccalus.  Also  A  can  be

predicated of B: for musical Miccalus might perish to-morrow. But to state A

of C is false at any rate. This argument then is identical with the former; for it

is not true universally that musical Miccalus perishes to-morrow: but unless

this is assumed, no syllogism (as we have shown) is possible.

This deception then arises through ignoring a small distinction. For if we

accept the conclusion as though it made no difference whether we said ‘This

belong to that’ or ‘This belongs to all of that’.


34


Men will frequently fall into fallacies through not setting out the terms of

the premiss well, e.g. suppose A to be health, B disease, C man. It is true to

say that A cannot belong to any B (for health belongs to no disease) and

again that B belongs to every C (for every man is capable of disease). It

would seem to follow that health cannot belong to any man. The reason for

this is that the terms are not set out well in the statement, since if the things

which are in the conditions are substituted, no syllogism can be made, e.g. if

‘healthy’ is substituted for ‘health’ and ‘diseased’ for ‘disease’. For it is not

true to say that being healthy cannot belong to one who is diseased. But

unless this is assumed no conclusion results, save in respect of possibility: butsuch  a  conclusion  is  not  impossible:  for  it  is  possible  that  health  should

belong to no man. Again the fallacy may occur in a similar way in the middle

figure: ‘it is not possible that health should belong to any disease, but it is

possible  that  health  should  belong  to  every  man,  consequently  it  is  not

possible that disease should belong to any man’. In the third figure the fallacy

results in reference to possibility. For health and diseae and knowledge and

ignorance, and in general contraries, may possibly belong to the same thing,

but cannot belong to one another. This is not in agreement with what was said

before: for we stated that when several things could belong to the same thing,

they could belong to one another.

It is evident then that in all these cases the fallacy arises from the setting

out of the terms: for if the things that are in the conditions are substituted, no

fallacy  arises.  It  is  clear  then  that  in  such  premisses  what  possesses  the

condition ought always to be substituted for the condition and taken as the

term.


35


We must not always seek to set out the terms a single word: for we shall

often have complexes of words to which a single name is not given. Hence it

is difficult to reduce syllogisms with such terms. Sometimes too fallacies will

result from such a search, e.g. the belief that syllogism can establish that

which has no mean. Let A stand for two right angles, B for triangle, C for

isosceles triangle. A then belongs to C because of B: but A belongs to B

without the mediation of another term: for the triangle in virtue of its own

nature contains two right angles, consequently there will be no middle term

for the proposition AB, although it is demonstrable. For it is clear that the

middle must not always be assumed to be an individual thing, but sometimes

a complex of words, as happens in the case mentioned.


36


That the first term belongs to the middle, and the middle to the extreme,

must not be understood in the sense that they can always be predicated of one

another or that the first term will be predicated of the middle in the same way

as the middle is predicated of the last term. The same holds if the premissesare negative. But we must suppose the verb ‘to belong’ to have as many

meanings as the senses in which the verb ‘to be’ is used, and in which the

assertion  that  a  thing  ‘is’  may  be  said  to  be  true.  Take  for  example  the

statement that there is a single science of contraries. Let A stand for ‘there

being a single science’, and B for things which are contrary to one another.

Then A belongs to B, not in the sense that contraries are the fact of there

being a single science of them, but in the sense that it is true to say of the

contraries that there is a single science of them.

It happens sometimes that the first term is stated of the middle, but the

middle  is  not  stated  of  the  third  term,  e.g.  if  wisdom  is  knowledge,  and

wisdom is of the good, the conclusion is that there is knowledge of the good.

The good then is not knowledge, though wisdom is knowledge. Sometimes

the middle term is stated of the third, but the first is not stated of the middle,

e.g. if there is a science of everything that has a quality, or is a contrary, and

the good both is a contrary and has a quality, the conclusion is that there is a

science of the good, but the good is not science, nor is that which has a

quality or is a contrary, though the good is both of these. Sometimes neither

the first term is stated of the middle, nor the middle of the third, while the

first is sometimes stated of the third, and sometimes not: e.g. if there is a

genus of that of which there is a science, and if there is a science of the good,

we conclude that there is a genus of the good. But nothing is predicated of

anything. And if that of which there is a science is a genus, and if there is a

science of the good, we conclude that the good is a genus. The first term then

is predicated of the extreme, but in the premisses one thing is not stated of

another.

The same holds good where the relation is negative. For ‘that does not

belong to this’ does not always mean that ‘this is not that’, but sometimes that

‘this is not of that’ or ‘for that’, e.g. ‘there is not a motion of a motion or a

becoming of a becoming, but there is a becoming of pleasure: so pleasure is

not a becoming.’ Or again it may be said that there is a sign of laughter, but

there is not a sign of a sign, consequently laughter is not a sign. This holds in

the  other  cases  too,  in  which  the  thesis  is  refuted  because  the  genus  is

asserted in a particular way, in relation to the terms of the thesis. Again take

the inference ‘opportunity is not the right time: for opportunity belongs to

God, but the right time does not, since nothing is useful to God’. We must

take as terms opportunity-right time-God: but the premiss must be understood

according  to  the  case  of  the  noun.  For  we  state  this  universally  withoutqualification, that the terms ought always to be stated in the nominative, e.g.

man,  good,  contraries,  not  in  oblique  cases,  e.g.  of  man,  of  a  good,  of

contraries, but the premisses ought to be understood with reference to the

cases of each term-either the dative, e.g. ‘equal to this’, or the genitive, e.g.

‘double of this’, or the accusative, e.g. ‘that which strikes or sees this’, or the

nominative, e.g. ‘man is an animal’, or in whatever other way the word falls

in the premiss.


37


The expressions ‘this belongs to that’ and ‘this holds true of that’ must be

understood  in  as  many  ways  as  there  are  different  categories,  and  these

categories must be taken either with or without qualification, and further as

simple  or  compound:  the  same  holds  good  of  the  corresponding  negative

expressions. We must consider these points and define them better.


38


A term which is repeated in the premisses ought to be joined to the first

extreme, not to the middle. I mean for example that if a syllogism should be

made  proving  that  there  is  knowledge  of  justice,  that  it  is  good,  the

expression ‘that it is good’ (or ‘qua good’) should be joined to the first term.

Let A stand for ‘knowledge that it is good’, B for good, C for justice. It is

true to predicate A of B. For of the good there is knowledge that it is good.

Also it is true to predicate B of C. For justice is identical with a good. In this

way an analysis of the argument can be made. But if the expression ‘that it is

good’ were added to B, the conclusion will not follow: for A will be true of

B, but B will not be true of C. For to predicate of justice the term ‘good that it

is good’ is false and not intelligible. Similarly if it should be proved that the

healthy  is  an  object  of  knowledge  qua  good,  of  goat-stag  an  object  of

knowledge qua not existing, or man perishable qua an object of sense: in

every case in which an addition is made to the predicate, the addition must be

joined to the extreme.

The position of the terms is not the same when something is established

without qualification and when it is qualified by some attribute or condition,

e.g. when the good is proved to be an object of knowledge and when it isproved to be an object of knowledge that it is good. If it has been proved to

be an object of knowledge without qualification, we must put as middle term

‘that which is’, but if we add the qualification ‘that it is good’, the middle

term must be ‘that which is something’. Let A stand for ‘knowledge that it is

something’, B stand for ‘something’, and C stand for ‘good’. It is true to

predicate  A  of  B:  for  ex  hypothesi  there  is  a  science  of  that  which  is

something, that it is something. B too is true of C: for that which C represents

is something. Consequently A is true of C: there will then be knowledge of

the good, that it is good: for ex hypothesi the term ‘something’ indicates the

thing’s special nature. But if ‘being’ were taken as middle and ‘being’ simply

were joined to the extreme, not ‘being something’, we should not have had a

syllogism proving that there is knowledge of the good, that it is good, but that

it is; e.g. let A stand for knowledge that it is, B for being, C for good. Clearly

then in syllogisms which are thus limited we must take the terms in the way

stated.


39


We ought also to exchange terms which have the same value, word for

word, and phrase for phrase, and word and phrase, and always take a word in

preference to a phrase: for thus the setting out of the terms will be easier. For

example if it makes no difference whether we say that the supposable is not

the genus of the opinable or that the opinable is not identical with a particular

kind of supposable (for what is meant is the same in both statements), it is

better to take as the terms the supposable and the opinable in preference to

the phrase suggested.


40


  Since the expressions ‘pleasure is good’ and ‘pleasure is the good’ are not

identical, we must not set out the terms in the same way; but if the syllogism

is to prove that pleasure is the good, the term must be ‘the good’, but if the

object is to prove that pleasure is good, the term will be ‘good’. Similarly in

all other cases.


41It is not the same, either in fact or in speech, that A belongs to all of that to

which B belongs, and that A belongs to all of that to all of which B belongs:

for nothing prevents B from belonging to C, though not to all C: e.g. let B

stand for beautiful, and C for white. If beauty belongs to something white, it

is true to say that beauty belongs to that which is white; but not perhaps to

everything that is white. If then A belongs to B, but not to everything of

which B is predicated, then whether B belongs to all C or merely belongs to

C, it is not necessary that A should belong, I do not say to all C, but even to C

at all. But if A belongs to everything of which B is truly stated, it will follow

that A can be said of all of that of all of which B is said. If however A is said

of that of all of which B may be said, nothing prevents B belonging to C, and

yet A not belonging to all C or to any C at all. If then we take three terms it is

clear that the expression ‘A is said of all of which B is said’ means this, ‘A is

said of all the things of which B is said’. And if B is said of all of a third

term, so also is A: but if B is not said of all of the third term, there is no

necessity that A should be said of all of it.

We must not suppose that something absurd results through setting out the

terms: for we do not use the existence of this particular thing, but imitate the

geometrician who says that ‘this line a foot long’ or ‘this straight line’ or ‘this

line  without  breadth’  exists  although  it  does  not,  but  does  not  use  the

diagrams in the sense that he reasons from them. For in general, if two things

are not related as whole to part and part to whole, the prover does not prove

from them, and so no syllogism a is formed. We (I mean the learner) use the

process of setting out terms like perception by sense, not as though it were

impossible  to  demonstrate  without  these  illustrative  terms,  as  it  is  to

demonstrate without the premisses of the syllogism.


42


We should not forget that in the same syllogism not all conclusions are

reached  through  one  figure,  but  one  through  one  figure,  another  through

another. Clearly then we must analyse arguments in accordance with this.

Since not every problem is proved in every figure, but certain problems in

each  figure,  it  is  clear  from  the  conclusion  in  what  figure  the  premisses

should be sought.


43In reference to those arguments aiming at a definition which have been

directed to prove some part of the definition, we must take as a term the point

to which the argument has been directed, not the whole definition: for so we

shall be less likely to be disturbed by the length of the term: e.g. if a man

proves that water is a drinkable liquid, we must take as terms drinkable and

water.


44


  Further we must not try to reduce hypothetical syllogisms; for with the

given premisses it is not possible to reduce them. For they have not been

proved by syllogism, but assented to by agreement. For instance if a man

should suppose that unless there is one faculty of contraries, there cannot be

one science, and should then argue that not every faculty is of contraries, e.g.

of what is healthy and what is sickly: for the same thing will then be at the

same time healthy and sickly. He has shown that there is not one faculty of

all contraries, but he has not proved that there is not a science. And yet one

must agree. But the agreement does not come from a syllogism, but from an

hypothesis. This argument cannot be reduced: but the proof that there is not a

single  faculty  can.  The  latter  argument  perhaps  was  a  syllogism:  but  the

former was an hypothesis.

The same holds good of arguments which are brought to a conclusion per

impossibile. These cannot be analysed either; but the reduction to what is

impossible can be analysed since it is proved by syllogism, though the rest of

the argument cannot, because the conclusion is reached from an hypothesis.

But these differ from the previous arguments: for in the former a preliminary

agreement  must  be  reached  if  one  is  to  accept  the  conclusion;  e.g.  an

agreement  that  if  there  is  proved  to  be  one  faculty  of  contraries,  then

contraries  fall  under  the  same  science;  whereas  in  the  latter,  even  if  no

preliminary  agreement  has  been  made,  men  still  accept  the  reasoning,

because  the  falsity  is  patent,  e.g.  the  falsity  of  what  follows  from  the

assumption that the diagonal is commensurate, viz. that then odd numbers are

equal to evens.

  Many  other  arguments  are  brought  to  a  conclusion  by  the  help  of  an

hypothesis;  these  we  ought  to  consider  and  mark  out  clearly.  We  shall

describe  in  the  sequel  their  differences,  and  the  various  ways  in  which

hypothetical arguments are formed: but at present this much must be clear,that it is not possible to resolve such arguments into the figures. And we have

explained the reason.


45


  Whatever problems are proved in more than one figure, if they have been

established in one figure by syllogism, can be reduced to another figure, e.g.

a negative syllogism in the first figure can be reduced to the second, and a

syllogism in the middle figure to the first, not all however but some only. The

point will be clear in the sequel. If A belongs to no B, and B to all C, then A

belongs  to  no  C.  Thus  the  first  figure;  but  if  the  negative  statement  is

converted, we shall have the middle figure. For B belongs to no A, and to all

C. Similarly if the syllogism is not universal but particular, e.g. if A belongs

to no B, and B to some C. Convert the negative statement and you will have

the middle figure.

The universal syllogisms in the second figure can be reduced to the first,

but only one of the two particular syllogisms. Let A belong to no B and to all

C. Convert the negative statement, and you will have the first figure. For B

will belong to no A and A to all C. But if the affirmative statement concerns

B, and the negative C, C must be made first term. For C belongs to no A, and

A to all B: therefore C belongs to no B. B then belongs to no C: for the

negative statement is convertible.

But  if  the  syllogism  is  particular,  whenever  the  negative  statement

concerns the major extreme, reduction to the first figure will be possible, e.g.

if A belongs to no B and to some C: convert the negative statement and you

will have the first figure. For B will belong to no A and A to some C. But

when the affirmative statement concerns the major extreme, no resolution

will be possible, e.g. if A belongs to all B, but not to all C: for the statement

AB does not admit of conversion, nor would there be a syllogism if it did.

  Again syllogisms in the third figure cannot all be resolved into the first,

though all syllogisms in the first figure can be resolved into the third. Let A

belong  to  all  B  and  B  to  some  C.  Since  the  particular  affirmative  is

convertible, C will belong to some B: but A belonged to all B: so that the

third figure is formed. Similarly if the syllogism is negative: for the particular

affirmative is convertible: therefore A will belong to no B, and to some C.

Of the syllogisms in the last figure one only cannot be resolved into the

first, viz. when the negative statement is not universal: all the rest can beresolved. Let A and B be affirmed of all C: then C can be converted partially

with either A or B: C then belongs to some B. Consequently we shall get the

first figure, if A belongs to all C, and C to some of the Bs. If A belongs to all

C  and  B  to  some  C,  the  argument  is  the  same:  for  B  is  convertible  in

reference to C. But if B belongs to all C and A to some C, the first term must

be B: for B belongs to all C, and C to some A, therefore B belongs to some

A. But since the particular statement is convertible, A will belong to some B.

If the syllogism is negative, when the terms are universal we must take them

in a similar way. Let B belong to all C, and A to no C: then C will belong to

some  B,  and  A  to  no  C;  and  so  C  will  be  middle  term.  Similarly  if  the

negative statement is universal, the affirmative particular: for A will belong

to no C, and C to some of the Bs. But if the negative statement is particular,

no resolution will be possible, e.g. if B belongs to all C, and A not belong to

some C: convert the statement BC and both premisses will be particular.

It is clear that in order to resolve the figures into one another the premiss

which concerns the minor extreme must be converted in both the figures: for

when this premiss is altered, the transition to the other figure is made.

One  of  the  syllogisms  in  the  middle  figure  can,  the  other  cannot,  be

resolved into the third figure. Whenever the universal statement is negative,

resolution is possible. For if A belongs to no B and to some C, both B and C

alike are convertible in relation to A, so that B belongs to no A and C to some

A. A therefore is middle term. But when A belongs to all B, and not to some

C, resolution will not be possible: for neither of the premisses is universal

after conversion.

  Syllogisms  in  the  third  figure  can  be  resolved  into  the  middle  figure,

whenever the negative statement is universal, e.g. if A belongs to no C, and B

to some or all C. For C then will belong to no A and to some B. But if the

negative  statement  is  particular,  no  resolution  will  be  possible:  for  the

particular negative does not admit of conversion.

It is clear then that the same syllogisms cannot be resolved in these figures

which could not be resolved into the first figure, and that when syllogisms are

reduced to the first figure these alone are confirmed by reduction to what is

impossible.

It is clear from what we have said how we ought to reduce syllogisms, and

that the figures may be resolved into one another.


46In establishing or refuting, it makes some difference whether we suppose

the expressions ‘not to be this’ and ‘to be not-this’ are identical or different in

meaning, e.g. ‘not to be white’ and ‘to be not-white’. For they do not mean

the same thing, nor is ‘to be not-white’ the negation of ‘to be white’, but ‘not

to be white’. The reason for this is as follows. The relation of ‘he can walk’

to ‘he can not-walk’ is similar to the relation of ‘it is white’ to ‘it is not-

white’; so is that of ‘he knows what is good’ to ‘he knows what is not-good’.

For there is no difference between the expressions ‘he knows what is good’

and ‘he is knowing what is good’, or ‘he can walk’ and ‘he is able to walk’:

therefore there is no difference between their contraries ‘he cannot walk’-’he

is not able to walk’. If then ‘he is not able to walk’ means the same as ‘he is

able not to walk’, capacity to walk and incapacity to walk will belong at the

same time to the same person (for the same man can both walk and not-walk,

and is possessed of knowledge of what is good and of what is not-good), but

an affirmation and a denial which are opposed to one another do not belong

at the same time to the same thing. As then ‘not to know what is good’ is not

the same as ‘to know what is not good’, so ‘to be not-good’ is not the same as

‘not to be good’. For when two pairs correspond, if the one pair are different

from one another, the other pair also must be different. Nor is ‘to be not-

equal’ the same as ‘not to be equal’: for there is something underlying the

one, viz. that which is not-equal, and this is the unequal, but there is nothing

underlying the other. Wherefore not everything is either equal or unequal, but

everything is equal or is not equal. Further the expressions ‘it is a not-white

log’ and ‘it is not a white log’ do not imply one another’s truth. For if ‘it is a

not-white log’, it must be a log: but that which is not a white log need not be

a log at all. Therefore it is clear that ‘it is not-good’ is not the denial of ‘it is

good’.  If  then  every  single  statement  may  truly  be  said  to  be  either  an

affirmation or a negation, if it is not a negation clearly it must in a sense be an

affirmation.  But  every  affirmation  has  a  corresponding  negation.  The

negation then of ‘it is not-good’ is ‘it is not not-good’. The relation of these

statements to one another is as follows. Let A stand for ‘to be good’, B for

‘not to be good’, let C stand for ‘to be not-good’ and be placed under B, and

let D stand for not to be not-good’ and be placed under A. Then either A or B

will belong to everything, but they will never belong to the same thing; and

either C or D will belong to everything, but they will never belong to the

same thing. And B must belong to everything to which C belongs. For if it is

true to say ‘it is a not-white’, it is true also to say ‘it is not white’: for it isimpossible that a thing should simultaneously be white and be not-white, or

be a not-white log and be a white log; consequently if the affirmation does

not belong, the denial must belong. But C does not always belong to B: for

what is not a log at all, cannot be a not-white log either. On the other hand D

belongs  to  everything  to  which  A  belongs.  For  either  C  or  D  belongs  to

everything to which A belongs. But since a thing cannot be simultaneously

not-white and white, D must belong to everything to which A belongs. For of

that which is white it is true to say that it is not not-white. But A is not true of

all D. For of that which is not a log at all it is not true to say A, viz. that it is a

white log. Consequently D is true, but A is not true, i.e. that it is a white log.

It is clear also that A and C cannot together belong to the same thing, and that

B and D may possibly belong to the same thing.

  Privative  terms  are  similarly  related  positive  ter  terms  respect  of  this

arrangement. Let A stand for ‘equal’, B for ‘not equal’, C for ‘unequal’, D for

‘not unequal’.

In many things also, to some of which something belongs which does not

belong to others, the negation may be true in a similar way, viz. that all are

not white or that each is not white, while that each is not-white or all are not-

white is false. Similarly also ‘every animal is not-white’ is not the negation of

‘every animal is white’ (for both are false): the proper negation is ‘every

animal is not white’. Since it is clear that ‘it is not-white’ and ‘it is not white’

mean  different  things,  and  one  is  an  affirmation,  the  other  a  denial,  it  is

evident  that  the  method  of  proving  each  cannot  be  the  same,  e.g.  that

whatever is an animal is not white or may not be white, and that it is true to

call it not-white; for this means that it is not-white. But we may prove that it

is true to call it white or not-white in the same way for both are proved

constructively by means of the first figure. For the expression ‘it is true’

stands on a similar footing to ‘it is’. For the negation of ‘it is true to call it

white’ is not ‘it is true to call it not-white’ but ‘it is not true to call it white’. If

then it is to be true to say that whatever is a man is musical or is not-musical,

we  must  assume  that  whatever  is  an  animal  either  is  musical  or  is  not-

musical; and the proof has been made. That whatever is a man is not musical

is proved destructively in the three ways mentioned.

In general whenever A and B are such that they cannot belong at the same

time to the same thing, and one of the two necessarily belongs to everything,

and again C and D are related in the same way, and A follows C but the

relation cannot be reversed, then D must follow B and the relation cannot bereversed. And A and D may belong to the same thing, but B and C cannot.

First it is clear from the following consideration that D follows B. For since

either C or D necessarily belongs to everything; and since C cannot belong to

that to which B belongs, because it carries A along with it and A and B

cannot belong to the same thing; it is clear that D must follow B. Again since

C does not reciprocate with but A, but C or D belongs to everything, it is

possible that A and D should belong to the same thing. But B and C cannot

belong to the same thing, because A follows C; and so something impossible

results. It is clear then that B does not reciprocate with D either, since it is

possible that D and A should belong at the same time to the same thing.

It  results  sometimes  even  in  such  an  arrangement  of  terms  that  one  is

deceived through not apprehending the opposites rightly, one of which must

belong to everything, e.g. we may reason that ‘if A and B cannot belong at

the same time to the same thing, but it is necessary that one of them should

belong to whatever the other does not belong to: and again C and D are

related in the same way, and follows everything which C follows: it will

result that B belongs necessarily to everything to which D belongs’: but this

is false. ‘Assume that F stands for the negation of A and B, and again that H

stands for the negation of C and D. It is necessary then that either A or F

should belong to everything: for either the affirmation or the denial must

belong. And again either C or H must belong to everything: for they are

related as affirmation and denial. And ex hypothesi A belongs to everything

ever thing to which C belongs. Therefore H belongs to everything to which F

belongs. Again since either F or B belongs to everything, and similarly either

H or D, and since H follows F, B must follow D: for we know this. If then A

follows C, B must follow D’. But this is false: for as we proved the sequence

is reversed in terms so constituted. The fallacy arises because perhaps it is not

necessary that A or F should belong to everything, or that F or B should

belong to everything: for F is not the denial of A. For not good is the negation

of  good:  and  not-good  is  not  identical  with  ‘neither  good  nor  not-good’.

Similarly also with C and D. For two negations have been assumed in respect

to one term.                            Prior Analytics, Book II


Translated by A. J. Jenkinson


1


We have already explained the number of the figures, the character and

number of the premisses, when and how a syllogism is formed; further what

we must look for when a refuting and establishing propositions, and how we

should investigate a given problem in any branch of inquiry, also by what

means  we  shall  obtain  principles  appropriate  to  each  subject.  Since  some

syllogisms are universal, others particular, all the universal syllogisms give

more than one result, and of particular syllogisms the affirmative yield more

than one, the negative yield only the stated conclusion. For all propositions

are convertible save only the particular negative: and the conclusion states

one definite thing about another definite thing. Consequently all syllogisms

save the particular negative yield more than one conclusion, e.g. if A has

been proved to to all or to some B, then B must belong to some A: and if A

has been proved to belong to no B, then B belongs to no A. This is a different

conclusion from the former. But if A does not belong to some B, it is not

necessary that B should not belong to some A: for it may possibly belong to

all A.

This then is the reason common to all syllogisms whether universal or

particular. But it is possible to give another reason concerning those which

are universal. For all the things that are subordinate to the middle term or to

the conclusion may be proved by the same syllogism, if the former are placed

in the middle, the latter in the conclusion; e.g. if the conclusion AB is proved

through C, whatever is subordinate to B or C must accept the predicate A: for

if D is included in B as in a whole, and B is included in A, then D will be

included in A. Again if E is included in C as in a whole, and C is included in

A, then E will be included in A. Similarly if the syllogism is negative. In the

second figure it will be possible to infer only that which is subordinate to the

conclusion, e.g. if A belongs to no B and to all C; we conclude that B belongs

to no C. If then D is subordinate to C, clearly B does not belong to it. But that

B does not belong to what is subordinate to A is not clear by means of thesyllogism. And yet B does not belong to E, if E is subordinate to A. But while

it has been proved through the syllogism that B belongs to no C, it has been

assumed without proof that B does not belong to A, consequently it does not

result through the syllogism that B does not belong to E.

But in particular syllogisms there will be no necessity of inferring what is

subordinate  to  the  conclusion  (for  a  syllogism  does  not  result  when  this

premiss is particular), but whatever is subordinate to the middle term may be

inferred, not however through the syllogism, e.g. if A belongs to all B and B

to some C. Nothing can be inferred about that which is subordinate to C;

something  can  be  inferred  about  that  which  is  subordinate  to  B,  but  not

through the preceding syllogism. Similarly in the other figures. That which is

subordinate to the conclusion cannot be proved; the other subordinate can be

proved, only not through the syllogism, just as in the universal syllogisms

what is subordinate to the middle term is proved (as we saw) from a premiss

which is not demonstrated: consequently either a conclusion is not possible in

the  case  of  universal  syllogisms  or  else  it  is  possible  also  in  the  case  of

particular syllogisms.


2


It is possible for the premisses of the syllogism to be true, or to be false, or

to  be  the  one  true,  the  other  false.  The  conclusion  is  either  true  or  false

necessarily. From true premisses it is not possible to draw a false conclusion,

but a true conclusion may be drawn from false premisses, true however only

in respect to the fact, not to the reason. The reason cannot be established from

false premisses: why this is so will be explained in the sequel.

First  then  that  it  is  not  possible  to  draw  a  false  conclusion  from  true

premisses, is made clear by this consideration. If it is necessary that B should

be when A is, it is necessary that A should not be when B is not. If then A is

true, B must be true: otherwise it will turn out that the same thing both is and

is not at the same time. But this is impossible. Let it not, because A is laid

down as a single term, be supposed that it is possible, when a single fact is

given, that something should necessarily result. For that is not possible. For

what results necessarily is the conclusion, and the means by which this comes

about are at the least three terms, and two relations of subject and predicate or

premisses. If then it is true that A belongs to all that to which B belongs, and

that B belongs to all that to which C belongs, it is necessary that A shouldbelong to all that to which C belongs, and this cannot be false: for then the

same thing will belong and not belong at the same time. So A is posited as

one  thing,  being  two  premisses  taken  together.  The  same  holds  good  of

negative syllogisms: it is not possible to prove a false conclusion from true

premisses.

But from what is false a true conclusion may be drawn, whether both the

premisses  are  false  or  only  one,  provided  that  this  is  not  either  of  the

premisses indifferently, if it is taken as wholly false: but if the premiss is not

taken as wholly false, it does not matter which of the two is false. (1) Let A

belong to the whole of C, but to none of the Bs, neither let B belong to C.

This is possible, e.g. animal belongs to no stone, nor stone to any man. If then

A  is  taken  to  belong  to  all  B  and  B  to  all  C,  A  will  belong  to  all  C;

consequently though both the premisses are false the conclusion is true: for

every man is an animal. Similarly with the negative. For it is possible that

neither A nor B should belong to any C, although A belongs to all B, e.g. if

the same terms are taken and man is put as middle: for neither animal nor

man belongs to any stone, but animal belongs to every man. Consequently if

one term is taken to belong to none of that to which it does belong, and the

other term is taken to belong to all of that to which it does not belong, though

both the premisses are false the conclusion will be true. (2) A similar proof

may be given if each premiss is partially false.

(3) But if one only of the premisses is false, when the first premiss is

wholly false, e.g. AB, the conclusion will not be true, but if the premiss BC is

wholly false, a true conclusion will be possible. I mean by ‘wholly false’ the

contrary of the truth, e.g. if what belongs to none is assumed to belong to all,

or if what belongs to all is assumed to belong to none. Let A belong to no B,

and B to all C. If then the premiss BC which I take is true, and the premiss

AB is wholly false, viz. that A belongs to all B, it is impossible that the

conclusion  should  be  true:  for  A  belonged  to  none  of  the  Cs,  since  A

belonged to nothing to which B belonged, and B belonged to all C. Similarly

there cannot be a true conclusion if A belongs to all B, and B to all C, but

while the true premiss BC is assumed, the wholly false premiss AB is also

assumed,  viz.  that  A  belongs  to  nothing  to  which  B  belongs:  here  the

conclusion must be false. For A will belong to all C, since A belongs to

everything to which B belongs, and B to all C. It is clear then that when the

first premiss is wholly false, whether affirmative or negative, and the other

premiss is true, the conclusion cannot be true.(4) But if the premiss is not wholly false, a true conclusion is possible. For

if A belongs to all C and to some B, and if B belongs to all C, e.g. animal to

every swan and to some white thing, and white to every swan, then if we take

as premisses that A belongs to all B, and B to all C, A will belong to all C

truly: for every swan is an animal. Similarly if the statement AB is negative.

For it is possible that A should belong to some B and to no C, and that B

should belong to all C, e.g. animal to some white thing, but to no snow, and

white to all snow. If then one should assume that A belongs to no B, and B to

all C, then will belong to no C.

(5)  But  if  the  premiss  AB,  which  is  assumed,  is  wholly  true,  and  the

premiss BC is wholly false, a true syllogism will be possible: for nothing

prevents A belonging to all B and to all C, though B belongs to no C, e.g.

these being species of the same genus which are not subordinate one to the

other: for animal belongs both to horse and to man, but horse to no man. If

then it is assumed that A belongs to all B and B to all C, the conclusion will

be true, although the premiss BC is wholly false. Similarly if the premiss AB

is negative. For it is possible that A should belong neither to any B nor to any

C, and that B should not belong to any C, e.g. a genus to species of another

genus: for animal belongs neither to music nor to the art of healing, nor does

music belong to the art of healing. If then it is assumed that A belongs to no

B, and B to all C, the conclusion will be true.

(6) And if the premiss BC is not wholly false but in part only, even so the

conclusion may be true. For nothing prevents A belonging to the whole of B

and  of  C,  while  B  belongs  to  some  C,  e.g.  a  genus  to  its  species  and

difference: for animal belongs to every man and to every footed thing, and

man to some footed things though not to all. If then it is assumed that A

belongs to all B, and B to all C, A will belong to all C: and this ex hypothesi

is true. Similarly if the premiss AB is negative. For it is possible that A

should neither belong to any B nor to any C, though B belongs to some C,

e.g. a genus to the species of another genus and its difference: for animal

neither  belongs  to  any  wisdom  nor  to  any  instance  of  ‘speculative’,  but

wisdom  belongs  to  some  instance  of  ‘speculative’.  If  then  it  should  be

assumed that A belongs to no B, and B to all C, will belong to no C: and this

ex hypothesi is true.

In particular syllogisms it is possible when the first premiss is wholly false,

and the other true, that the conclusion should be true; also when the first

premiss is false in part, and the other true; and when the first is true, and theparticular  is  false;  and  when  both  are  false.  (7)  For  nothing  prevents  A

belonging to no B, but to some C, and B to some C, e.g. animal belongs to no

snow, but to some white thing, and snow to some white thing. If then snow is

taken as middle, and animal as first term, and it is assumed that A belongs to

the whole of B, and B to some C, then the premiss BC is wholly false, the

premiss BC true, and the conclusion true. Similarly if the premiss AB is

negative: for it is possible that A should belong to the whole of B, but not to

some C, although B belongs to some C, e.g. animal belongs to every man, but

does not follow some white, but man belongs to some white; consequently if

man be taken as middle term and it is assumed that A belongs to no B but B

belongs to some C, the conclusion will be true although the premiss AB is

wholly false. (If the premiss AB is false in part, the conclusion may be true.

For nothing prevents A belonging both to B and to some C, and B belonging

to some C, e.g. animal to something beautiful and to something great, and

beautiful belonging to something great. If then A is assumed to belong to all

B, and B to some C, the a premiss AB will be partially false, the premiss BC

will be true, and the conclusion true. Similarly if the premiss AB is negative.

For the same terms will serve, and in the same positions, to prove the point.

(9)  Again  if  the  premiss  AB  is  true,  and  the  premiss  BC  is  false,  the

conclusion may be true. For nothing prevents A belonging to the whole of B

and to some C, while B belongs to no C, e.g. animal to every swan and to

some black things, though swan belongs to no black thing. Consequently if it

should be assumed that A belongs to all B, and B to some C, the conclusion

will be true, although the statement BC is false. Similarly if the premiss AB

is negative. For it is possible that A should belong to no B, and not to some

C, while B belongs to no C, e.g. a genus to the species of another genus and

to the accident of its own species: for animal belongs to no number and not to

some white things, and number belongs to nothing white. If then number is

taken as middle, and it is assumed that A belongs to no B, and B to some C,

then  A  will  not  belong  to  some  C,  which  ex  hypothesi  is  true.  And  the

premiss AB is true, the premiss BC false.

(10) Also if the premiss AB is partially false, and the premiss BC is false

too, the conclusion may be true. For nothing prevents A belonging to some B

and to some C, though B belongs to no C, e.g. if B is the contrary of C, and

both  are  accidents  of  the  same  genus:  for  animal  belongs  to  some  white

things and to some black things, but white belongs to no black thing. If then it

is assumed that A belongs to all B, and B to some C, the conclusion will betrue. Similarly if the premiss AB is negative: for the same terms arranged in

the same way will serve for the proof.

(11) Also though both premisses are false the conclusion may be true. For

it is possible that A may belong to no B and to some C, while B belongs to no

C, e.g. a genus in relation to the species of another genus, and to the accident

of  its  own  species:  for  animal  belongs  to  no  number,  but  to  some  white

things, and number to nothing white. If then it is assumed that A belongs to

all B and B to some C, the conclusion will be true, though both premisses are

false. Similarly also if the premiss AB is negative. For nothing prevents A

belonging to the whole of B, and not to some C, while B belongs to no C, e.g.

animal  belongs  to  every  swan,  and  not  to  some  black  things,  and  swan

belongs to nothing black. Consequently if it is assumed that A belongs to no

B, and B to some C, then A does not belong to some C. The conclusion then

is true, but the premisses arc false.


3


In the middle figure it is possible in every way to reach a true conclusion

through false premisses, whether the syllogisms are universal or particular,

viz. when both premisses are wholly false; when each is partially false; when

one  is  true,  the  other  wholly  false  (it  does  not  matter  which  of  the  two

premisses is false); if both premisses are partially false; if one is quite true,

the other partially false; if one is wholly false, the other partially true. For (1)

if A belongs to no B and to all C, e.g. animal to no stone and to every horse,

then if the premisses are stated contrariwise and it is assumed that A belongs

to all B and to no C, though the premisses are wholly false they will yield a

true conclusion. Similarly if A belongs to all B and to no C: for we shall have

the same syllogism.

(2) Again if one premiss is wholly false, the other wholly true: for nothing

prevents A belonging to all B and to all C, though B belongs to no C, e.g. a

genus to its co-ordinate species. For animal belongs to every horse and man,

and no man is a horse. If then it is assumed that animal belongs to all of the

one, and none of the other, the one premiss will be wholly false, the other

wholly true, and the conclusion will be true whichever term the negative

statement concerns.

(3) Also if one premiss is partially false, the other wholly true. For it is

possible that A should belong to some B and to all C, though B belongs to noC, e.g. animal to some white things and to every raven, though white belongs

to no raven. If then it is assumed that A belongs to no B, but to the whole of

C, the premiss AB is partially false, the premiss AC wholly true, and the

conclusion true. Similarly if the negative statement is transposed: the proof

can be made by means of the same terms. Also if the affirmative premiss is

partially false, the negative wholly true, a true conclusion is possible. For

nothing prevents A belonging to some B, but not to C as a whole, while B

belongs to no C, e.g. animal belongs to some white things, but to no pitch,

and white belongs to no pitch. Consequently if it is assumed that A belongs to

the whole of B, but to no C, the premiss AB is partially false, the premiss AC

is wholly true, and the conclusion is true.

(4) And if both the premisses are partially false, the conclusion may be

true. For it is possible that A should belong to some B and to some C, and B

to no C, e.g. animal to some white things and to some black things, though

white belongs to nothing black. If then it is assumed that A belongs to all B

and to no C, both premisses are partially false, but the conclusion is true.

Similarly, if the negative premiss is transposed, the proof can be made by

means of the same terms.

It is clear also that our thesis holds in particular syllogisms. For (5) nothing

prevents A belonging to all B and to some C, though B does not belong to

some C, e.g. animal to every man and to some white things, though man will

not belong to some white things. If then it is stated that A belongs to no B

and to some C, the universal premiss is wholly false, the particular premiss is

true, and the conclusion is true. Similarly if the premiss AB is affirmative: for

it is possible that A should belong to no B, and not to some C, though B does

not belong to some C, e.g. animal belongs to nothing lifeless, and does not

belong  to  some  white  things,  and  lifeless  will  not  belong  to  some  white

things. If then it is stated that A belongs to all B and not to some C, the

premiss AB which is universal is wholly false, the premiss AC is true, and

the conclusion is true. Also a true conclusion is possible when the universal

premiss is true, and the particular is false. For nothing prevents A following

neither  B  nor  C  at  all,  while  B  does  not  belong  to  some  C,  e.g.  animal

belongs to no number nor to anything lifeless, and number does not follow

some lifeless things. If then it is stated that A belongs to no B and to some C,

the conclusion will be true, and the universal premiss true, but the particular

false. Similarly if the premiss which is stated universally is affirmative. For it

is possible that should A belong both to B and to C as wholes, though B doesnot follow some C, e.g. a genus in relation to its species and difference: for

animal follows every man and footed things as a whole, but man does not

follow every footed thing. Consequently if it is assumed that A belongs to the

whole of B, but does not belong to some C, the universal premiss is true, the

particular false, and the conclusion true.

(6) It is clear too that though both premisses are false they may yield a true

conclusion, since it is possible that A should belong both to B and to C as

wholes, though B does not follow some C. For if it is assumed that A belongs

to no B and to some C, the premisses are both false, but the conclusion is

true.  Similarly  if  the  universal  premiss  is  affirmative  and  the  particular

negative. For it is possible that A should follow no B and all C, though B

does not belong to some C, e.g. animal follows no science but every man,

though science does not follow every man. If then A is assumed to belong to

the whole of B, and not to follow some C, the premisses are false but the

conclusion is true.


4


In the last figure a true conclusion may come through what is false, alike

when both premisses are wholly false, when each is partly false, when one

premiss is wholly true, the other false, when one premiss is partly false, the

other  wholly  true,  and  vice  versa,  and  in  every  other  way  in  which  it  is

possible to alter the premisses. For (1) nothing prevents neither A nor B from

belonging to any C, while A belongs to some B, e.g. neither man nor footed

follows anything lifeless, though man belongs to some footed things. If then

it is assumed that A and B belong to all C, the premisses will be wholly false,

but  the  conclusion  true.  Similarly  if  one  premiss  is  negative,  the  other

affirmative. For it is possible that B should belong to no C, but A to all C,

and that should not belong to some B, e.g. black belongs to no swan, animal

to  every  swan,  and  animal  not  to  everything  black.  Consequently  if  it  is

assumed that B belongs to all C, and A to no C, A will not belong to some B:

and the conclusion is true, though the premisses are false.

(2) Also if each premiss is partly false, the conclusion may be true. For

nothing prevents both A and B from belonging to some C while A belongs to

some B, e.g. white and beautiful belong to some animals, and white to some

beautiful things. If then it is stated that A and B belong to all C, the premisses

are partially false, but the conclusion is true. Similarly if the premiss AC isstated as negative. For nothing prevents A from not belonging, and B from

belonging, to some C, while A does not belong to all B, e.g. white does not

belong to some animals, beautiful belongs to some animals, and white does

not  belong  to  everything  beautiful.  Consequently  if  it  is  assumed  that  A

belongs to no C, and B to all C, both premisses are partly false, but the

conclusion is true.

(3) Similarly if one of the premisses assumed is wholly false, the other

wholly true. For it is possible that both A and B should follow all C, though

A does not belong to some B, e.g. animal and white follow every swan,

though animal does not belong to everything white. Taking these then as

terms, if one assumes that B belongs to the whole of C, but A does not belong

to C at all, the premiss BC will be wholly true, the premiss AC wholly false,

and the conclusion true. Similarly if the statement BC is false, the statement

AC true, the conclusion may be true. The same terms will serve for the proof.

Also if both the premisses assumed are affirmative, the conclusion may be

true. For nothing prevents B from following all C, and A from not belonging

to C at all, though A belongs to some B, e.g. animal belongs to every swan,

black to no swan, and black to some animals. Consequently if it is assumed

that A and B belong to every C, the premiss BC is wholly true, the premiss

AC is wholly false, and the conclusion is true. Similarly if the premiss AC

which is assumed is true: the proof can be made through the same terms.

(4)  Again  if  one  premiss  is  wholly  true,  the  other  partly  false,  the

conclusion may be true. For it is possible that B should belong to all C, and A

to some C, while A belongs to some B, e.g. biped belongs to every man,

beautiful not to every man, and beautiful to some bipeds. If then it is assumed

that both A and B belong to the whole of C, the premiss BC is wholly true,

the premiss AC partly false, the conclusion true. Similarly if of the premisses

assumed AC is true and BC partly false, a true conclusion is possible: this can

be proved, if the same terms as before are transposed. Also the conclusion

may be true if one premiss is negative, the other affirmative. For since it is

possible that B should belong to the whole of C, and A to some C, and, when

they are so, that A should not belong to all B, therefore it is assumed that B

belongs to the whole of C, and A to no C, the negative premiss is partly false,

the other premiss wholly true, and the conclusion is true. Again since it has

been proved that if A belongs to no C and B to some C, it is possible that A

should not belong to some C, it is clear that if the premiss AC is wholly true,

and the premiss BC partly false, it is possible that the conclusion should betrue. For if it is assumed that A belongs to no C, and B to all C, the premiss

AC is wholly true, and the premiss BC is partly false.

(5) It is clear also in the case of particular syllogisms that a true conclusion

may come through what is false, in every possible way. For the same terms

must be taken as have been taken when the premisses are universal, positive

terms in positive syllogisms, negative terms in negative. For it makes no

difference to the setting out of the terms, whether one assumes that what

belongs to none belongs to all or that what belongs to some belongs to all.

The same applies to negative statements.

It is clear then that if the conclusion is false, the premisses of the argument

must be false, either all or some of them; but when the conclusion is true, it is

not necessary that the premisses should be true, either one or all, yet it is

possible, though no part of the syllogism is true, that the conclusion may

none the less be true; but it is not necessitated. The reason is that when two

things are so related to one another, that if the one is, the other necessarily is,

then if the latter is not, the former will not be either, but if the latter is, it is

not necessary that the former should be. But it is impossible that the same

thing should be necessitated by the being and by the not-being of the same

thing. I mean, for example, that it is impossible that B should necessarily be

great since A is white and that B should necessarily be great since A is not

white. For whenever since this, A, is white it is necessary that that, B, should

be great, and since B is great that C should not be white, then it is necessary

if is white that C should not be white. And whenever it is necessary, since

one of two things is, that the other should be, it is necessary, if the latter is

not, that the former (viz. A) should not be. If then B is not great A cannot be

white. But if, when A is not white, it is necessary that B should be great, it

necessarily  results  that  if  B  is  not  great,  B  itself  is  great.  (But  this  is

impossible.) For if B is not great, A will necessarily not be white. If then

when this is not white B must be great, it results that if B is not great, it is

great, just as if it were proved through three terms.


5


  Circular and reciprocal proof means proof by means of the conclusion, i.e.

by converting one of the premisses simply and inferring the premiss which

was assumed in the original syllogism: e.g. suppose it has been necessary to

prove that A belongs to all C, and it has been proved through B; suppose thatA should now be proved to belong to B by assuming that A belongs to C, and

C  to  B-so  A  belongs  to  B:  but  in  the  first  syllogism  the  converse  was

assumed, viz. that B belongs to C. Or suppose it is necessary to prove that B

belongs to C, and A is assumed to belong to C, which was the conclusion of

the first syllogism, and B to belong to A but the converse was assumed in the

earlier syllogism, viz. that A belongs to B. In no other way is reciprocal proof

possible. If another term is taken as middle, the proof is not circular: for

neither  of  the  propositions  assumed  is  the  same  as  before:  if  one  of  the

accepted  terms  is  taken  as  middle,  only  one  of  the  premisses  of  the  first

syllogism can be assumed in the second: for if both of them are taken the

same conclusion as before will result: but it must be different. If the terms are

not convertible, one of the premisses from which the syllogism results must

be undemonstrated: for it is not possible to demonstrate through these terms

that the third belongs to the middle or the middle to the first. If the terms are

convertible, it is possible to demonstrate everything reciprocally, e.g. if A and

B and C are convertible with one another. Suppose the proposition AC has

been demonstrated through B as middle term, and again the proposition AB

through  the  conclusion  and  the  premiss  BC  converted,  and  similarly  the

proposition BC through the conclusion and the premiss AB converted. But it

is necessary to prove both the premiss CB, and the premiss BA: for we have

used these alone without demonstrating them. If then it is assumed that B

belongs to all C, and C to all A, we shall have a syllogism relating B to A.

Again if it is assumed that C belongs to all A, and A to all B, C must belong

to all B. In both these syllogisms the premiss CA has been assumed without

being  demonstrated:  the  other  premisses  had  ex  hypothesi  been  proved.

Consequently if we succeed in demonstrating this premiss, all the premisses

will have been proved reciprocally. If then it is assumed that C belongs to all

B, and B to all A, both the premisses assumed have been proved, and C must

belong to A. It is clear then that only if the terms are convertible is circular

and reciprocal demonstration possible (if the terms are not convertible, the

matter stands as we said above). But it turns out in these also that we use for

the demonstration the very thing that is being proved: for C is proved of B,

and B of by assuming that C is said of and C is proved of A through these

premisses, so that we use the conclusion for the demonstration.

In negative syllogisms reciprocal proof is as follows. Let B belong to all C,

and A to none of the Bs: we conclude that A belongs to none of the Cs. If

again it is necessary to prove that A belongs to none of the Bs (which waspreviously assumed) A must belong to no C, and C to all B: thus the previous

premiss  is  reversed.  If  it  is  necessary  to  prove  that  B  belongs  to  C,  the

proposition AB must no longer be converted as before: for the premiss ‘B

belongs to no A’ is identical with the premiss ‘A belongs to no B’. But we

must assume that B belongs to all of that to none of which longs. Let A

belong to none of the Cs (which was the previous conclusion) and assume

that B belongs to all of that to none of which A belongs. It is necessary then

that B should belong to all C. Consequently each of the three propositions has

been made a conclusion, and this is circular demonstration, to assume the

conclusion  and  the  converse  of  one  of  the  premisses,  and  deduce  the

remaining premiss.

In  particular  syllogisms  it  is  not  possible  to  demonstrate  the  universal

premiss  through  the  other  propositions,  but  the  particular  premiss  can  be

demonstrated. Clearly it is impossible to demonstrate the universal premiss:

for what is universal is proved through propositions which are universal, but

the conclusion is not universal, and the proof must start from the conclusion

and the other premiss. Further a syllogism cannot be made at all if the other

premiss is converted: for the result is that both premisses are particular. But

the particular premiss may be proved. Suppose that A has been proved of

some C through B. If then it is assumed that B belongs to all A and the

conclusion is retained, B will belong to some C: for we obtain the first figure

and A is middle. But if the syllogism is negative, it is not possible to prove

the universal premiss, for the reason given above. But it is possible to prove

the particular premiss, if the proposition AB is converted as in the universal

syllogism,  i.e  ‘B  belongs  to  some  of  that  to  some  of  which  A  does  not

belong’:  otherwise  no  syllogism  results  because  the  particular  premiss  is

negative.


6


In the second figure it is not possible to prove an affirmative proposition in

this  way,  but  a  negative  proposition  may  be  proved.  An  affirmative

proposition is not proved because both premisses of the new syllogism are

not affirmative (for the conclusion is negative) but an affirmative proposition

is  (as  we  saw)  proved  from  premisses  which  are  both  affirmative.  The

negative  is  proved  as  follows.  Let  A  belong  to  all  B,  and  to  no  C:  we

conclude that B belongs to no C. If then it is assumed that B belongs to all A,it is necessary that A should belong to no C: for we get the second figure,

with  B  as  middle.  But  if  the  premiss  AB  was  negative,  and  the  other

affirmative, we shall have the first figure. For C belongs to all A and B to no

C, consequently B belongs to no A: neither then does A belong to B. Through

the  conclusion,  therefore,  and  one  premiss,  we  get  no  syllogism,  but  if

another premiss is assumed in addition, a syllogism will be possible. But if

the syllogism not universal, the universal premiss cannot be proved, for the

same  reason  as  we  gave  above,  but  the  particular  premiss  can  be  proved

whenever the universal statement is affirmative. Let A belong to all B, and

not to all C: the conclusion is BC. If then it is assumed that B belongs to all

A, but not to all C, A will not belong to some C, B being middle. But if the

universal premiss is negative, the premiss AC will not be demonstrated by the

conversion of AB: for it turns out that either both or one of the premisses is

negative; consequently a syllogism will not be possible. But the proof will

proceed as in the universal syllogisms, if it is assumed that A belongs to some

of that to some of which B does not belong.


7


In the third figure, when both premisses are taken universally, it is not

possible to prove them reciprocally: for that which is universal is proved

through statements which are universal, but the conclusion in this figure is

always particular, so that it is clear that it is not possible at all to prove

through this figure the universal premiss. But if one premiss is universal, the

other particular, proof of the latter will sometimes be possible, sometimes

not.  When  both  the  premisses  assumed  are  affirmative,  and  the  universal

concerns the minor extreme, proof will be possible, but when it concerns the

other  extreme,  impossible.  Let  A  belong  to  all  C  and  B  to  some  C:  the

conclusion is the statement AB. If then it is assumed that C belongs to all A,

it has been proved that C belongs to some B, but that B belongs to some C

has not been proved. And yet it is necessary, if C belongs to some B, that B

should belong to some C. But it is not the same that this should belong to

that, and that to this: but we must assume besides that if this belongs to some

of that, that belongs to some of this. But if this is assumed the syllogism no

longer results from the conclusion and the other premiss. But if B belongs to

all C, and A to some C, it will be possible to prove the proposition AC, when

it is assumed that C belongs to all B, and A to some B. For if C belongs to allB and A to some B, it is necessary that A should belong to some C, B being

middle. And whenever one premiss is affirmative the other negative, and the

affirmative is universal, the other premiss can be proved. Let B belong to all

C, and A not to some C: the conclusion is that A does not belong to some B.

If then it is assumed further that C belongs to all B, it is necessary that A

should not belong to some C, B being middle. But when the negative premiss

is universal, the other premiss is not except as before, viz. if it is assumed that

that belongs to some of that, to some of which this does not belong, e.g. if A

belongs to no C, and B to some C: the conclusion is that A does not belong to

some B. If then it is assumed that C belongs to some of that to some of which

does not belong, it is necessary that C should belong to some of the Bs. In no

other way is it possible by converting the universal premiss to prove the

other: for in no other way can a syllogism be formed.

It is clear then that in the first figure reciprocal proof is made both through

the third and through the first figure-if the conclusion is affirmative through

the first; if the conclusion is negative through the last. For it is assumed that

that belongs to all of that to none of which this belongs. In the middle figure,

when the syllogism is universal, proof is possible through the second figure

and through the first, but when particular through the second and the last. In

the third figure all proofs are made through itself. It is clear also that in the

third figure and in the middle figure those syllogisms which are not made

through those figures themselves either are not of the nature of circular proof

or are imperfect.


8


To convert a syllogism means to alter the conclusion and make another

syllogism to prove that either the extreme cannot belong to the middle or the

middle  to  the  last  term.  For  it  is  necessary,  if  the  conclusion  has  been

changed  into  its  opposite  and  one  of  the  premisses  stands,  that  the  other

premiss should be destroyed. For if it should stand, the conclusion also must

stand.  It  makes  a  difference  whether  the  conclusion  is  converted  into  its

contradictory  or  into  its  contrary.  For  the  same  syllogism  does  not  result

whichever form the conversion takes. This will be made clear by the sequel.

By contradictory opposition I mean the opposition of ‘to all’ to ‘not to all’,

and of ‘to some’ to ‘to none’; by contrary opposition I mean the opposition of

‘to all’ to ‘to none’, and of ‘to some’ to ‘not to some’. Suppose that A beenproved of C, through B as middle term. If then it should be assumed that A

belongs to no C, but to all B, B will belong to no C. And if A belongs to no

C, and B to all C, A will belong, not to no B at all, but not to all B. For (as we

saw) the universal is not proved through the last figure. In a word it is not

possible to refute universally by conversion the premiss which concerns the

major extreme: for the refutation always proceeds through the third since it is

necessary to take both premisses in reference to the minor extreme. Similarly

if the syllogism is negative. Suppose it has been proved that A belongs to no

C through B. Then if it is assumed that A belongs to all C, and to no B, B will

belong to none of the Cs. And if A and B belong to all C, A will belong to

some B: but in the original premiss it belonged to no B.

If the conclusion is converted into its contradictory, the syllogisms will be

contradictory and not universal. For one premiss is particular, so that the

conclusion also will be particular. Let the syllogism be affirmative, and let it

be converted as stated. Then if A belongs not to all C, but to all B, B will

belong not to all C. And if A belongs not to all C, but B belongs to all C, A

will  belong  not  to  all  B.  Similarly  if  the  syllogism  is  negative.  For  if  A

belongs to some C, and to no B, B will belong, not to no C at all, but-not to

some C. And if A belongs to some C, and B to all C, as was originally

assumed, A will belong to some B.

In  particular  syllogisms  when  the  conclusion  is  converted  into  its

contradictory, both premisses may be refuted, but when it is converted into its

contrary, neither. For the result is no longer, as in the universal syllogisms,

refutation  in  which  the  conclusion  reached  by  O,  conversion  lacks

universality, but no refutation at all. Suppose that A has been proved of some

C. If then it is assumed that A belongs to no C, and B to some C, A will not

belong to some B: and if A belongs to no C, but to all B, B will belong to no

C.  Thus  both  premisses  are  refuted.  But  neither  can  be  refuted  if  the

conclusion is converted into its contrary. For if A does not belong to some C,

but to all B, then B will not belong to some C. But the original premiss is not

yet refuted: for it is possible that B should belong to some C, and should not

belong  to  some  C.  The  universal  premiss  AB  cannot  be  affected  by  a

syllogism at all: for if A does not belong to some of the Cs, but B belongs to

some  of  the  Cs,  neither  of  the  premisses  is  universal.  Similarly  if  the

syllogism is negative: for if it should be assumed that A belongs to all C, both

premisses are refuted: but if the assumption is that A belongs to some C,

neither premiss is refuted. The proof is the same as before.9


In the second figure it is not possible to refute the premiss which concerns

the major extreme by establishing something contrary to it, whichever form

the  conversion  of  the  conclusion  may  take.  For  the  conclusion  of  the

refutation will always be in the third figure, and in this figure (as we saw)

there is no universal syllogism. The other premiss can be refuted in a manner

similar to the conversion: I mean, if the conclusion of the first syllogism is

converted  into  its  contrary,  the  conclusion  of  the  refutation  will  be  the

contrary  of  the  minor  premiss  of  the  first,  if  into  its  contradictory,  the

contradictory. Let A belong to all B and to no C: conclusion BC. If then it is

assumed  that  B  belongs  to  all  C,  and  the  proposition  AB  stands,  A  will

belong to all C, since the first figure is produced. If B belongs to all C, and A

to  no  C,  then  A  belongs  not  to  all  B:  the  figure  is  the  last.  But  if  the

conclusion BC is converted into its contradictory, the premiss AB will be

refuted as before, the premiss, AC by its contradictory. For if B belongs to

some C, and A to no C, then A will not belong to some B. Again if B belongs

to some C, and A to all B, A will belong to some C, so that the syllogism

results  in  the  contradictory  of  the  minor  premiss.  A  similar  proof  can  be

given if the premisses are transposed in respect of their quality.

If the syllogism is particular, when the conclusion is converted into its

contrary neither premiss can be refuted, as also happened in the first figure,’

if the conclusion is converted into its contradictory, both premisses can be

refuted. Suppose that A belongs to no B, and to some C: the conclusion is

BC. If then it is assumed that B belongs to some C, and the statement AB

stands, the conclusion will be that A does not belong to some C. But the

original statement has not been refuted: for it is possible that A should belong

to some C and also not to some C. Again if B belongs to some C and A to

some C, no syllogism will be possible: for neither of the premisses taken is

universal.  Consequently  the  proposition  AB  is  not  refuted.  But  if  the

conclusion is converted into its contradictory, both premisses can be refuted.

For if B belongs to all C, and A to no B, A will belong to no C: but it was

assumed to belong to some C. Again if B belongs to all C and A to some C,

A  will  belong  to  some  B.  The  same  proof  can  be  given  if  the  universal

statement is affirmative.


10In  the  third  figure  when  the  conclusion  is  converted  into  its  contrary,

neither of the premisses can be refuted in any of the syllogisms, but when the

conclusion is converted into its contradictory, both premisses may be refuted

and in all the moods. Suppose it has been proved that A belongs to some B, C

being  taken  as  middle,  and  the  premisses  being  universal.  If  then  it  is

assumed  that  A  does  not  belong  to  some  B,  but  B  belongs  to  all  C,  no

syllogism is formed about A and C. Nor if A does not belong to some B, but

belongs to all C, will a syllogism be possible about B and C. A similar proof

can be given if the premisses are not universal. For either both premisses

arrived at by the conversion must be particular, or the universal premiss must

refer to the minor extreme. But we found that no syllogism is possible thus

either in the first or in the middle figure. But if the conclusion is converted

into its contradictory, both the premisses can be refuted. For if A belongs to

no B, and B to all C, then A belongs to no C: again if A belongs to no B, and

to all C, B belongs to no C. And similarly if one of the premisses is not

universal. For if A belongs to no B, and B to some C, A will not belong to

some C: if A belongs to no B, and to C, B will belong to no C.

  Similarly if the original syllogism is negative. Suppose it has been proved

that A does not belong to some B, BC being affirmative, AC being negative:

for it was thus that, as we saw, a syllogism could be made. Whenever then

the contrary of the conclusion is assumed a syllogism will not be possible.

For if A belongs to some B, and B to all C, no syllogism is possible (as we

saw)  about  A  and  C.  Nor,  if  A  belongs  to  some  B,  and  to  no  C,  was  a

syllogism  possible  concerning  B  and  C.  Therefore  the  premisses  are  not

refuted. But when the contradictory of the conclusion is assumed, they are

refuted. For if A belongs to all B, and B to C, A belongs to all C: but A was

supposed originally to belong to no C. Again if A belongs to all B, and to no

C, then B belongs to no C: but it was supposed to belong to all C. A similar

proof  is  possible  if  the  premisses  are  not  universal.  For  AC  becomes

universal and negative, the other premiss particular and affirmative. If then A

belongs to all B, and B to some C, it results that A belongs to some C: but it

was supposed to belong to no C. Again if A belongs to all B, and to no C,

then B belongs to no C: but it was assumed to belong to some C. If A belongs

to some B and B to some C, no syllogism results: nor yet if A belongs to

some B, and to no C. Thus in one way the premisses are refuted, in the other

way they are not.

  From what has been said it is clear how a syllogism results in each figurewhen the conclusion is converted; when a result contrary to the premiss, and

when a result contradictory to the premiss, is obtained. It is clear that in the

first figure the syllogisms are formed through the middle and the last figures,

and the premiss which concerns the minor extreme is alway refuted through

the middle figure, the premiss which concerns the major through the last

figure. In the second figure syllogisms proceed through the first and the last

figures, and the premiss which concerns the minor extreme is always refuted

through  the  first  figure,  the  premiss  which  concerns  the  major  extreme

through the last. In the third figure the refutation proceeds through the first

and  the  middle  figures;  the  premiss  which  concerns  the  major  is  always

refuted  through  the  first  figure,  the  premiss  which  concerns  the  minor

through the middle figure.


11


It is clear then what conversion is, how it is effected in each figure, and

what syllogism results. The syllogism per impossibile is proved when the

contradictory of the conclusion stated and another premiss is assumed; it can

be made in all the figures. For it resembles conversion, differing only in this:

conversion  takes  place  after  a  syllogism  has  been  formed  and  both  the

premisses have been taken, but a reduction to the impossible takes place not

because the contradictory has been agreed to already, but because it is clear

that it is true. The terms are alike in both, and the premisses of both are taken

in the same way. For example if A belongs to all B, C being middle, then if it

is supposed that A does not belong to all B or belongs to no B, but to all C

(which was admitted to be true), it follows that C belongs to no B or not to all

B.  But  this  is  impossible:  consequently  the  supposition  is  false:  its

contradictory then is true. Similarly in the other figures: for whatever moods

admit of conversion admit also of the reduction per impossibile.

All the problems can be proved per impossibile in all the figures, excepting

the universal affirmative, which is proved in the middle and third figures, but

not in the first. Suppose that A belongs not to all B, or to no B, and take

besides another premiss concerning either of the terms, viz. that C belongs to

all A, or that B belongs to all D; thus we get the first figure. If then it is

supposed that A does not belong to all B, no syllogism results whichever

term the assumed premiss concerns; but if it is supposed that A belongs to no

B, when the premiss BD is assumed as well we shall prove syllogisticallywhat is false, but not the problem proposed. For if A belongs to no B, and B

belongs to all D, A belongs to no D. Let this be impossible: it is false then A

belongs to no B. But the universal affirmative is not necessarily true if the

universal negative is false. But if the premiss CA is assumed as well, no

syllogism  results,  nor  does  it  do  so  when  it  is  supposed  that  A  does  not

belong to all B. Consequently it is clear that the universal affirmative cannot

be proved in the first figure per impossibile.

But the particular affirmative and the universal and particular negatives can

all be proved. Suppose that A belongs to no B, and let it have been assumed

that B belongs to all or to some C. Then it is necessary that A should belong

to no C or not to all C. But this is impossible (for let it be true and clear that

A belongs to all C): consequently if this is false, it is necessary that A should

belong to some B. But if the other premiss assumed relates to A, no syllogism

will be possible. Nor can a conclusion be drawn when the contrary of the

conclusion is supposed, e.g. that A does not belong to some B. Clearly then

we must suppose the contradictory.

  Again suppose that A belongs to some B, and let it have been assumed that

C belongs to all A. It is necessary then that C should belong to some B. But

let this be impossible, so that the supposition is false: in that case it is true

that A belongs to no B. We may proceed in the same way if the proposition

CA has been taken as negative. But if the premiss assumed concerns B, no

syllogism  will  be  possible.  If  the  contrary  is  supposed,  we  shall  have  a

syllogism  and  an  impossible  conclusion,  but  the  problem  in  hand  is  not

proved. Suppose that A belongs to all B, and let it have been assumed that C

belongs to all A. It is necessary then that C should belong to all B. But this is

impossible, so that it is false that A belongs to all B. But we have not yet

shown it to be necessary that A belongs to no B, if it does not belong to all B.

Similarly if the other premiss taken concerns B; we shall have a syllogism

and  a  conclusion  which  is  impossible,  but  the  hypothesis  is  not  refuted.

Therefore it is the contradictory that we must suppose.

To prove that A does not belong to all B, we must suppose that it belongs

to all B: for if A belongs to all B, and C to all A, then C belongs to all B; so

that if this is impossible, the hypothesis is false. Similarly if the other premiss

assumed concerns B. The same results if the original proposition CA was

negative: for thus also we get a syllogism. But if the negative proposition

concerns B, nothing is proved. If the hypothesis is that A belongs not to all

but to some B, it is not proved that A belongs not to all B, but that it belongsto no B. For if A belongs to some B, and C to all A, then C will belong to

some  B.  If  then  this  is  impossible,  it  is  false  that  A  belongs  to  some  B;

consequently it is true that A belongs to no B. But if this is proved, the truth

is refuted as well; for the original conclusion was that A belongs to some B,

and does not belong to some B. Further the impossible does not result from

the hypothesis: for then the hypothesis would be false, since it is impossible

to draw a false conclusion from true premisses: but in fact it is true: for A

belongs to some B. Consequently we must not suppose that A belongs to

some B, but that it belongs to all B. Similarly if we should be proving that A

does not belong to some B: for if ‘not to belong to some’ and ‘to belong not

to all’ have the same meaning, the demonstration of both will be identical.

It  is  clear  then  that  not  the  contrary  but  the  contradictory  ought  to  be

supposed in all the syllogisms. For thus we shall have necessity of inference,

and  the  claim  we  make  is  one  that  will  be  generally  accepted.  For  if  of

everything one or other of two contradictory statements holds good, then if it

is proved that the negation does not hold, the affirmation must be true. Again

if it is not admitted that the affirmation is true, the claim that the negation is

true will be generally accepted. But in neither way does it suit to maintain the

contrary: for it is not necessary that if the universal negative is false, the

universal affirmative should be true, nor is it generally accepted that if the

one is false the other is true.


12


It is clear then that in the first figure all problems except the universal

affirmative are proved per impossibile. But in the middle and the last figures

this also is proved. Suppose that A does not belong to all B, and let it have

been assumed that A belongs to all C. If then A belongs not to all B, but to all

C, C will not belong to all B. But this is impossible (for suppose it to be clear

that C belongs to all B): consequently the hypothesis is false. It is true then

that A belongs to all B. But if the contrary is supposed, we shall have a

syllogism and a result which is impossible: but the problem in hand is not

proved. For if A belongs to no B, and to all C, C will belong to no B. This is

impossible; so that it is false that A belongs to no B. But though this is false,

it does not follow that it is true that A belongs to all B.

  When A belongs to some B, suppose that A belongs to no B, and let A

belong  to  all  C.  It  is  necessary  then  that  C  should  belong  to  no  B.Consequently, if this is impossible, A must belong to some B. But if it is

supposed that A does not belong to some B, we shall have the same results as

in the first figure.

  Again suppose that A belongs to some B, and let A belong to no C. It is

necessary then that C should not belong to some B. But originally it belonged

to all B, consequently the hypothesis is false: A then will belong to no B.

  When A does not belong to an B, suppose it does belong to all B, and to no

C. It is necessary then that C should belong to no B. But this is impossible: so

that it is true that A does not belong to all B. It is clear then that all the

syllogisms can be formed in the middle figure.


13


  Similarly they can all be formed in the last figure. Suppose that A does not

belong to some B, but C belongs to all B: then A does not belong to some C.

If then this is impossible, it is false that A does not belong to some B; so that

it is true that A belongs to all B. But if it is supposed that A belongs to no B,

we  shall  have  a  syllogism  and  a  conclusion  which  is  impossible:  but  the

problem in hand is not proved: for if the contrary is supposed, we shall have

the same results as before.

But to prove that A belongs to some B, this hypothesis must be made. If A

belongs to no B, and C to some B, A will belong not to all C. If then this is

false, it is true that A belongs to some B.

  When A belongs to no B, suppose A belongs to some B, and let it have

been assumed that C belongs to all B. Then it is necessary that A should

belong to some C. But ex hypothesi it belongs to no C, so that it is false that

A  belongs  to  some  B.  But  if  it  is  supposed  that  A  belongs  to  all  B,  the

problem is not proved.

But this hypothesis must be made if we are prove that A belongs not to all

B. For if A belongs to all B and C to some B, then A belongs to some C. But

this we assumed not to be so, so it is false that A belongs to all B. But in that

case it is true that A belongs not to all B. If however it is assumed that A

belongs to some B, we shall have the same result as before.

It is clear then that in all the syllogisms which proceed per impossibile the

contradictory must be assumed. And it is plain that in the middle figure an

affirmative  conclusion,  and  in  the  last  figure  a  universal  conclusion,  are

proved in a way.14


  Demonstration per impossibile differs from ostensive proof in that it posits

what it wishes to refute by reduction to a statement admitted to be false;

whereas ostensive proof starts from admitted positions. Both, indeed, take

two premisses that are admitted, but the latter takes the premisses from which

the  syllogism  starts,  the  former  takes  one  of  these,  along  with  the

contradictory of the original conclusion. Also in the ostensive proof it is not

necessary that the conclusion should be known, nor that one should suppose

beforehand  that  it  is  true  or  not:  in  the  other  it  is  necessary  to  suppose

beforehand that it is not true. It makes no difference whether the conclusion

is affirmative or negative; the method is the same in both cases. Everything

which is concluded ostensively can be proved per impossibile, and that which

is proved per impossibile can be proved ostensively, through the same terms.

Whenever the syllogism is formed in the first figure, the truth will be found

in the middle or the last figure, if negative in the middle, if affirmative in the

last. Whenever the syllogism is formed in the middle figure, the truth will be

found in the first, whatever the problem may be. Whenever the syllogism is

formed  in  the  last  figure,  the  truth  will  be  found  in  the  first  and  middle

figures, if affirmative in first, if negative in the middle. Suppose that A has

been proved to belong to no B, or not to all B, through the first figure. Then

the hypothesis must have been that A belongs to some B, and the original

premisses that C belongs to all A and to no B. For thus the syllogism was

made and the impossible conclusion reached. But this is the middle figure, if

C belongs to all A and to no B. And it is clear from these premisses that A

belongs to no B. Similarly if has been proved not to belong to all B. For the

hypothesis is that A belongs to all B; and the original premisses are that C

belongs to all A but not to all B. Similarly too, if the premiss CA should be

negative: for thus also we have the middle figure. Again suppose it has been

proved  that  A  belongs  to  some  B.  The  hypothesis  here  is  that  is  that  A

belongs to no B; and the original premisses that B belongs to all C, and A

either to all or to some C: for in this way we shall get what is impossible. But

if A and B belong to all C, we have the last figure. And it is clear from these

premisses  that  A  must  belong  to  some  B.  Similarly  if  B  or  A  should  be

assumed to belong to some C.

  Again suppose it has been proved in the middle figure that A belongs to all

B. Then the hypothesis must have been that A belongs not to all B, and theoriginal premisses that A belongs to all C, and C to all B: for thus we shall

get what is impossible. But if A belongs to all C, and C to all B, we have the

first figure. Similarly if it has been proved that A belongs to some B: for the

hypothesis then must have been that A belongs to no B, and the original

premisses  that  A  belongs  to  all  C,  and  C  to  some  B.  If  the  syllogism  is

negative, the hypothesis must have been that A belongs to some B, and the

original premisses that A belongs to no C, and C to all B, so that the first

figure results. If the syllogism is not universal, but proof has been given that

A does not belong to some B, we may infer in the same way. The hypothesis

is that A belongs to all B, the original premisses that A belongs to no C, and

C belongs to some B: for thus we get the first figure.

  Again suppose it has been proved in the third figure that A belongs to all

B. Then the hypothesis must have been that A belongs not to all B, and the

original premisses that C belongs to all B, and A belongs to all C; for thus we

shall get what is impossible. And the original premisses form the first figure.

Similarly  if  the  demonstration  establishes  a  particular  proposition:  the

hypothesis then must have been that A belongs to no B, and the original

premisses  that  C  belongs  to  some  B,  and  A  to  all  C.  If  the  syllogism  is

negative, the hypothesis must have been that A belongs to some B, and the

original premisses that C belongs to no A and to all B, and this is the middle

figure. Similarly if the demonstration is not universal. The hypothesis will

then be that A belongs to all B, the premisses that C belongs to no A and to

some B: and this is the middle figure.

It is clear then that it is possible through the same terms to prove each of

the  problems  ostensively  as  well.  Similarly  it  will  be  possible  if  the

syllogisms are ostensive to reduce them ad impossibile in the terms which

have  been  taken,  whenever  the  contradictory  of  the  conclusion  of  the

ostensive  syllogism  is  taken  as  a  premiss.  For  the  syllogisms  become

identical with those which are obtained by means of conversion, so that we

obtain immediately the figures through which each problem will be solved. It

is clear then that every thesis can be proved in both ways, i.e. per impossibile

and ostensively, and it is not possible to separate one method from the other.


15


In what figure it is possible to draw a conclusion from premisses which are

opposed, and in what figure this is not possible, will be made clear in thisway. Verbally four kinds of opposition are possible, viz. universal affirmative

to universal negative, universal affirmative to particular negative, particular

affirmative  to  universal  negative,  and  particular  affirmative  to  particular

negative: but really there are only three: for the particular affirmative is only

verbally opposed to the particular negative. Of the genuine opposites I call

those  which  are  universal  contraries,  the  universal  affirmative  and  the

universal negative, e.g. ‘every science is good’, ‘no science is good’; the

others I call contradictories.

In  the  first  figure  no  syllogism  whether  affirmative  or  negative  can  be

made out of opposed premisses: no affirmative syllogism is possible because

both premisses must be affirmative, but opposites are, the one affirmative, the

other negative: no negative syllogism is possible because opposites affirm

and deny the same predicate of the same subject, and the middle term in the

first figure is not predicated of both extremes, but one thing is denied of it,

and it is affirmed of something else: but such premisses are not opposed.

In the middle figure a syllogism can be made both oLcontradictories and of

contraries. Let A stand for good, let B and C stand for science. If then one

assumes that every science is good, and no science is good, A belongs to all

B and to no C, so that B belongs to no C: no science then is a science.

Similarly  if  after  taking  ‘every  science  is  good’  one  took  ‘the  science  of

medicine is not good’; for A belongs to all B but to no C, so that a particular

science will not be a science. Again, a particular science will not be a science

if A belongs to all C but to no B, and B is science, C medicine, and A

supposition: for after taking ‘no science is supposition’, one has assumed that

a particular science is supposition. This syllogism differs from the preceding

because the relations between the terms are reversed: before, the affirmative

statement concerned B, now it concerns C. Similarly if one premiss is not

universal: for the middle term is always that which is stated negatively of one

extreme,  and  affirmatively  of  the  other.  Consequently  it  is  possible  that

contradictories  may  lead  to  a  conclusion,  though  not  always  or  in  every

mood, but only if the terms subordinate to the middle are such that they are

either identical or related as whole to part. Otherwise it is impossible: for the

premisses cannot anyhow be either contraries or contradictories.

In  the  third  figure  an  affirmative  syllogism  can  never  be  made  out  of

opposite premisses, for the reason given in reference to the first figure; but a

negative syllogism is possible whether the terms are universal or not. Let B

and C stand for science, A for medicine. If then one should assume that allmedicine is science and that no medicine is science, he has assumed that B

belongs to all A and C to no A, so that a particular science will not be a

science. Similarly if the premiss BA is not assumed universally. For if some

medicine is science and again no medicine is science, it results that some

science  is  not  science,  The  premisses  are  contrary  if  the  terms  are  taken

universally; if one is particular, they are contradictory.

We must recognize that it is possible to take opposites in the way we said,

viz. ‘all science is good’ and ‘no science is good’ or ‘some science is not

good’. This does not usually escape notice. But it is possible to establish one

part of a contradiction through other premisses, or to assume it in the way

suggested  in  the  Topics.  Since  there  are  three  oppositions  to  affirmative

statements, it follows that opposite statements may be assumed as premisses

in  six  ways;  we  may  have  either  universal  affirmative  and  negative,  or

universal affirmative and particular negative, or particular affirmative and

universal negative, and the relations between the terms may be reversed; e.g.

A may belong to all B and to no C, or to all C and to no B, or to all of the

one, not to all of the other; here too the relation between the terms may be

reversed. Similarly in the third figure. So it is clear in how many ways and in

what  figures  a  syllogism  can  be  made  by  means  of  premisses  which  are

opposed.

It  is  clear  too  that  from  false  premisses  it  is  possible  to  draw  a  true

conclusion, as has been said before, but it is not possible if the premisses are

opposed. For the syllogism is always contrary to the fact, e.g. if a thing is

good, it is proved that it is not good, if an animal, that it is not an animal

because  the  syllogism  springs  out  of  a  contradiction  and  the  terms

presupposed are either identical or related as whole and part. It is evident also

that  in  fallacious  reasonings  nothing  prevents  a  contradiction  to  the

hypothesis from resulting, e.g. if something is odd, it is not odd. For the

syllogism owed its contrariety to its contradictory premisses; if we assume

such premisses we shall get a result that contradicts our hypothesis. But we

must recognize that contraries cannot be inferred from a single syllogism in

such a way that we conclude that what is not good is good, or anything of that

sort unless a self-contradictory premiss is at once assumed, e.g. ‘every animal

is white and not white’, and we proceed ‘man is an animal’. Either we must

introduce the contradiction by an additional assumption, assuming, e.g., that

every science is supposition, and then assuming ‘Medicine is a science, but

none of it is supposition’ (which is the mode in which refutations are made),