For  constructive  purposes,  a  man  should  see  if  the  term  of  which  he  is

rendering the property avoids bearing many senses and is one and simple: for

then the property will have been correctly stated in this respect. Thus (e.g.)

seeing that ‘man’ is used in a single sense, ‘naturally civilized animal’ would

be correctly stated as a property of man.

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  whether  the  same  term  has  been

repeated in the property. For people often do this undetected in rendering

‘properties’ also, just as they do in their ‘definitions’ as well: but a property

to  which  this  has  happened  will  not  have  been  correctly  stated:  for  the

repetition  of  it  confuses  the  hearer;  thus  inevitably  the  meaning  becomes

obscure, and further, such people are thought to babble. Repetition of the

same term is likely to happen in two ways; one is, when a man repeatedly

uses the same word, as would happen if any one were to render, as a property

of fire, ‘the body which is the most rarefied of bodies’ (for he has repeated

the word ‘body’); the second is, if a man replaces words by their definitions,

as  would  happen  if  any  one  were  to  render,  as  a  property  of  earth,  ‘the

substance which is by its nature most easily of all bodies borne downwards in

space’, and were then to substitute ‘substances of such and such a kind’ for

the word ‘bodies’: for ‘body’ and ‘a substance of such and such a kind’ mean

one and the same thing. For he will have repeated the word ‘substance’, and

accordingly  neither  of  the  properties  would  be  correctly  stated.  For

constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  whether  he  avoids  ever

repeating the same term; for then the property will in this respect have been

correctly rendered. Thus (e.g.) seeing that he who has stated ‘animal capable

of acquiring knowledge’ as a property of man has avoided repeating the same

term several times, the property would in this respect have been correctly

rendered of man.

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered in the property

any such term as is a universal attribute. For one which does not distinguish

its subject from other things is useless, and it is the business of the language

Of ‘properties’, as also of the language of definitions, to distinguish. In the

case  contemplated,  therefore,  the  property  will  not  have  been  correctly

rendered. Thus (e.g.) a man who has stated that it is a property of knowledge

to be a ‘conception incontrovertible by argument, because of its unity’, has

used in the property a term of that kind, viz. ‘unity’, which is a universal

attribute;  and  therefore  the  property  of  knowledge  could  not  have  been

correctly stated. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see whether hehas avoided all terms that are common to everything and used a term that

distinguishes the subject from something: for then the property will in this

respect have been correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as he who has said

that it is a property of a ‘living creature’ to ‘have a soul’ has used no term

that is common to everything, it would in this respect have been correctly

stated to be a property of a ‘living creature’ to ‘have a soul’.

Next,  for  destructive  purposes  see  whether  he  renders  more  than  one

property of the same thing, without a definite proviso that he is stating more

than one: for then the property will not have been correctly stated. For just as

in the case of definitions too there should be no further addition beside the

expression which shows the essence, so too in the case of properties nothing

further should be rendered beside the expression that constitutes the property

mentioned: for such an addition is made to no purpose. Thus (e.g.) a man

who has said that it is a property of fire to be ‘the most rarefied and lightest

body’ has rendered more than one property (for each term is a true predicate

of fire alone); and so it could not be a correctly stated property of fire to be

‘the most rarefied and lightest body’. On the other hand, for constructive

purposes, see whether he has avoided rendering more than one property of

the same thing, and has rendered one only: for then the property will in this

respect have been correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) a man who has said that it is a

property of a liquid to be a ‘body adaptable to every shape’ has rendered as

its property a single character and not several, and so the property of ‘liquid’

would in this respect have been correctly stated.

<

div id="section44" class="section" title="3">


3


Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has employed either the

actual subject whose property he is rendering, or any of its species: for then

the property will not have been correctly stated. For the object of rendering

the property is that people may understand: now the subject itself is just as

unintelligible as it was to start with, while any one of its species is posterior

to it, and so is no more intelligible. Accordingly it is impossible to understand

anything further by the use of these terms. Thus (e.g.) any one who has said

that it is property of ‘animal’ to be ‘the substance to which “man” belongs as

a species’ has employed one of its species, and therefore the property couldnot have been correctly stated. For constructive purposes, on the other hand,

see  whether  he  avoids  introducing  either  the  subject  itself  or  any  of  its

species: for then the property will in this respect have been correctly stated.

Thus (e.g.) a man who has stated that it is a property of a living creature to be

‘compounded  of  soul  and  body’  has  avoided  introducing  among  the  rest

either the subject itself or any of its species, and therefore in this respect the

property of a ‘living creature’ would have been correctly rendered.

You should inquire in the same way also in the case of other terms that do

or do not make the subject more intelligible: thus, for destructive purposes,

see whether he has employed anything either opposite to the subject or, in

general, anything simultaneous by nature with it or posterior to it: for then the

property will not have been correctly stated. For an opposite is simultaneous

by nature with its opposite, and what is simultaneous by nature or is posterior

to it does not make its subject more intelligible. Thus (e.g.) any one who has

said that it is a property of good to be ‘the most direct opposite of evil’, has

employed the opposite of good, and so the property of good could not have

been correctly rendered. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see

whether he has avoided employing anything either opposite to, or, in general,

simultaneous  by  nature  with  the  subject,  or  posterior  to  it:  for  then  the

property will in this respect have been correctly rendered. Thus (e.g.) a man

who has stated that it is a property of knowledge to be ‘the most convincing

conception’  has  avoided  employing  anything  either  opposite  to,  or

simultaneous by nature with, or posterior to, the subject; and so the property

of knowledge would in this respect have been correctly stated.

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered as property

something that does not always follow the subject but sometimes ceases to be

its property: for then the property will not have been correctly described. For

there is no necessity either that the name of the subject must also be true of

anything to which we find such an attribute belonging; nor yet that the name

of the subject will be untrue of anything to which such an attribute is found

not to belong. Moreover, in addition to this, even after he has rendered the

property it will not be clear whether it belongs, seeing that it is the kind of

attribute that may fall: and so the property will not be clear. Thus (e.g.) a man

who  has  stated  that  it  is  a  property  of  animal  ‘sometimes  to  move  and

sometimes to stand still’ rendered the kind of property which sometimes is

not a property, and so the property could not have been correctly stated. For

constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  whether  he  has  renderedsomething that of necessity must always be a property: for then the property

will have been in this respect correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) a man who has

stated that it is a property of virtue to be ‘what makes its possessor good’ has

rendered as property something that always follows, and so the property of

virtue would in this respect have been correctly rendered.

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether in rendering the property of the

present time he has omitted to make a definite proviso that it is the property

of the present time which he is rendering: for else the property will not have

been correctly stated. For in the first place, any unusual procedure always

needs a definite proviso: and it is the usual procedure for everybody to render

as property some attribute that always follows. In the second place, a man

who omits to provide definitely whether it was the property of the present

time which he intended to state, is obscure: and one should not give any

occasion for adverse criticism. Thus (e.g.) a man who has stated it as the

property of a particular man ‘to be sitting with a particular man’, states the

property of the present time, and so he cannot have rendered the property

correctly, seeing that he has described it without any definite proviso. For

constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  whether,  in  rendering  the

property of the present time, he has, in stating it, made a definite proviso that

it is the property of the present time that he is stating: for then the property

will in this respect have been correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) a man who has said

that it is the property of a particular man ‘to be walking now’, has made this

distinction in his statement, and so the property would have been correctly

stated.

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered a property of

the kind whose appropriateness is not obvious except by sensation: for then

the property will not have been correctly stated. For every sensible attribute,

once it is taken beyond the sphere of sensation, becomes uncertain. For it is

not clear whether it still belongs, because it is evidenced only by sensation.

This principle will be true in the case of any attributes that do not always and

necessarily follow. Thus (e.g.) any one who has stated that it is a property of

the  sun  to  be  ‘the  brightest  star  that  moves  over  the  earth’,  has  used  in

describing the property an expression of that kind, viz. ‘to move over the

earth’, which is evidenced by sensation; and so the sun’s property could not

have been correctly rendered: for it will be uncertain, whenever the sun sets,

whether it continues to move over the earth, because sensation then fails us.

For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see whether he has rendered theproperty of a kind that is not obvious to sensation, or, if it be sensible, must

clearly belong of necessity: for then the property will in this respect have

been correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) a man who has stated that it is a property of

a surface to be ‘the primary thing that is coloured’, has introduced amongst

the  rest  a  sensible  quality,  ‘to  be  coloured’,  but  still  a  quality  such  as

manifestly always belongs, and so the property of ‘surface’ would in this

respect have been correctly rendered.

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered the definition

as a property: for then the property will not have been correctly stated: for the

property of a thing ought not to show its essence. Thus (e.g.) a man who has

said  that  it  is  the  property  of  man  to  be  ‘a  walking,  biped  animal’  has

rendered a property of man so as to signify his essence, and so the property of

man could not have been correctly rendered. For constructive purposes, on

the  other  hand,  see  whether  the  property  which  he  has  rendered  forms  a

predicate  convertible  with  its  subject,  without,  however,  signifying  its

essence:  for  then  the  property  will  in  this  respect  have  been  correctly

rendered. Thus (e.g.) he who has stated that it is a property of man to be a

‘naturally civilized animal’ has rendered the property so as to be convertible

with its subject, without, however, showing its essence, and so the property

of man’ would in this respect have been correctly rendered.

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether he has rendered the property

without having placed the subject within its essence. For of properties, as also

of definitions, the first term to be rendered should be the genus, and then the

rest of it should be appended immediately afterwards, and should distinguish

its subject from other things. Hence a property which is not stated in this way

could not have been correctly rendered. Thus (e.g.) a man who has said that it

is  a  property  of  a  living  creature  to  ‘have  a  soul’  has  not  placed  ‘living

creature’ within its essence, and so the property of a living creature could not

have been correctly stated. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see

whether a man first places within its essence the subject whose property he is

rendering, and then appends the rest: for then the property will in this respect

have been correctly rendered. Thus (e.g.) he who has stated that is a property

of man to be an ‘animal capable of receiving knowledge’, has rendered the

property after placing the subject within its essence, and so the property of

‘man’ would in this respect have been correctly rendered.

<

div id="section45" class="section" title="4">4


The inquiry, then, whether the property has been correctly rendered or no,

should be made by these means. The question, on the other hand, whether

what is stated is or is not a property at all, you should examine from the

following points of view. For the commonplace arguments which establish

absolutely that the property is accurately stated will be the same as those that

constitute it a property at all: accordingly they will be described in the course

of them.

  Firstly, then, for destructive purposes, take a look at each subject of which

he has rendered the property, and see (e.g.) if it fails to belong to any of them

at all, or to be true of them in that particular respect, or to be a property of

each  of  them  in  respect  of  that  character  of  which  he  has  rendered  the

property: for then what is stated to be a property will not be a property. Thus,

for example, inasmuch as it is not true of the geometrician that he ‘cannot be

deceived by an argument’ (for a geometrician is deceived when his figure is

misdrawn), it could not be a property of the man of science that he is not

deceived by an argument. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see

whether  the  property  rendered  be  true  of  every  instance,  and  true  in  that

particular  respect:  for  then  what  is  stated  not  to  be  a  property  will  be  a

property. Thus, for example, in as much as the description ‘an animal capable

of receiving knowledge’ is true of every man, and true of him qua man, it

would  be  a  property  of  man  to  be  ‘an  animal  capable  of  receiving

knowledge’.  commonplace  rule  means-for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  the

description fails to be true of that of which the name is true; and if the name

fails  to  be  true  of  that  of  which  the  description  is  true:  for  constructive

purposes, on the other hand, see if the description too is predicated of that of

which the name is predicated, and if the name too is predicated of that of

which the description is predicated.]

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the description fails to apply to that to

which the name applies, and if the name fails to apply to that to which the

description applies: for then what is stated to be a property will not be a

property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as the description ‘a living being that partakes

of knowledge’ is true of God, while ‘man’ is not predicated of God, to be a

living being that partakes of knowledge’ could not be a property of man. For

constructive  purposes,  on  the  other  hand,  see  if  the  name  as  well  be

predicated  of  that  of  which  the  description  is  predicated,  and  if  thedescription as well be predicated of that of which the name is predicated. For

then what is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus (e.g.) the

predicate ‘living creature’ is true of that of which ‘having a soul’ is true, and

‘having a soul’ is true of that of which the predicate ‘living creature’ is true;

and so ‘having a soul would be a property of ‘living creature’.

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  he  has  rendered  a  subject  as  a

property of that which is described as ‘in the subject’: for then what has been

stated to be a property will not be a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as he who

has  rendered  ‘fire’  as  the  property  of  ‘the  body  with  the  most  rarefied

particles’,  has  rendered  the  subject  as  the  property  of  its  predicate,  ‘fire’

could not be a property of ‘the body with the most rarefied particles’. The

reason why the subject will not be a property of that which is found in the

subject is this, that then the same thing will be the property of a number of

things that are specifically different. For the same thing has quite a number of

specifically different predicates that belong to it alone, and the subject will be

a property of all of these, if any one states the property in this way. For

constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if he has rendered what is found

in the subject as a property of the subject: for then what has been stated not to

be a property will be a property, if it be predicated only of the things of which

it has been stated to be the property. Thus (e.g.) he who has said that it is a

property of ‘earth’ to be ‘specifically the heaviest body’ has rendered of the

subject as its property something that is said of the thing in question alone,

and is said of it in the manner in which a property is predicated, and so the

property of earth would have been rightly stated.

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  he  has  rendered  the  property  as

partaken of: for then what is stated to be a property will not be a property. For

an attribute of which the subject partakes is a constituent part of its essence:

and an attribute of that kind would be a differentia applying to some one

species.  E.g.  inasmuch  as  he  who  has  said  that  ‘walking  on  two  feet’  is

property of man has rendered the property as partaken of, ‘walking on two

feet’ could not be a property of ‘man’. For constructive purposes, on the other

hand,  see  if  he  has  avoided  rendering  the  property  as  partaken  of,  or  as

showing the essence, though the subject is predicated convertibly with it: for

then what is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus (e.g.) he who

has stated that to be ‘naturally sentient’ is a property of ‘animal’ has rendered

the property neither as partaken of nor as showing the essence, though the

subject is predicated convertibly with it; and so to be ‘naturally sentient’would be a property of ‘animal’.

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the property cannot possibly belong

simultaneously, but must belong either as posterior or as prior to the attribute

described in the name: for then what is stated to be a property will not be a

property either never, or not always. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is possible for

the attribute ‘walking through the market-place’ to belong to an object as

prior and as posterior to the attribute ‘man’, ‘walking through the market-

place’  could  not  be  a  property  of  ‘man’  either  never,  or  not  always.  For

constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if it always and of necessity

belongs simultaneously, without being either a definition or a differentia: for

then what is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus (e.g.) the

attribute ‘an animal capable of receiving knowledge’ always and of necessity

belongs simultaneously with the attribute ‘man’, and is neither differentia nor

definition of its subject, and so ‘an animal capable of receiving knowledge’

would be a property of ‘man’.

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the same thing fails to be a property

of things that are the same as the subject, so far as they are the same: for then

what is stated to be a property will not be a property. Thus, for example,

inasmuch as it is no property of a ‘proper object of pursuit’ to ‘appear good to

certain persons’, it could not be a property of the ‘desirable’ either to ‘appear

good to certain persons’: for ‘proper object of pursuit’ and ‘desirable’ mean

the same. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the same thing

be a property of something that is the same as the subject, in so far as it is the

same. For then is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus (e.g.)

inasmuch as it is called a property of a man, in so far as he is a man, ‘to have

a tripartite soul’, it would also be a property of a mortal, in so far as he is a

mortal, to have a tripartite soul. This commonplace rule is useful also in

dealing with Accident: for the same attributes ought either to belong or not

belong to the same things, in so far as they are the same.

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the property of things that are the

same in kind as the subject fails to be always the same in kind as the alleged

property: for then neither will what is stated to be the property of the subject

in question. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as a man and a horse are the same in kind,

and it is not always a property of a horse to stand by its own initiative, it

could not be a property of a man to move by his own initiative; for to stand

and to move by his own initiative are the same in kind, because they belong

to each of them in so far as each is an ‘animal’. For constructive purposes, onthe other hand, see if of things that are the same in kind as the subject the

property that is the same as the alleged property is always true: for then what

is stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus (e.g.) since it is a

property of man to be a ‘walking biped,’ it would also be a property of a bird

to be a ‘flying biped’: for each of these is the same in kind, in so far as the

one pair have the sameness of species that fall under the same genus, being

under the genus ‘animal’, while the other pair have that of differentiae of the

genus, viz. of ‘animal’. This commonplace rule is deceptive whenever one of

the properties mentioned belongs to some one species only while the other

belongs to many, as does ‘walking quadruped’.

  Inasmuch as ‘same’ and ‘different’ are terms used in several senses, it is a

job to render to a sophistical questioner a property that belongs to one thing

and  that  only.  For  an  attribute  that  belongs  to  something  qualified  by  an

accident will also belong to the accident taken along with the subject which it

qualifies; e.g. an attribute that belongs to ‘man’ will belong also to ‘white

man’, if there be a white man, and one that belongs to ‘white man’ will

belong also to ‘man’. One might, then, bring captious criticism against the

majority of properties, by representing the subject as being one thing in itself,

and another thing when combined with its accident, saying, for example, that

‘man’ is one thing, and white man’ another, and moreover by representing as

different a certain state and what is called after that state. For an attribute that

belongs to the state will belong also to what is called after that state, and one

that belongs to what is called after a state will belong also to the state: e.g.

inasmuch as the condition of the scientist is called after his science, it could

not be a property of ‘science’ that it is ‘incontrovertible by argument’; for

then the scientist also will be incontrovertible by argument. For constructive

purposes,  however,  you  should  say  that  the  subject  of  an  accident  is  not

absolutely different from the accident taken along with its subject; though it

is called ‘another’ thing because the mode of being of the two is different: for

it is not the same thing for a man to be a man and for a white man to be a

white man. Moreover, you should take a look along at the inflections, and say

that the description of the man of science is wrong: one should say not ‘it’ but

‘he  is  incontrovertible  by  argument’;  while  the  description  of  Science  is

wrong too: one should say not ‘it’ but ‘she is incontrovertible by argument’.

For against an objector who sticks at nothing the defence should stick at

nothing.

<div id="section46" class="section" title="5">


5


Next, for destructive purposes, see if, while intending to render an attribute

that naturally belongs, he states it in his language in such a way as to indicate

one that invariably belongs: for then it would be generally agreed that what

has been stated to be a property is upset. Thus (e.g.) the man who has said

that ‘biped’ is a property of man intends to render the attribute that naturally

belongs, but his expression actually indicates one that invariably belongs:

accordingly, ‘biped’ could not be a property of man: for not every man is

possessed of two feet. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if he

intends to render the property that naturally belongs, and indicates it in that

way in his language: for then the property will not be upset in this respect.

Thus (e.g.) he who renders as a property of ‘man’ the phrase ‘an animal

capable of receiving knowledge’ both intends, and by his language indicates,

the property that belongs by nature, and so ‘an animal capable of receiving

knowledge’ would not be upset or shown in that respect not to be a property

of man.

  Moreover, as regards all the things that are called as they are primarily

after something else, or primarily in themselves, it is a job to render the

property of such things. For if you render a property as belonging to the

subject that is so called after something else, then it will be true of its primary

subject as well; whereas if you state it of its primary subject, then it will be

predicated also of the thing that is so called after this other. Thus (e.g.) if any

one renders , coloured’ as the property of ‘surface’, ‘coloured’ will be true of

body as well; whereas if he render it of ‘body’, it will be predicated also of

‘surface’.  Hence  the  name  as  well  will  not  be  true  of  that  of  which  the

description is true.

In the case of some properties it mostly happens that some error is incurred

because of a failure to define how as well as to what things the property is

stated to belong. For every one tries to render as the property of a thing

something that belongs to it either naturally, as ‘biped’ belongs to ‘man’, or

actually, as ‘having four fingers’ belongs to a particular man, or specifically,

as ‘consisting of most rarefied particles’ belongs to ‘fire’, or absolutely, as

‘life’ to ‘living being’, or one that belongs to a thing only as called after

something else, as ‘wisdom’ to the ‘soul’, or on the other hand primarily, as‘wisdom’ to the ‘rational faculty’, or because the thing is in a certain state, as

‘incontrovertible by argument’ belongs to a ‘scientist’ (for simply and solely

by  reason  of  his  being  in  a  certain  state  will  he  be  ‘incontrovertible  by

argument’),  or  because  it  is  the  state  possessed  by  something,  as

‘incontrovertible by argument’ belongs to ‘science’, or because it is partaken

of, as ‘sensation’ belongs to ‘animal’ (for other things as well have sensation,

e.g.  man,  but  they  have  it  because  they  already  partake  of  ‘animal’),  or

because it partakes of something else, as ‘life’ belongs to a particular kind of

‘living being’. Accordingly he makes a mistake if he has failed to add the

word ‘naturally’, because what belongs naturally may fail to belong to the

thing to which it naturally belongs, as (e.g.) it belongs to a man to have two

feet: so too he errs if he does not make a definite proviso that he is rendering

what actually belongs, because one day that attribute will not be what it now

is, e.g. the man’s possession of four fingers. So he errs if he has not shown

that he states a thing to be such and such primarily, or that he calls it so after

something else, because then its name too will not be true of that of which the

description  is  true,  as  is  the  case  with  ‘coloured’,  whether  rendered  as  a

property of ‘surface’ or of ‘body’. So he errs if he has not said beforehand

that he has rendered a property to a thing either because that thing possesses a

state, or because it is a state possessed by something; because then it will not

be a property. For, supposing he renders the property to something as being a

state possessed, it will belong to what possesses that state; while supposing

he renders it to what possesses the state, it will belong to the state possessed,

as did ‘incontrovertible by argument’ when stated as a property of ‘science’

or of the ‘scientist’. So he errs if he has not indicated beforehand that the

property  belongs  because  the  thing  partakes  of,  or  is  partaken  of  by,

something; because then the property will belong to certain other things as

well. For if he renders it because its subject is partaken of, it will belong to

the things which partake of it; whereas if he renders it because its subject

partakes of something else, it will belong to the things partaken of, as (e.g.) if

he were to state ‘life’ to be a property of a ‘particular kind of living being’, or

just of ‘living being. So he errs if he has not expressly distinguished the

property that belongs specifically, because then it will belong only to one of

the things that fall under the term of which he states the property: for the

superlative belongs only to one of them, e.g. ‘lightest’ as applied to ‘fire’.

Sometimes, too, a man may even add the word ‘specifically’, and still make a

mistake. For the things in question should all be of one species, whenever theword ‘specifically’ is added: and in some cases this does not occur, as it does

not, in fact, in the case of fire. For fire is not all of one species; for live coals

and flame and light are each of them ‘fire’, but are of different species. The

reason why, whenever ‘specifically’ is added, there should not be any species

other than the one mentioned, is this, that if there be, then the property in

question will belong to some of them in a greater and to others in a less

degree, as happens with ‘consisting of most rarefied particles’ in the case of

fire: for ‘light’ consists of more rarefied particles than live coals and flame.

And this should not happen unless the name too be predicated in a greater

degree of that of which the description is truer; otherwise the rule that where

the  description  is  truer  the  name  too  should  be  truer  is  not  fulfilled.

Moreover, in addition to this, the same attribute will be the property both of

the term which has it absolutely and of that element therein which has it in

the highest degree, as is the condition of the property ‘consisting of most

rarefied particles’ in the case of ‘fire’: for this same attribute will be the

property of ‘light’ as well: for it is ‘light’ that ‘consists of the most rarefied

particles’. If, then, any one else renders a property in this way one should

attack it; for oneself, one should not give occasion for this objection, but

should define in what manner one states the property at the actual time of

making the statement.

Next, for destructive purposes, see if he has stated a thing as a property of

itself: for then what has been stated to be a property will not be a property.

For a thing itself always shows its own essence, and what shows the essence

is not a property but a definition. Thus (e.g.) he who has said that ‘becoming’

is a property of ‘beautiful’ has rendered the term as a property of itself (for

‘beautiful’ and ‘becoming’ are the same); and so ‘becoming’ could not be a

property of ‘beautiful’. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if he

has avoided rendering a thing as a property of itself, but has yet stated a

convertible predicate: for then what is stated not to be a property will be a

property. Thus he who has stated ‘animate substance’ as a property of ‘living-

creature’  has  not  stated  ‘living-creature’  as  a  property  of  itself,  but  has

rendered  a  convertible  predicate,  so  that  ‘animate  substance’  would  be  a

property of ‘living-creature’.

Next, in the case of things consisting of like parts, you should look and see,

for destructive purposes, if the property of the whole be not true of the part,

or if that of the part be not predicated of the whole: for then what has been

stated to be the property will not be a property. In some cases it happens thatthis is so: for sometimes in rendering a property in the case of things that

consist of like parts a man may have his eye on the whole, while sometimes

he may address himself to what is predicated of the part: and then in neither

case  will  it  have  been  rightly  rendered.  Take  an  instance  referring  to  the

whole: the man who has said that it is a property of the ‘sea’ to be ‘the largest

volume of salt water’, has stated the property of something that consists of

like parts, but has rendered an attribute of such a kind as is not true of the part

(for a particular sea is not ‘the largest volume of salt water’); and so the

largest volume of salt water’ could not be a property of the ‘sea’. Now take

one referring to the part: the man who has stated that it is a property of ‘air’

to be ‘breathable’ has stated the property of something that consists of like

parts, but he has stated an attribute such as, though true of some air, is still

not predicable of the whole (for the whole of the air is not breathable); and so

‘breathable’ could not be a property of ‘air’. For constructive purposes, on

the other hand, see whether, while it is true of each of the things with similar

parts, it is on the other hand a property of them taken as a collective whole:

for then what has been stated not to be a property will be a property. Thus

(e.g.) while it is true of earth everywhere that it naturally falls downwards, it

is a property of the various particular pieces of earth taken as ‘the Earth’, so

that it would be a property of ‘earth’ ‘naturally to fall downwards’.

<

div id="section47" class="section" title="6">


6


Next, look from the point of view of the respective opposites, and first (a)

from that of the contraries, and see, for destructive purposes, if the contrary

of the term rendered fails to be a property of the contrary subject. For then

neither  will  the  contrary  of  the  first  be  a  property  of  the  contrary  of  the

second. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as injustice is contrary to justice, and the lowest

evil to the highest good, but ‘to be the highest good’ is not a property of

‘justice’,  therefore  ‘to  be  the  lowest  evil’  could  not  be  a  property  of

‘injustice’. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the contrary is

the property of the contrary: for then also the contrary of the first will be the

property  of  the  contrary  of  the  second.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  evil  is

contrary to good, and objectionable to desirable, and ‘desirable’ is a property

of ‘good’, ‘objectionable’ would be a property of ‘evil’.  Secondly (h) look from the point of view of relative opposites and see, for

destructive  purposes,  if  the  correlative  of  the  term  rendered  fails  to  be  a

property of the correlative of the subject: for then neither will the correlative

of  the  first  be  a  property  of  the  correlative  of  the  second.  Thus  (e.g.)

inasmuch as ‘double’ is relative to ‘half’, and ‘in excess’ to ‘exceeded’, while

‘in excess’ is not a property of ‘double’, exceeded’ could not be a property of

‘half’. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the correlative of

the alleged property is a property of the subject’s correlative: for then also the

correlative of the first will be a property of the correlative of the second: e.g.

inasmuch as ‘double’ is relative to ‘half’, and the proportion 1:2 is relative to

the proportion 2:1, while it is a property of ‘double’ to be ‘in the proportion

of 2 to 1’, it would be a property of ‘half’ to be ‘in the proportion of 1 to 2’.

  Thirdly (c) for destructive purposes, see if an attribute described in terms

of a state (X) fails to be a property of the given state (Y): for then neither will

the attribute described in terms of the privation (of X) be a property of the

privation (of Y). Also if, on the other hand, an attribute described in terms of

the privation (of X) be not a property of the given privation (of Y), neither

will the attribute described in terms of the state (X) be a property of the state

(Y). Thus, for example, inasmuch as it is not predicated as a property of

‘deafness’  to  be  a  ‘lack  of  sensation’,  neither  could  it  be  a  property  of

‘hearing’ to be a ‘sensation’. For constructive purposes, on the other hand,

see if an attribute described in terms of a state (X) is a property of the given

state (Y): for then also the attribute that is described in terms of the privation

(of  X)  will  be  a  property  of  the  privation  (of  Y).  Also,  if  an  attribute

described in terms of a privation (of X) be a property of the privation (of Y),

then also the attribute that is described in terms of the state (X) will be a

property of the state (Y). Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘to see’ is a property of

‘sight’, inasmuch as we have sight, ‘failure to see’ would be a property of

‘blindness’, inasmuch as we have not got the sight we should naturally have.

Next, look from the point of view of positive and negative terms; and first

(a)  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  predicates  taken  by  themselves.  This

common-place rule is useful only for a destructive purpose. Thus (e.g.) see if

the positive term or the attribute described in terms of it is a property of the

subject: for then the negative term or the attribute described in terms of it will

not be a property of the subject. Also if, on the other hand, the negative term

or the attribute described in terms of it is a property of the subject, then the

positive term or the attribute described in terms of it will not be a property ofthe  subject:  e.g.  inasmuch  as  ‘animate’  is  a  property  of  ‘living  creature’,

‘inanimate’ could not be a property of ‘living creature’.

  Secondly (b) look from the point of view of the predicates, positive or

negative, and their respective subjects; and see, for destructive purposes, if

the positive term falls to be a property of the positive subject: for then neither

will  the  negative  term  be  a  property  of  the  negative  subject.  Also,  if  the

negative term fails to be a property of the negative subject, neither will the

positive term be a property of the positive subject. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as

‘animal’ is not a property of ‘man’, neither could ‘not-animal’ be a property

of ‘not-man’. Also if ‘not-animal’ seems not to be a property of ‘not-man’,

neither will ‘animal’ be a property of ‘man’. For constructive purposes, on

the other hand, see if the positive term is a property of the positive subject:

for then the negative term will be a property of the negative subject as well.

Also if the negative term be a property of the negative subject, the positive

will be a property of the positive as well. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is a

property of ‘not-living being’ ‘not to live’, it would be a property of ‘living

being’ ‘to live’: also if it seems to be a property of ‘living being’ ‘to live’, it

will also seem to be a property of ‘not-living being’ ‘not to live’.

  Thirdly  (c)  look  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  subjects  taken  by

themselves, and see, for destructive purposes, if the property rendered is a

property of the positive subject: for then the same term will not be a property

of the negative subject as well. Also, if the term rendered be a property of the

negative  subject,  it  will  not  be  a  property  of  the  positive.  Thus  (e.g.)

inasmuch as ‘animate’ is a property of ‘living creature’, ‘animate’ could not

be a property of ‘not-living creature’. For constructive purposes, on the other

hand, if the term rendered fails to be a property of the affirmative subject it

would be a property of the negative. This commonplace rule is, however,

deceptive: for a positive term is not a property of a negative, or a negative of

a positive. For a positive term does not belong at all to a negative, while a

negative term, though it belongs to a positive, does not belong as a property.

Next, look from the point of view of the coordinate members of a division,

and  see,  for  destructive  purposes,  if  none  of  the  co-ordinate  members

(parallel with the property rendered) be a property of any of the remaining set

of co-ordinate members (parallel with the subject): for then neither will the

term stated be a property of that of which it is stated to be a property. Thus

(e.g.) inasmuch as ‘sensible living being’ is not a property of any of the other

living beings, ‘intelligible living being’ could not be a property of God. Forconstructive purposes, on the other hand, see if some one or other of the

remaining co-ordinate members (parallel with the property rendered) be a

property of each of these co-ordinate members (parallel with the subject): for

then the remaining one too will be a property of that of which it has been

stated  not  to  be  a  property.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  property  of

‘wisdom’ to be essentially ‘the natural virtue of the rational faculty’, then,

taking each of the other virtues as well in this way, it would be a property of

‘temperance’ to be essentially ‘the natural virtue of the faculty of desire’.

Next, look from the point of view of the inflexions, and see, for destructive

purposes, if the inflexion of the property rendered fails to be a property of the

inflexion of the subject: for then neither will the other inflexion be a property

of the other inflexion. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘beautifully’ is not a property

of ‘justly’, neither could ‘beautiful’ be a property of ‘just’. For constructive

purposes, on the other hand, see if the inflexion of the property rendered is a

property of the inflexion of the subject: for then also the other inflexion will

be a property of the other inflexion. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘walking biped’

is a property of man, it would also be any one’s property ‘as a man’ to be

described  ‘as  a  walking  biped’.  Not  only  in  the  case  of  the  actual  term

mentioned  should  one  look  at  the  inflexions,  but  also  in  the  case  of  its

opposites, just as has been laid down in the case of the former commonplace

rules  as  well.’  Thus,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  the  inflexion  of  the

opposite of the property rendered fails to be the property of the inflexion of

the opposite of the subject: for then neither will the inflexion of the other

opposite  be  a  property  of  the  inflexion  of  the  other  opposite.  Thus  (e.g.)

inasmuch as ‘well’ is not a property of ‘justly’, neither could ‘badly’ be a

property of ‘unjustly’. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the

inflexion of the opposite of the property originally suggested is a property of

the inflexion of the opposite of the original subject: for then also the inflexion

of the other opposite will be a property of the inflexion of the other opposite.

Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘best’ is a property of ‘the good’, ‘worst’ also will be

a property of ‘the evil’.

<

div id="section48" class="section" title="7">


7


Next, look from the point of view of things that are in a like relation, andsee, for destructive purposes, if what is in a relation like that of the property

rendered fails to be a property of what is in a relation like that of the subject:

for then neither will what is in a relation like that of the first be a property of

what is in a relation like that of the second. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as the

relation of the builder towards the production of a house is like that of the

doctor towards the production of health, and it is not a property of a doctor to

produce health, it could not be a property of a builder to produce a house. For

constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if what is in a relation like that

of the property rendered is a property of what is in a relation like that of the

subject: for then also what is in a relation like that of the first will be a

property of what is in a relation like that of the second. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch

as the relation of a doctor towards the possession of ability to produce health

is like that of a trainer towards the possession of ability to produce vigour,

and it is a property of a trainer to possess the ability to produce vigour, it

would be a property of a doctor to possess the ability to produce health.

Next look from the point of view of things that are identically related, and

see,  for  destructive  purposes,  if  the  predicate  that  is  identically  related

towards two subjects fails to be a property of the subject which is identically

related to it as the subject in question; for then neither will the predicate that

is identically related to both subjects be a property of the subject which is

identically related to it as the first. If, on the other hand, the predicate which

is identically related to two subjects is the property of the subject which is

identically related to it as the subject in question, then it will not be a property

of  that  of  which  it  has  been  stated  to  be  a  property.  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as

prudence  is  identically  related  to  both  the  noble  and  the  base,  since  it  is

knowledge  of  each  of  them,  and  it  is  not  a  property  of  prudence  to  be

knowledge  of  the  noble,  it  could  not  be  a  property  of  prudence  to  be

knowledge of the base. If, on the other hand, it is a property of prudence to be

the  knowledge  of  the  noble,  it  could  not  be  a  property  of  it  to  be  the

knowledge  of  the  base.]  For  it  is  impossible  for  the  same  thing  to  be  a

property of more than one subject. For constructive purposes, on the other

hand, this commonplace rule is of no use: for what is ‘identically related’ is a

single predicate in process of comparison with more than one subject.

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the predicate qualified by the verb ‘to

be’ fails to be a property of the subject qualified by the verb ‘to be’: for then

neither will the destruction of the one be a property of the other qualified by

the verb ‘to be destroyed’, nor will the ‘becoming’the one be a property ofthe other qualified by the verb ‘to become’. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it is not a

property of ‘man’ to be an animal, neither could it be a property of becoming

a man to become an animal; nor could the destruction of an animal be a

property of the destruction of a man. In the same way one should derive

arguments also from ‘becoming’ to ‘being’ and ‘being destroyed’, and from

‘being destroyed’ to ‘being’ and to ‘becoming’ exactly as they have just been

given from ‘being’ to ‘becoming’ and ‘being destroyed’. For constructive

purposes, on the other hand, see if the subject set down as qualified by the

verb ‘to be’ has the predicate set down as so qualified, as its property: for

then also the subject qualified by the very ‘to become’ will have the predicate

qualified by ‘to become’ as its property, and the subject qualified by the verb

to be destroyed’ will have as its property the predicate rendered with this

qualification. Thus, for example, inasmuch as it is a property of man to be a

mortal, it would be a property of becoming a man to become a mortal, and

the destruction of a mortal would be a property of the destruction of a man. In

the same way one should derive arguments also from ‘becoming’ and ‘being

destroyed’  both  to  ‘being’  and  to  the  conclusions  that  follow  from  them,

exactly as was directed also for the purpose of destruction.

Next take a look at the ‘idea’ of the subject stated, and see, for destructive

purposes, if the suggested property fails to belong to the ‘idea’ in question, or

fails to belong to it in virtue of that character which causes it to bear the

description of which the property was rendered: for then what has been stated

to  be  a  property  will  not  be  a  property.  Thus  (e.g.)  inasmuch  as  ‘being

motionless’ does not belong to ‘man-himself’ qua ‘man’, but qua ‘idea’, it

could not be a property of ‘man’ to be motionless. For constructive purposes,

on the other hand, see if the property in question belongs to the idea, and

belongs to it in that respect in virtue of which there is predicated of it that

character  of  which  the  predicate  in  question  has  been  stated  not  to  be  a

property:  for  then  what  has  been  stated  not  to  be  a  property  will  be  a

property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it belongs to ‘living-creature-itself’ to be

compounded of soul and body, and further this belongs to it qua ‘living-

creature’, it would be a property of ‘living-creature’ to be compounded of

soul and body.

<

div id="section49" class="section" title="8">


8Next look from the point of view of greater and less degrees, and first (a)

for destructive purposes, see if what is more-P fails to be a property of what

is more-S: for then neither will what is less-P be a property of what is less-S,

nor least-P of least-S, nor most-P of most-S, nor P simply of S simply. Thus

(e.g.) inasmuch as being more highly coloured is not a property of what is

more a body, neither could being less highly coloured be a property of what

is  less  a  body,  nor  being  coloured  be  a  property  of  body  at  all.  For

constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if what is more-P is a property

of what is more-S: for then also what is less-P will be a property of what is

less  S,  and  least-P  of  least-S,  and  most-P  of  most-S,  and  P  simply  of  S

simply. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as a higher degree of sensation is a property of

a higher degree of life, a lower degree of sensation also would be a property

of a lower degree of life, and the highest of the highest and the lowest of the

lowest degree, and sensation simply of life simply.

  Also you should look at the argument from a simple predication to the

same qualified types of predication, and see, for destructive purposes, if P

simply fails to be a property of S simply; for then neither will more-P be a

property of more-S, nor less-P of less-S, nor most-P of most-S, nor least-P of

least-S. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘virtuous’ is not a property of ‘man’, neither

could  ‘more  virtuous’  be  a  property  of  what  is  ‘more  human’.  For

constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if P simply is a property of S

simply: for then more P also will be a property of more-S, and less-P of less-

S, and least-P of least-S, and most-P of most-S. Thus (e.g.) a tendency to

move upwards by nature is a property of fire, and so also a greater tendency

to move upwards by nature would be a property of what is more fiery. In the

same way too one should look at all these matters from the point of view of

the others as well.

  Secondly (b) for destructive purposes, see if the more likely property fails

to be a property of the more likely subject: for then neither will the less likely

property be a property of the less likely subject. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as

‘perceiving’ is more likely to be a property of ‘animal’ than ‘knowing’ of

‘man’, and ‘perceiving’ is not a property of ‘animal’, ‘knowing’ could not be

a property of ‘man’. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if the

less likely property is a property of the less likely subject; for then too the

more likely property will be a property of the more likely subject. Thus (e.g.)

inasmuch as ‘to be naturally civilized’ is less likely to be a property of man

than  ‘to  live’  of  an  animal,  and  it  is  a  property  of  man  to  be  naturallycivilized, it would be a property of animal to live.

  Thirdly  (c)  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  the  predicate  fails  to  be  a

property of that of which it is more likely to be a property: for then neither

will it be a property of that of which it is less likely to be a property: while if

it is a property of the former, it will not be a property of the latter. Thus (e.g.)

inasmuch as ‘to be coloured’ is more likely to be a property of a ‘surface’

than of a ‘body’, and it is not a property of a surface, ‘to be coloured’ could

not be a property of ‘body’; while if it is a property of a ‘surface’, it could not

be a property of a ‘body’. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, this

commonplace rule is not of any use: for it is impossible for the same thing to

be a property of more than one thing.

  Fourthly (d) for destructive purposes, see if what is more likely to be a

property of a given subject fails to be its property: for then neither will what

is less likely to be a property of it be its property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as

‘sensible’ is more likely than ‘divisible’ to be a property of ‘animal’, and

‘sensible’ is not a property of animal, ‘divisible’ could not be a property of

animal. For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if what is less likely

to be a property of it is a property; for then what is more likely to be a

property of it will be a property as well. Thus, for example, inasmuch as

‘sensation’  is  less  likely  to  be  a  property  of  ‘animal’  than  life’,  and

‘sensation’ is a property of animal, ‘life’ would be a property of animal.

Next, look from the point of view of the attributes that belong in a like

manner,  and  first  (a)  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  what  is  as  much  a

property fails to be a property of that of which it is as much a property: for

then neither will that which is as much a property as it be a property of that of

which it is as much a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘desiring’ is as much

a property of the faculty of desire as reasoning’ is a property of the faculty of

reason, and desiring is not a property of the faculty of desire, reasoning could

not be a property of the faculty of reason. For constructive purposes, on the

other hand, see if what is as much a property is a property of that of which it

is as much a property: for then also what is as much a property as it will be a

property of that of which it is as much a property. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as it

is as much a property of ‘the faculty of reason’ to be ‘the primary seat of

wisdom’  as  it  is  of  ‘the  faculty  of  desire’  to  be  ‘the  primary  seat  of

temperance’, and it is a property of the faculty of reason to be the primary

seat of wisdom, it would be a property of the faculty of desire to be the

primary seat of temperance.  Secondly (b) for destructive purposes, see if what is as much a property of

anything fails to be a property of it: for then neither will what is as much a

property be a property of it. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘seeing’ is as much a

property of man as ‘hearing’, and ‘seeing’ is not a property of man, ‘hearing’

could not be a property of man. For constructive purposes, on the other hand,

see if what is as much a property of it is its property: for then what is as much

a property of it as the former will be its property as well. Thus (e.g.) it is as

much a property of the soul to be the primary possessor of a part that desires

as of a part that reasons, and it is a property of the soul to be the primary

possessor of a part that desires, and so it be a property of the soul to be the

primary possessor of a part that reasons.

  Thirdly (c) for destructive purposes, see if it fails to be a property of that of

which it is as much a property: for then neither will it be a property of that of

which it is as much a property as of the former, while if it be a property of the

former, it will not be a property of the other. Thus (e.g.) inasmuch as ‘to

burn’ is as much a property of ‘flame’ as of ‘live coals’, and ‘to burn’ is not a

property of flame, ‘to burn’ could not be a property of live coals: while if it is

a property of flame, it could not be a property of live coals. For constructive

purposes, on the other hand, this commonplace rule is of no use.

The rule based on things that are in a like relation’ differs from the rule

based on attributes that belong in a like manner,’ because the former point is

secured by analogy, not from reflection on the belonging of any attribute,

while the latter is judged by a comparison based on the fact that an attribute

belongs.

Next, for destructive purposes, see if in rendering the property potentially,

he  has  also  through  that  potentiality  rendered  the  property  relatively  to

something that does not exist, when the potentiality in question cannot belong

to what does not exist: for then what is stated to be a property will not be a

property. Thus (e.g.) he who has said that ‘breathable’ is a property of ‘air’

has,  on  the  one  hand,  rendered  the  property  potentially  (for  that  is

‘breathable’ which is such as can be breathed), and on the other hand has also

rendered the property relatively to what does not exist:-for while air may

exist, even though there exist no animal so constituted as to breathe the air, it

is not possible to breathe it if no animal exist: so that it will not, either, be a

property of air to be such as can be breathed at a time when there exists no

animal such as to breathe it and so it follows that ‘breathable’ could not be a

property of air.For constructive purposes, see if in rendering the property potentially he

renders the property either relatively to something that exists, or to something

that does not exist, when the potentiality in question can belong to what does

not  exist:  for  then  what  has  been  stated  not  to  be  a  property  will  be  a

property. Thus e.g.) he who renders it as a property of ‘being’ to be ‘capable

of being acted upon or of acting’, in rendering the property potentially, has

rendered the property relatively to something that exists: for when ‘being’

exists, it will also be capable of being acted upon or of acting in a certain

way: so that to be ‘capable of being acted upon or of acting’ would be a

property of ‘being’.

Next,  for  destructive  purposes,  see  if  he  has  stated  the  property  in  the

superlative:  for  then  what  has  been  stated  to  be  a  property  will  not  be  a

property. For people who render the property in that way find that of the

object  of  which  the  description  is  true,  the  name  is  not  true  as  well:  for

though the object perish the description will continue in being none the less;

for it belongs most nearly to something that is in being. An example would be

supposing any one were to render ‘the lightest body’ as a property of ‘fire’:

for, though fire perish, there eh re will still be some form of body that is the

lightest,  so  that  ‘the  lightest  body’  could  not  be  a  property  of  fire.  For

constructive purposes, on the other hand, see if he has avoided rendering the

property in the superlative: for then the property will in this respect have been

property of man has not rendered the property correctly stated. Thus (e.g.)

inasmuch  as  he  in  the  superlative,  the  property  would  in  who  states  ‘a

naturally civilized animal’ as a this respect have been correctly stated.                                Topics, Book VI


Translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge


<

div id="book6" class="book" title="Book VI">


1


The discussion of Definitions falls into five parts. For you have to show

either (1) that it is not true at all to apply the expression as well to that to

which the term is applied (for the definition of Man ought to be true of every

man); or (2) that though the object has a genus, he has failed to put the object

defined into the genus, or to put it into the appropriate genus (for the framer

of a definition should first place the object in its genus, and then append its

differences:  for  of  all  the  elements  of  the  definition  the  genus  is  usually

supposed to be the principal mark of the essence of what is defined): or (3)

that the expression is not peculiar to the object (for, as we said above as well,

a definition ought to be peculiar): or else (4) see if, though he has observed

all the aforesaid cautions, he has yet failed to define the object, that is, to

express its essence. (5) It remains, apart from the foregoing, to see if he has

defined it, but defined it incorrectly.

  Whether, then, the expression be not also true of that of which the term is

true you should proceed to examine according to the commonplace rules that

relate to Accident. For there too the question is always ‘Is so and so true or

untrue?’: for whenever we argue that an accident belongs, we declare it to be

true, while whenever we argue that it does not belong, we declare it to be

untrue. If, again, he has failed to place the object in the appropriate genus, or

if the expression be not peculiar to the object, we must go on to examine the

case according to the commonplace rules that relate to genus and property.

It remains, then, to prescribe how to investigate whether the object has

been either not defined at all, or else defined incorrectly. First, then, we must

proceed to examine if it has been defined incorrectly: for with anything it is

easier to do it than to do it correctly. Clearly, then, more mistakes are made in

the  latter  task  on  account  of  its  greater  difficulty.  Accordingly  the  attackbecomes easier in the latter case than in the former.

  Incorrectness falls into two branches: (1) first, the use of obscure language

(for the language of a definition ought to be the very clearest possible, seeing

that  the  whole  purpose  of  rendering  it  is  to  make  something  known);

(secondly,  if  the  expression  used  be  longer  than  is  necessary:  for  all

additional matter in a definition is superfluous. Again, each of the aforesaid

branches is divided into a number of others.

<

div id="section51" class="section" title="2">


2


One commonplace rule, then, in regard to obscurity is, See if the meaning

intended  by  the  definition  involves  an  ambiguity  with  any  other,  e.g.

‘Becoming is a passage into being’, or ‘Health is the balance of hot and cold

elements’.  Here  ‘passage’  and  ‘balance’  are  ambiguous  terms:  it  is

accordingly not clear which of the several possible senses of the term he

intends to convey. Likewise also, if the term defined be used in different

senses and he has spoken without distinguishing between them: for then it is

not clear to which of them the definition rendered applies, and one can then

bring a captious objection on the ground that the definition does not apply to

all the things whose definition he has rendered: and this kind of thing is

particularly easy in the case where the definer does not see the ambiguity of

his  terms.  Or,  again,  the  questioner  may  himself  distinguish  the  various

senses of the term rendered in the definition, and then institute his argument

against each: for if the expression used be not adequate to the subject in any

of its senses, it is clear that he cannot have defined it in any sense aright.

  Another  rule  is,  See  if  he  has  used  a  metaphorical  expression,  as,  for

instance, if he has defined knowledge as ‘unsupplantable’, or the earth as a

‘nurse’,  or  temperance  as  a  ‘harmony’.  For  a  metaphorical  expression  is

always obscure. It is possible, also, to argue sophistically against the user of a

metaphorical expression as though he had used it in its literal sense: for the

definition  stated  will  not  apply  to  the  term  defined,  e.g.  in  the  case  of

temperance:  for  harmony  is  always  found  between  notes.  Moreover,  if

harmony be the genus of temperance, then the same object will occur in two

genera of which neither contains the other: for harmony does not contain

virtue, nor virtue harmony. Again, see if he uses terms that are unfamiliar, aswhen Plato describes the eye as ‘brow-shaded’, or a certain spider as poison-

fanged’, or the marrow as ‘boneformed’. For an unusual phrase is always

obscure.

  Sometimes a phrase is used neither ambiguously, nor yet metaphorically,

nor yet literally, as when the law is said to be the ‘measure’ or ‘image’ of the

things that are by nature just. Such phrases are worse than metaphor; for the

latter does make its meaning to some extent clear because of the likeness

involved;  for  those  who  use  metaphors  do  so  always  in  view  of  some

likeness: whereas this kind of phrase makes nothing clear; for there is no

likeness to justify the description ‘measure’ or ‘image’, as applied to the law,

nor is the law ordinarily so called in a literal sense. So then, if a man says that

the law is literally a ‘measure’ or an ‘image’, he speaks falsely: for an image

is something produced by imitation, and this is not found in the case of the

law. If, on the other hand, he does not mean the term literally, it is clear that

he has used an unclear expression, and one that is worse than any sort of

metaphorical expression.

  Moreover, see if from the expression used the definition of the contrary be

not clear; for definitions that have been correctly rendered also indicate their

contraries as well. Or, again, see if, when it is merely stated by itself, it is not

evident what it defines: just as in the works of the old painters, unless there

were an inscription, the figures used to be unrecognizable.

<

div id="section52" class="section" title="3">


3


If, then, the definition be not clear, you should proceed to examine on lines

such as these. If, on the other hand, he has phrased the definition redundantly,

first  of  all  look  and  see  whether  he  has  used  any  attribute  that  belongs

universally, either to real objects in general, or to all that fall under the same

genus as the object defined: for the mention of this is sure to be redundant.

For  the  genus  ought  to  divide  the  object  from  things  in  general,  and  the

differentia from any of the things contained in the same genus. Now any term

that  belongs  to  everything  separates  off  the  given  object  from  absolutely

nothing, while any that belongs to all the things that fall under the same

genus does not separate it off from the things contained in the same genus.

Any addition, then, of that kind will be pointless.Or see if, though the additional matter may be peculiar to the given term,

yet even when it is struck out the rest of the expression too is peculiar and

makes  clear  the  essence  of  the  term.  Thus,  in  the  definition  of  man,  the

addition ‘capable of receiving knowledge’ is superfluous; for strike it out,

and still the expression is peculiar and makes clear his essence. Speaking

generally, everything is superfluous upon whose removal the remainder still

makes the term that is being defined clear. Such, for instance, would also be

the definition of the soul, assuming it to be stated as a ‘self-moving number’;

for  the  soul  is  just  ‘the  self-moving’,  as  Plato  defined  it.  Or  perhaps  the

expression used, though appropriate, yet does not declare the essence, if the

word ‘number’ be eliminated. Which of the two is the real state of the case it

is difficult to determine clearly: the right way to treat the matter in all cases is

to  be  guided  by  convenience.  Thus  (e.g.)  it  is  said  that  the  definition  of

phlegm  is  the  ‘undigested  moisture  that  comes  first  off  food’.  Here  the

addition of the word ‘undigested’ is superfluous, seeing that ‘the first’ is one

and not many, so that even when undigested’ is left out the definition will

still be peculiar to the subject: for it is impossible that both phlegm and also

something else should both be the first to arise from the food. Or perhaps the

phlegm is not absolutely the first thing to come off the food, but only the first

of the undigested matters, so that the addition ‘undigested’ is required; for

stated the other way the definition would not be true unless the phlegm comes

first of all.

  Moreover,  see  if  anything  contained  in  the  definition  fails  to  apply  to

everything  that  falls  under  the  same  species:  for  this  sort  of  definition  is

worse  than  those  which  include  an  attribute  belonging  to  all  things

universally. For in that case, if the remainder of the expression be peculiar,

the whole too will be peculiar: for absolutely always, if to something peculiar

anything whatever that is true be added, the whole too becomes peculiar.

Whereas if any part of the expression do not apply to everything that falls

under the same species, it is impossible that the expression as a whole should

be peculiar: for it will not be predicated convertibly with the object; e.g. ‘a

walking biped animal six feet high’: for an expression of that kind is not

predicated convertibly with the term, because the attribute ‘six feet high’ does

not belong to everything that falls under the same species.

  Again, see if he has said the same thing more than once, saying (e.g.)

‘desire’  is  a  ‘conation  for  the  pleasant’.  For  ‘desire’  is  always  ‘for  the

pleasant’, so that what is the same as desire will also be ‘for the pleasant’.Accordingly our definition of desire becomes ‘conation-for-the-pleasant’: for

the  word  ‘desire’  is  the  exact  equivalent  of  the  words  ‘conation  for-the-

pleasant’, so that both alike will be ‘for the pleasant’. Or perhaps there is no

absurdity in this; for consider this instance:-Man is a biped’: therefore, what

is the same as man is a biped: but ‘a walking biped animal’ is the same as

man, and therefore walking biped animal is a biped’. But this involves no real

absurdity. For ‘biped’ is not a predicate of ‘walking animal’: if it were, then

we should certainly have ‘biped’ predicated twice of the same thing; but as a

matter of fact the subject said to be a biped is’a walking biped animal’, so

that the word ‘biped’ is only used as a predicate once. Likewise also in the

case of ‘desire’ as well: for it is not ‘conation’ that is said to be ‘for the

pleasant’, but rather the whole idea, so that there too the predication is only

made once. Absurdity results, not when the same word is uttered twice, but

when the same thing is more than once predicated of a subject; e.g. if he says,

like Xenocrates, that wisdom defines and contemplates reality:’ for definition

is  a  certain  type  of  contemplation,  so  that  by  adding  the  words  ‘and

contemplates’ over again he says the same thing twice over. Likewise, too,

those fail who say that ‘cooling’ is ‘the privation of natural heat’. For all

privation is a privation of some natural attribute, so that the addition of the

word ‘natural’ is superfluous: it would have been enough to say ‘privation of

heat’, for the word ‘privation’ shows of itself that the heat meant is natural

heat.

  Again, see if a universal have been mentioned and then a particular case of

it be added as well, e.g. ‘Equity is a remission of what is expedient and just’;

for what is just is a branch of what is expedient and is therefore included in

the  latter  term:  its  mention  is  therefore  redundant,  an  addition  of  the

particular after the universal has been already stated. So also, if he defines

‘medicine’ as ‘knowledge of what makes for health in animals and men’, or

‘the law’ as ‘the image of what is by nature noble and just’; for what is just is

a branch of what is noble, so that he says the same thing more than once.

<

div id="section53" class="section" title="4">


4


  Whether, then, a man defines a thing correctly or incorrectly you should

proceed to examine on these and similar lines. But whether he has mentionedand defined its essence or no, should be examined as follows: First of all, see

if he has failed to make the definition through terms that are prior and more

intelligible. For the reason why the definition is rendered is to make known

the term stated, and we make things known by taking not any random terms,

but such as are prior and more intelligible, as is done in demonstrations (for

so it is with all teaching and learning); accordingly, it is clear that a man who

does not define through terms of this kind has not defined at all. Otherwise,

there will be more than one definition of the same thing: for clearly he who

defines through terms that are prior and more intelligible has also framed a

definition, and a better one, so that both would then be definitions of the

same object. This sort of view, however, does not generally find acceptance:

for of each real object the essence is single: if, then, there are to be a number

of definitions of the same thing, the essence of the object will be the same as

it is represented to be in each of the definitions, and these representations are

not the same, inasmuch as the definitions are different. Clearly, then, any one

who has not defined a thing through terms that are prior and more intelligible

has not defined it at all.

The statement that a definition has not been made through more intelligible

terms may be understood in two senses, either supposing that its terms are

absolutely less intelligible, or supposing that they are less intelligible to us:

for either sense is possible. Thus absolutely the prior is more intelligible than

the posterior, a point, for instance, than a line, a line than a plane, and a plane

than a solid; just as also a unit is more intelligible than a number; for it is the

prius  and  starting-point  of  all  number.  Likewise,  also,  a  letter  is  more

intelligible  than  a  syllable.  Whereas  to  us  it  sometimes  happens  that  the

converse is the case: for the solid falls under perception most of all-more than

a plane-and a plane more than a line, and a line more than a point; for most

people learn things like the former earlier than the latter; for any ordinary

intelligence  can  grasp  them,  whereas  the  others  require  an  exact  and

exceptional understanding.

  Absolutely, then, it is better to try to make what is posterior known through

what is prior, inasmuch as such a way of procedure is more scientific. Of

course, in dealing with persons who cannot recognize things through terms of

that kind, it may perhaps be necessary to frame the expression through terms

that are intelligible to them. Among definitions of this kind are those of a

point, a line, and a plane, all of which explain the prior by the posterior; for

they say that a point is the limit of a line, a line of a plane, a plane of a solid.One must, however, not fail to observe that those who define in this way

cannot show the essential nature of the term they define, unless it so happens

that the same thing is more intelligible both to us and also absolutely, since a

correct definition must define a thing through its genus and its differentiae,

and these belong to the order of things which are absolutely more intelligible

than, and prior to, the species. For annul the genus and differentia, and the

species too is annulled, so that these are prior to the species. They are also

more intelligible; for if the species be known, the genus and differentia must

of necessity be known as well (for any one who knows what a man is knows

also what ‘animal’ and ‘walking’ are), whereas if the genus or the differentia

be known it does not follow of necessity that the species is known as well:

thus  the  species  is  less  intelligible.  Moreover,  those  who  say  that  such

definitions, viz. those which proceed from what is intelligible to this, that, or

the other man, are really and truly definitions, will have to say that there are

several definitions of one and the same thing. For, as it happens, different

things are more intelligible to different people, not the same things to all; and

so a different definition would have to be rendered to each several person, if

the definition is to be constructed from what is more intelligible to particular

individuals.  Moreover,  to  the  same  people  different  things  are  more

intelligible at different times; first of all the objects of sense; then, as they

become  more  sharpwitted,  the  converse;  so  that  those  who  hold  that  a

definition ought to be rendered through what is more intelligible to particular

individuals would not have to render the same definition at all times even to

the same person. It is clear, then, that the right way to define is not through

terms of that kind, but through what is absolutely more intelligible: for only

in  this  way  could  the  definition  come  always  to  be  one  and  the  same.

Perhaps, also, what is absolutely intelligible is what is intelligible, not to all,

but  to  those  who  are  in  a  sound  state  of  understanding,  just  as  what  is

absolutely healthy is what is healthy to those in a sound state of body. All

such points as this ought to be made very precise, and made use of in the

course of discussion as occasion requires. The demolition of a definition will

most surely win a general approval if the definer happens to have framed his

expression  neither  from  what  is  absolutely  more  intelligible  nor  yet  from

what is so to us.

One form, then, of the failure to work through more intelligible terms is the

exhibition of the prior through the posterior, as we remarked before.’ Another

form occurs if we find that the definition has been rendered of what is at restand definite through what is indefinite and in motion: for what is still and

definite is prior to what is indefinite and in motion.

Of the failure to use terms that are prior there are three forms:

(1) The first is when an opposite has been defined through its opposite,

e.g.i. good through evil: for opposites are always simultaneous by nature.

Some people think, also, that both are objects of the same science, so that the

one is not even more intelligible than the other. One must, however, observe

that it is perhaps not possible to define some things in any other way, e.g. the

double without the half, and all the terms that are essentially relative: for in

all  such  cases  the  essential  being  is  the  same  as  a  certain  relation  to

something, so that it is impossible to understand the one term without the

other,  and  accordingly  in  the  definition  of  the  one  the  other  too  must  be

embraced. One ought to learn up all such points as these, and use them as

occasion may seem to require.

(2)  Another  is-if  he  has  used  the  term  defined  itself.  This  passes

unobserved when the actual name of the object is not used, e.g. supposing

any one had defined the sun as a star that appears by day’. For in bringing in

‘day’ he brings in the sun. To detect errors of this sort, exchange the word for

its definition, e.g. the definition of ‘day’ as the ‘passage of the sun over the

earth’. Clearly, whoever has said ‘the passage of the sun over the earth’ has

said ‘the sun’, so that in bringing in the ‘day’ he has brought in the sun.

(3) Again, see if he has defined one coordinate member of a division by

another, e.g. ‘an odd number’ as ‘that which is greater by one than an even

number’. For the co-ordinate members of a division that are derived from the

same genus are simultaneous by nature and ‘odd’ and ‘even’ are such terms:

for both are differentiae of number.

  Likewise also, see if he has defined a superior through a subordinate term,

e.g. ‘An “even number” is “a number divisible into halves”’, or ‘”the good”

is a “state of virtue” ‘. For ‘half’ is derived from ‘two’, and ‘two’ is an even

number: virtue also is a kind of good, so that the latter terms are subordinate

to the former. Moreover, in using the subordinate term one is bound to use

the other as well: for whoever employs the term ‘virtue’ employs the term

‘good’, seeing that virtue is a certain kind of good: likewise, also, whoever

employs the term ‘half’ employs the term ‘even’, for to be ‘divided in half’

means to be divided into two, and two is even.

<

div id="section54" class="section" title="5">5


  Generally speaking, then, one commonplace rule relates to the failure to

frame the expression by means of terms that are prior and more intelligible:

and  of  this  the  subdivisions  are  those  specified  above.  A  second  is,  see

whether, though the object is in a genus, it has not been placed in a genus.

This sort of error is always found where the essence of the object does not

stand first in the expression, e.g. the definition of ‘body’ as ‘that which has

three dimensions’, or the definition of ‘man’, supposing any one to give it, as

‘that which knows how to count’: for it is not stated what it is that has three

dimensions, or what it is that knows how to count: whereas the genus is

meant to indicate just this, and is submitted first of the terms in the definition.

  Moreover, see if, while the term to be defined is used in relation to many

things, he has failed to render it in relation to all of them; as (e.g.) if he define

‘grammar’ as the ‘knowledge how to write from dictation’: for he ought also

to say that it is a knowledge how to read as well. For in rendering it as

‘knowledge  of  writing’  has  no  more  defined  it  than  by  rendering  it  as

‘knowledge  of  reading’:  neither  in  fact  has  succeeded,  but  only  he  who

mentions both these things, since it is impossible that there should be more

than one definition of the same thing. It is only, however, in some cases that

what has been said corresponds to the actual state of things: in some it does

not, e.g. all those terms which are not used essentially in relation to both

things: as medicine is said to deal with the production of disease and health;

for it is said essentially to do the latter, but the former only by accident: for it

is absolutely alien to medicine to produce disease. Here, then, the man who

renders medicine as relative to both of these things has not defined it any

better than he who mentions the one only. In fact he has done it perhaps

worse, for any one else besides the doctor is capable of producing disease.

  Moreover, in a case where the term to be defined is used in relation to

several things, see if he has rendered it as relative to the worse rather than to

the better; for every form of knowledge and potentiality is generally thought

to be relative to the best.

  Again, if the thing in question be not placed in its own proper genus, one

must examine it according to the elementary rules in regard to genera, as has

been said before.’

  Moreover, see if he uses language which transgresses the genera of the

things he defines, defining, e.g. justice as a ‘state that produces equality’ or‘distributes what is equal’: for by defining it so he passes outside the sphere

of virtue, and so by leaving out the genus of justice he fails to express its

essence: for the essence of a thing must in each case bring in its genus. It is

the same thing if the object be not put into its nearest genus; for the man who

puts it into the nearest one has stated all the higher genera, seeing that all the

higher genera are predicated of the lower. Either, then, it ought to be put into

its nearest genus, or else to the higher genus all the differentiae ought to be

appended whereby the nearest genus is defined. For then he would not have

left out anything: but would merely have mentioned the subordinate genus by

an  expression  instead  of  by  name.  On  the  other  hand,  he  who  mentions

merely the higher genus by itself, does not state the subordinate genus as

well: in saying ‘plant’ a man does not specify ‘a tree’.

<

div id="section55" class="section" title="6">


6


  Again,  in  regard  to  the  differentiae,  we  must  examine  in  like  manner

whether the differentiae, too, that he has stated be those of the genus. For if a

man  has  not  defined  the  object  by  the  differentiae  peculiar  to  it,  or  has

mentioned something such as is utterly incapable of being a differentia of

anything, e.g. ‘animal’ or ‘substance’, clearly he has not defined it at all: for

the aforesaid terms do not differentiate anything at all. Further, we must see

whether the differentia stated possesses anything that is co-ordinate with it in

a division; for, if not, clearly the one stated could not be a differentia of the

genus.  For  a  genus  is  always  divided  by  differentiae  that  are  co-ordinate

members  of  a  division,  as,  for  instance,  by  the  terms  ‘walking’,  ‘flying’,

‘aquatic’, and ‘biped’. Or see if, though the contrasted differentia exists, it yet

is  not  true  of  the  genus,  for  then,  clearly,  neither  of  them  could  be  a

differentia of the genus; for differentiae that are co-ordinates in a division

with the differentia of a thing are all true of the genus to which the thing

belongs. Likewise, also, see if, though it be true, yet the addition of it to the

genus fails to make a species. For then, clearly, this could not be a specific

differentia  of  the  genus:  for  a  specific  differentia,  if  added  to  the  genus,

always makes a species. If, however, this be no true differentia, no more is

the one adduced, seeing that it is a co-ordinate member of a division with

this.  Moreover,  see  if  he  divides  the  genus  by  a  negation,  as  those  do  who

define line as ‘length without breadth’: for this means simply that it has not

any breadth. The genus will then be found to partake of its own species: for,

since of everything either an affirmation or its negation is true, length must

always either lack breadth or possess it, so that ‘length’ as well, i.e. the genus

of ‘line’, will be either with or without breadth. But ‘length without breadth’

is the definition of a species, as also is ‘length with breadth’: for ‘without

breadth’ and ‘with breadth’ are differentiae, and the genus and differentia

constitute the definition of the species. Hence the genus would admit of the

definition of its species. Likewise, also, it will admit of the definition of the

differentia, seeing that one or the other of the aforesaid differentiae is of

necessity predicated of the genus. The usefulness of this principle is found in

meeting those who assert the existence of ‘Ideas’: for if absolute length exist,

how will it be predicable of the genus that it has breadth or that it lacks it?

For one assertion or the other will have to be true of ‘length’ universally, if it

is to be true of the genus at all: and this is contrary to the fact: for there exist

both lengths which have, and lengths which have not, breadth. Hence the

only people against whom the rule can be employed are those who assert that

a genus is always numerically one; and this is what is done by those who

assert the real existence of the ‘Ideas’; for they allege that absolute length and

absolute animal are the genus.

It may be that in some cases the definer is obliged to employ a negation as

well, e.g. in defining privations. For ‘blind’ means a thing which cannot see

when its nature is to see. There is no difference between dividing the genus

by a negation, and dividing it by such an affirmation as is bound to have a

negation  as  its  co-ordinate  in  a  division,  e.g.  supposing  he  had  defined

something as ‘length possessed of breadth’; for co-ordinate in the division

with that which is possessed of breadth is that which possesses no breadth

and that only, so that again the genus is divided by a negation.

  Again, see if he rendered the species as a differentia, as do those who

define ‘contumely’ as ‘insolence accompanied by jeering’; for jeering is a

kind of insolence, i.e. it is a species and not a differentia.

  Moreover, see if he has stated the genus as the differentia, e.g. ‘Virtue is a

good or noble state: for ‘good’ is the genus of ‘virtue’. Or possibly ‘good’

here is not the genus but the differentia, on the principle that the same thing

cannot be in two genera of which neither contains the other: for ‘good’ does

not include ‘state’, nor vice versa: for not every state is good nor every gooda ‘state’. Both, then, could not be genera, and consequently, if ‘state’ is the

genus  of  virtue,  clearly  ‘good’  cannot  be  its  genus:  it  must  rather  be  the

differentia’.  Moreover,  ‘a  state’  indicates  the  essence  of  virtue,  whereas

‘good’ indicates not the essence but a quality: and to indicate a quality is

generally held to be the function of the differentia. See, further, whether the

differentia  rendered  indicates  an  individual  rather  than  a  quality:  for  the

general view is that the differentia always expresses a quality.

  Look and see, further, whether the differentia belongs only by accident to

the object defined. For the differentia is never an accidental attribute, any

more than the genus is: for the differentia of a thing cannot both belong and

not belong to it.

  Moreover, if either the differentia or the species, or any of the things which

are under the species, is predicable of the genus, then he could not have

defined the term. For none of the aforesaid can possibly be predicated of the

genus, seeing that the genus is the term with the widest range of all. Again,

see if the genus be predicated of the differentia; for the general view is that

the genus is predicated, not of the differentia, but of the objects of which the

differentia is predicated. Animal (e.g.) is predicated of ‘man’ or ‘ox’ or other

walking animals, not of the actual differentia itself which we predicate of the

species. For if ‘animal’ is to be predicated of each of its differentiae, then

‘animal’  would  be  predicated  of  the  species  several  times  over;  for  the

differentiae are predicates of the species. Moreover, the differentiae will be

all either species or individuals, if they are animals; for every animal is either

a species or an individual.

  Likewise you must inquire also if the species or any of the objects that

come under it is predicated of the differentia: for this is impossible, seeing

that the differentia is a term with a wider range than the various species.

Moreover, if any of the species be predicated of it, the result will be that the

differentia is a species: if, for instance, ‘man’ be predicated, the differentia is

clearly the human race. Again, see if the differentia fails to be prior to the

species: for the differentia ought to be posterior to the genus, but prior to the

species.

  Look and see also if the differentia mentioned belongs to a different genus,

neither contained in nor containing the genus in question. For the general

view is that the same differentia cannot be used of two non-subaltern genera.

Else the result will be that the same species as well will be in two non-

subaltern  genera:  for  each  of  the  differentiae  imports  its  own  genus,  e.g.‘walking’ and ‘biped’ import with them the genus ‘animal’. If, then, each of

the genera as well is true of that of which the differentia is true, it clearly

follows that the species must be in two non-subaltern genera. Or perhaps it is

not  impossible  for  the  same  differentia  to  be  used  of  two  non-subaltern

genera,  and  we  ought  to  add  the  words  ‘except  they  both  be  subordinate

members of the same genus’. Thus ‘walking animal’ and ‘flying animal’ are

non-subaltern  genera,  and  ‘biped’  is  the  differentia  of  both.  The  words

‘except they both be subordinate members of the same genus’ ought therefore

to be added; for both these are subordinate to ‘animal’. From this possibility,

that the same differentia may be used of two non-subaltern genera, it is clear

also that there is no necessity for the differentia to carry with it the whole of

the genus to which it belongs, but only the one or the other of its limbs

together with the genera that are higher than this, as ‘biped’ carries with it

either ‘flying’ or ‘walking animal’.

See, too, if he has rendered ‘existence in’ something as the differentia of a

thing’s  essence:  for  the  general  view  is  that  locality  cannot  differentiate

between one essence and another. Hence, too, people condemn those who

divide animals by means of the terms ‘walking’ and ‘aquatic’, on the ground

that ‘walking’ and ‘aquatic’ indicate mere locality. Or possibly in this case

the censure is undeserved; for ‘aquatic’ does not mean ‘in’ anything; nor does

it denote a locality, but a certain quality: for even if the thing be on the dry

land, still it is aquatic: and likewise a land-animal, even though it be in the

water, will still be a and not an aquatic-animal. But all the same, if ever the

differentia does denote existence in something, clearly he will have made a

bad mistake.

  Again,  see  if  he  has  rendered  an  affection  as  the  differentia:  for  every

affection, if intensified, subverts the essence of the thing, while the differentia

is  not  of  that  kind:  for  the  differentia  is  generally  considered  rather  to

preserve that which it differentiates; and it is absolutely impossible for a thing

to exist without its own special differentia: for if there be no ‘walking’, there

will be no ‘man’. In fact, we may lay down absolutely that a thing cannot

have as its differentia anything in respect of which it is subject to alteration:

for all things of that kind, if intensified, destroy its essence. If, then, a man

has rendered any differentia of this kind, he has made a mistake: for we

undergo absolutely no alteration in respect of our differentiae.

  Again,  see  if  he  has  failed  to  render  the  differentia  of  a  relative  term

relatively  to  something  else;  for  the  differentiae  of  relative  terms  arethemselves  relative,  as  in  the  case  also  of  knowledge.  This  is  classed  as

speculative, practical and productive; and each of these denotes a relation: for

it speculates upon something, and produces something and does something.

  Look and see also if the definer renders each relative term relatively to its

natural purpose: for while in some cases the particular relative term can be

used in relation to its natural purpose only and to nothing else, some can be

used in relation to something else as well. Thus sight can only be used for

seeing, but a strigil can also be used to dip up water. Still, if any one were to

define a strigil as an instrument for dipping water, he has made a mistake: for

that is not its natural function. The definition of a thing’s natural function is

‘that for which it would be used by the prudent man, acting as such, and by

the science that deals specially with that thing’.

Or see if, whenever a term happens to be used in a number of relations, he

has failed to introduce it in its primary relation: e.g. by defining ‘wisdom’ as

the virtue of ‘man’ or of the ‘soul,’ rather than of the ‘reasoning faculty’: for

‘wisdom’ is the virtue primarily of the reasoning faculty: for it is in virtue of

this that both the man and his soul are said to be wise.

  Moreover, if the thing of which the term defined has been stated to be an

affection or disposition, or whatever it may be, be unable to admit it, the

definer  has  made  a  mistake.  For  every  disposition  and  every  affection  is

formed  naturally  in  that  of  which  it  is  an  affection  or  disposition,  as

knowledge, too, is formed in the soul, being a disposition of soul. Sometimes,

however, people make bad mistakes in matters of this sort, e.g. all those who

say that ‘sleep’ is a ‘failure of sensation’, or that ‘perplexity’ is a state of

‘equality between contrary reasonings’, or that ‘pain’ is a ‘violent disruption

of  parts  that  are  naturally  conjoined’.  For  sleep  is  not  an  attribute  of

sensation, whereas it ought to be, if it is a failure of sensation. Likewise,

perplexity  is  not  an  attribute  of  opposite  reasonings,  nor  pain  of  parts

naturally conjoined: for then inanimate things will be in pain, since pain will

be present in them. Similar in character, too, is the definition of ‘health’, say,

as a ‘balance of hot and cold elements’: for then health will be necessarily

exhibited by the hot and cold elements: for balance of anything is an attribute

inherent in those things of which it is the balance, so that health would be an

attribute of them. Moreover, people who define in this way put effect for

cause, or cause for effect. For the disruption of parts naturally conjoined is

not pain, but only a cause of pain: nor again is a failure of sensation sleep, but

the one is the cause of the other: for either we go to sleep because sensationfails, or sensation fails because we go to sleep. Likewise also an equality

between contrary reasonings would be generally considered to be a cause of

perplexity: for it is when we reflect on both sides of a question and find

everything alike to be in keeping with either course that we are perplexed

which of the two we are to do.

  Moreover, with regard to all periods of time look and see whether there be

any discrepancy between the differentia and the thing defined: e.g. supposing

the  ‘immortal’  to  be  defined  as  a  ‘living  thing  immune  at  present  from

destruction’. For a living thing that is immune ‘at present’ from destruction

will be immortal ‘at present’. Possibly, indeed, in this case this result does

not follow, owing to the ambiguity of the words ‘immune at present from

destruction’: for it may mean either that the thing has not been destroyed at

present, or that it cannot be destroyed at present, or that at present it is such

that it never can be destroyed. Whenever, then, we say that a living thing is at

present immune from destruction, we mean that it is at present a living thing

of such a kind as never to be destroyed: and this is equivalent to saying that it

is immortal, so that it is not meant that it is immortal only at present. Still, if

ever it does happen that what has been rendered according to the definition

belongs in the present only or past, whereas what is meant by the word does

not  so  belong,  then  the  two  could  not  be  the  same.  So,  then,  this

commonplace rule ought to be followed, as we have said.

<

div id="section56" class="section" title="7">


7


You should look and see also whether the term being defined is applied in

consideration of something other than the definition rendered. Suppose (e.g.)

a definition of ‘justice’ as the ‘ability to distribute what is equal’. This would

not be right, for ‘just’ describes rather the man who chooses, than the man

who is able to distribute what is equal: so that justice could not be an ability

to distribute what is equal: for then also the most just man would be the man

with the most ability to distribute what is equal.

  Moreover, see if the thing admits of degrees, whereas what is rendered

according  to  the  definition  does  not,  or,  vice  versa,  what  is  rendered

according to the definition admits of degrees while the thing does not. For

either  both  must  admit  them  or  else  neither,  if  indeed  what  is  renderedaccording to the definition is the same as the thing. Moreover, see if, while

both of them admit of degrees, they yet do not both become greater together:

e.g. suppose sexual love to be the desire for intercourse: for he who is more

intensely in love has not a more intense desire for intercourse, so that both do

not become intensified at once: they certainly should, however, had they been

the same thing.

  Moreover,  suppose  two  things  to  be  before  you,  see  if  the  term  to  be

defined  applies  more  particularly  to  the  one  to  which  the  content  of  the

definition is less applicable. Take, for instance, the definition of ‘fire’ as the

‘body that consists of the most rarefied particles’. For ‘fire’ denotes flame

rather than light, but flame is less the body that consists of the most rarefied

particles than is light: whereas both ought to be more applicable to the same

thing, if they had been the same. Again, see if the one expression applies

alike to both the objects before you, while the other does not apply to both

alike, but more particularly to one of them.

  Moreover,  see  if  he  renders  the  definition  relative  to  two  things  taken

separately: thus, the beautiful’ is ‘what is pleasant to the eyes or to the ears”:

or ‘the real’ is ‘what is capable of being acted upon or of acting’. For then the

same thing will be both beautiful and not beautiful, and likewise will be both

real and not real. For ‘pleasant to the ears’ will be the same as ‘beautiful’, so

that  ‘not  pleasant  to  the  ears’  will  be  the  same  as  ‘not  beautiful’:  for  of

identical  things  the  opposites,  too,  are  identical,  and  the  opposite  of

‘beautiful’ is ‘not beautiful’, while of ‘pleasant to the ears’ the opposite is not

pleasant to the cars’: clearly, then, ‘not pleasant to the ears’ is the same thing

as ‘not beautiful’. If, therefore, something be pleasant to the eyes but not to

the ears, it will be both beautiful and not beautiful. In like manner we shall

show also that the same thing is both real and unreal.

  Moreover, of both genera and differentiae and all the other terms rendered

in definitions you should frame definitions in lieu of the terms, and then see if

there be any discrepancy between them.

<

div id="section57" class="section" title="8">


8


If the term defined be relative, either in itself or in respect of its genus, see

whether the definition fails to mention that to which the term, either in itselfor in respect of its genus, is relative, e.g. if he has defined ‘knowledge’ as an

‘incontrovertible  conception’  or  ‘wishing’  as  ‘painless  conation’.  For  of

everything relative the essence is relative to something else, seeing that the

being of every relative term is identical with being in a certain relation to

something. He ought, therefore, to have said that knowledge is ‘conception of

a knowable’ and that wishing is ‘conation for a good’. Likewise, also, if he

has defined ‘grammar’ as ‘knowledge of letters’: whereas in the definition

there ought to be rendered either the thing to which the term itself is relative,

or that, whatever it is, to which its genus is relative. Or see if a relative term

has  been  described  not  in  relation  to  its  end,  the  end  in  anything  being

whatever is best in it or gives its purpose to the rest. Certainly it is what is

best or final that should be stated, e.g. that desire is not for the pleasant but

for pleasure: for this is our purpose in choosing what is pleasant as well.

  Look and see also if that in relation to which he has rendered the term be a

process or an activity: for nothing of that kind is an end, for the completion of

the activity or process is the end rather than the process or activity itself. Or

perhaps this rule is not true in all cases, for almost everybody prefers the

present experience of pleasure to its cessation, so that they would count the

activity as the end rather than its completion.

  Again see in some cases if he has failed to distinguish the quantity or

quality or place or other differentiae of an object; e.g. the quality and quantity

of the honour the striving for which makes a man ambitious: for all men

strive for honour, so that it is not enough to define the ambitious man as him

who  strives  for  honour,  but  the  aforesaid  differentiae  must  be  added.

Likewise, also, in defining the covetous man the quantity of money he aims

at, or in the case of the incontinent man the quality of the pleasures, should be

stated. For it is not the man who gives way to any sort of pleasure whatever

who is called incontinent, but only he who gives way to a certain kind of

pleasure. Or again, people sometimes define night as a ‘shadow on the earth’,

or an earthquake as a movement of the earth’, or a cloud as ‘condensation of

the air’, or a wind as a ‘movement of the air’; whereas they ought to specify

as well quantity, quality, place, and cause. Likewise, also, in other cases of

the  kind:  for  by  omitting  any  differentiae  whatever  he  fails  to  state  the

essence of the term. One should always attack deficiency. For a movement of

the earth does not constitute an earthquake, nor a movement of the air a wind,

irrespective of its manner and the amount involved.

  Moreover, in the case of conations, and in any other cases where it applies,see if the word ‘apparent’ is left out, e.g. ‘wishing is a conation after the

good’,  or  ‘desire  is  a  conation  after  the  pleasant’-instead  of  saying  ‘the

apparently good’, or ‘pleasant’. For often those who exhibit the conation do

not perceive what is good or pleasant, so that their aim need not be really

good  or  pleasant,  but  only  apparently  so.  They  ought,  therefore,  to  have

rendered the definition also accordingly. On the other hand, any one who

maintains the existence of Ideas ought to be brought face to face with his

Ideas, even though he does render the word in question: for there can be no

Idea of anything merely apparent: the general view is that an Idea is always

spoken of in relation to an Idea: thus absolute desire is for the absolutely

pleasant,  and  absolute  wishing  is  for  the  absolutely  good;  they  therefore

cannot be for an apparent good or an apparently pleasant: for the existence of

an absolutely-apparently-good or pleasant would be an absurdity.

<

div id="section58" class="section" title="9">


9


  Moreover, if the definition be of the state of anything, look at what is in the

state, while if it be of what is in the state, look at the state: and likewise also

in other cases of the kind. Thus if the pleasant be identical with the beneficial,

then,  too,  the  man  who  is  pleased  is  benefited.  Speaking  generally,  in

definitions of this sort it happens that what the definer defines is in a sense

more than one thing: for in defining knowledge, a man in a sense defines

ignorance as well, and likewise also what has knowledge and what lacks it,

and what it is to know and to be ignorant. For if the first be made clear, the

others become in a certain sense clear as well. We have, then, to be on our

guard in all such cases against discrepancy, using the elementary principles

drawn from consideration of contraries and of coordinates.

  Moreover, in the case of relative terms, see if the species is rendered as

relative to a species of that to which the genus is rendered as relative, e.g.

supposing  belief  to  be  relative  to  some  object  of  belief,  see  whether  a

particular belief is made relative to some particular object of belief: and, if a

multiple be relative to a fraction, see whether a particular multiple be made

relative to a particular fraction. For if it be not so rendered, clearly a mistake

has been made.

See, also, if the opposite of the term has the opposite definition, whether(e.g.) the definition of ‘half’ is the opposite of that of ‘double’: for if ‘double’

is ‘that which exceeds another by an equal amount to that other’, ‘half’ is

‘that which is exceeded by an amount equal to itself’. In the same way, too,

with  contraries.  For  to  the  contrary  term  will  apply  the  definition  that  is

contrary in some one of the ways in which contraries are conjoined. Thus

(e.g.)  if  ‘useful’=’productive  of  good’,  ‘injurious’=productive  of  evil’  or

‘destructive of good’, for one or the other of thee is bound to be contrary to

the  term  originally  used.  Suppose,  then,  neither  of  these  things  to  be  the

contrary of the term originally used, then clearly neither of the definitions

rendered later could be the definition of the contrary of the term originally

defined: and therefore the definition originally rendered of the original term

has not been rightly rendered either. Seeing, moreover, that of contraries, the

one is sometimes a word forced to denote the privation of the other, as (e.g.)

inequality  is  generally  held  to  be  the  privation  of  equality  (for  ‘unequal’

merely describes things that are not equal’), it is therefore clear that that

contrary  whose  form  denotes  the  privation  must  of  necessity  be  defined

through the other; whereas the other cannot then be defined through the one

whose form denotes the privation; for else we should find that each is being

interpreted by the other. We must in the case of contrary terms keep an eye

on  this  mistake,  e.g.  supposing  any  one  were  to  define  equality  as  the

contrary  of  inequality:  for  then  he  is  defining  it  through  the  term  which

denotes privation of it. Moreover, a man who so defines is bound to use in his

definition the very term he is defining; and this becomes clear, if for the word

we  substitute  its  definition.  For  to  say  ‘inequality’  is  the  same  as  to  say

‘privation of equality’. Therefore equality so defined will be ‘the contrary of

the privation of equality’, so that he would have used the very word to be

defined. Suppose, however, that neither of the contraries be so formed as to

denote privation, but yet the definition of it be rendered in a manner like the

above, e.g. suppose ‘good’ to be defined as ‘the contrary of evil’, then, since

it is clear that ‘evil’ too will be ‘the contrary of good’ (for the definition of

things that are contrary in this must be rendered in a like manner), the result

again is that he uses the very term being defined: for ‘good’ is inherent in the

definition  of  ‘evil’.  If,  then,  ‘good’  be  the  contrary  of  evil,  and  evil  be

nothing other than the ‘contrary of good’, then ‘good’ will be the ‘contrary of

the contrary of good’. Clearly, then, he has used the very word to be defined.

  Moreover, see if in rendering a term formed to denote privation, he has

failed to render the term of which it is the privation, e.g. the state, or contrary,or whatever it may be whose privation it is: also if he has omitted to add

either any term at all in which the privation is naturally formed, or else that in

which it is naturally formed primarily, e.g. whether in defining ‘ignorance’ a

privation he has failed to say that it is the privation of ‘knowledge’; or has

failed to add in what it is naturally formed, or, though he has added this, has

failed to render the thing in which it is primarily formed, placing it (e.g.) in

‘man’ or in ‘the soul’, and not in the ‘reasoning faculty’: for if in any of these

respects he fails, he has made a mistake. Likewise, also, if he has failed to say

that ‘blindness’ is the ‘privation of sight in an eye’: for a proper rendering of

its essence must state both of what it is the privation and what it is that is

deprived.

  Examine further whether he has defined by the expression ‘a privation’ a

term that is not used to denote a privation: thus a mistake of this sort also

would be generally thought to be incurred in the case of ‘error’ by any one

who is not using it as a merely negative term. For what is generally thought

to be in error is not that which has no knowledge, but rather that which has

been deceived, and for this reason we do not talk of inanimate things or of

children as ‘erring’. ‘Error’, then, is not used to denote a mere privation of

knowledge.

<

div id="section59" class="section" title="10">


10


  Moreover, see whether the like inflexions in the definition apply to the like

inflexions of the term; e.g. if ‘beneficial’ means ‘productive of health’, does

‘beneficially’ mean productively of health’ and a ‘benefactor’ a ‘producer of

health’?

  Look too and see whether the definition given will apply to the Idea as

well. For in some cases it will not do so; e.g. in the Platonic definition where

he adds the word ‘mortal’ in his definitions of living creatures: for the Idea

(e.g. the absolute Man) is not mortal, so that the definition will not fit the

Idea. So always wherever the words ‘capable of acting on’ or ‘capable of

being acted upon’ are added, the definition and the Idea are absolutely bound

to be discrepant: for those who assert the existence of Ideas hold that they are

incapable of being acted upon, or of motion. In dealing with these people

even arguments of this kind are useful.  Further, see if he has rendered a single common definition of terms that are

used ambiguously. For terms whose definition corresponding their common

name is one and the same, are synonymous; if, then, the definition applies in

a like manner to the whole range of the ambiguous term, it is not true of any

one of the objects described by the term. This is, moreover, what happens to

Dionysius’  definition  of  ‘life’  when  stated  as  ‘a  movement  of  a  creature

sustained  by  nutriment,  congenitally  present  with  it’:  for  this  is  found  in

plants as much as in animals, whereas ‘life’ is generally understood to mean

not one kind of thing only, but to be one thing in animals and another in

plants. It is possible to hold the view that life is a synonymous term and is

always used to describe one thing only, and therefore to render the definition

in this way on purpose: or it may quite well happen that a man may see the

ambiguous character of the word, and wish to render the definition of the one

sense only, and yet fail to see that he has rendered a definition common to

both senses instead of one peculiar to the sense he intends. In either case,

whichever course he pursues, he is equally at fault. Since ambiguous terms

sometimes pass unobserved, it is best in questioning to treat such terms as

though they were synonymous (for the definition of the one sense will not

apply to the other, so that the answerer will be generally thought not to have

defined it correctly, for to a synonymous term the definition should apply in

its full range), whereas in answering you should yourself distinguish between

the  senses.  Further,  as  some  answerers  call  ‘ambiguous’  what  is  really

synonymous, whenever the definition rendered fails to apply universally, and,

vice  versa,  call  synonymous  what  is  really  ambiguous  supposing  their

definition applies to both senses of the term, one should secure a preliminary

admission  on  such  points,  or  else  prove  beforehand  that  so-and-so  is

ambiguous or synonymous, as the case may be: for people are more ready to

agree when they do not foresee what the consequence will be. If, however, no

admission has been made, and the man asserts that what is really synonymous

is ambiguous because the definition he has rendered will not apply to the

second sense as well, see if the definition of this second meaning applies also

to the other meanings: for if so, this meaning must clearly be synonymous

with those others. Otherwise, there will be more than one definition of those

other meanings, for there are applicable to them two distinct definitions in

explanation of the term, viz. the one previously rendered and also the later

one. Again, if any one were to define a term used in several senses, and,

finding that his definition does not apply to them all, were to contend not thatthe term is ambiguous, but that even the term does not properly apply to all

those senses, just because his definition will not do so either, then one may

retort to such a man that though in some things one must not use the language

of the people, yet in a question of terminology one is bound to employ the

received and traditional usage and not to upset matters of that sort.

<

div id="section60" class="section" title="11">


11


  Suppose now that a definition has been rendered of some complex term,

take away the definition of one of the elements in the complex, and see if also

the rest of the definition defines the rest of it: if not, it is clear that neither

does the whole definition define the whole complex. Suppose, e.g. that some

one has defined a ‘finite straight line’ as ‘the limit of a finite plane, such that

its centre is in a line with its extremes’; if now the definition of a finite line’

be the ‘limit of a finite plane’, the rest (viz. ‘such that its centre is in a line

with  its  extremes’)  ought  to  be  a  definition  of  straight’.  But  an  infinite

straight line has neither centre nor extremes and yet is straight so that this

remainder does not define the remainder of the term.

  Moreover, if the term defined be a compound notion, see if the definition

rendered be equimembral with the term defined. A definition is said to be

equimembral  with  the  term  defined  when  the  number  of  the  elements

compounded in the latter is the same as the number of nouns and verbs in the

definition. For the exchange in such cases is bound to be merely one of term

for term, in the case of some if not of all, seeing that there are no more terms

used now than formerly; whereas in a definition terms ought to be rendered

by phrases, if possible in every case, or if not, in the majority. For at that rate,

simple objects too could be defined by merely calling them by a different

name, e.g. ‘cloak’ instead of ‘doublet’.

The  mistake  is  even  worse,  if  actually  a  less  well  known  term  be

substituted, e.g. ‘pellucid mortal’ for ‘white man’: for it is no definition, and

moreover is less intelligible when put in that form.

  Look and see also whether, in the exchange of words, the sense fails still to

be the same. Take, for instance, the explanation of ‘speculative knowledge’

as ‘speculative conception’: for conception is not the same as knowledge-as it

certainly ought to be if the whole is to be the same too: for though the word‘speculative’ is common to both expressions, yet the remainder is different.

  Moreover, see if in replacing one of the terms by something else he has

exchanged the genus and not the differentia, as in the example just given: for

‘speculative’ is a less familiar term than knowledge; for the one is the genus

and the other the differentia, and the genus is always the most familiar term

of  all;  so  that  it  is  not  this,  but  the  differentia,  that  ought  to  have  been

changed, seeing that it is the less familiar. It might be held that this criticism

is ridiculous: because there is no reason why the most familiar term should

not describe the differentia, and not the genus; in which case, clearly, the

term  to  be  altered  would  also  be  that  denoting  the  genus  and  not  the

differentia. If, however, a man is substituting for a term not merely another

term but a phrase, clearly it is of the differentia rather than of the genus that a

definition  should  be  rendered,  seeing  that  the  object  of  rendering  the

definition is to make the subject familiar; for the differentia is less familiar

than the genus.

If  he  has  rendered  the  definition  of  the  differentia,  see  whether  the

definition  rendered  is  common  to  it  and  something  else  as  well:  e.g.

whenever he says that an odd number is a ‘number with a middle’, further

definition  is  required  of  how  it  has  a  middle:  for  the  word  ‘number’  is

common to both expressions, and it is the word ‘odd’ for which the phrase

has been substituted. Now both a line and a body have a middle, yet they are

not ‘odd’; so that this could not be a definition of ‘odd’. If, on the other hand,

the phrase ‘with a middle’ be used in several senses, the sense here intended

requires to be defined. So that this will either discredit the definition or prove

that it is no definition at all.

<

div id="section61" class="section" title="12">


12


  Again,  see  if  the  term  of  which  he  renders  the  definition  is  a  reality,

whereas what is contained in the definition is not, e.g. Suppose ‘white’ to be

defined as ‘colour mingled with fire’: for what is bodiless cannot be mingled

with  body,  so  that  ‘colour’  ‘mingled  with  fire’  could  not  exist,  whereas

‘white’ does exist.

  Moreover, those who in the case of relative terms do not distinguish to

what the object is related, but have described it only so as to include it amongtoo large a number of things, are wrong either wholly or in part; e.g. suppose

some one to have defined ‘medicine’ as a science of Reality’. For if medicine

be not a science of anything that is real, the definition is clearly altogether

false; while if it be a science of some real thing, but not of another, it is partly

false; for it ought to hold of all reality, if it is said to be of Reality essentially

and not accidentally: as is the case with other relative terms: for every object

of  knowledge  is  a  term  relative  to  knowledge:  likewise,  also,  with  other

relative terms, inasmuch as all such are convertible. Moreover, if the right

way to render account of a thing be to render it as it is not in itself but

accidentally, then each and every relative term would be used in relation not

to one thing but to a number of things. For there is no reason why the same

thing should not be both real and white and good, so that it would be a correct

rendering to render the object in relation to any one whatsoever of these, if to

render what it is accidentally be a correct way to render it. It is, moreover,

impossible  that  a  definition  of  this  sort  should  be  peculiar  to  the  term

rendered: for not only but the majority of the other sciences too, have for

their object some real thing, so that each will be a science of reality. Clearly,

then, such a definition does not define any science at all; for a definition

ought to be peculiar to its own term, not general.

  Sometimes, again, people define not the thing but only the thing in a good

or perfect condition. Such is the definition of a rhetorician as ‘one who can

always see what will persuade in the given circumstances, and omit nothing’;

or of a thief, as ‘one who pilfers in secret’: for clearly, if they each do this,

then the one will be a good rhetorician, and the other a good thief: whereas it

is not the actual pilfering in secret, but the wish to do it, that constitutes the

thief.

  Again, see if he has rendered what is desirable for its own sake as desirable

for what it produces or does, or as in any way desirable because of something

else, e.g. by saying that justice is ‘what preserves the laws’ or that wisdom is

‘what produces happiness’; for what produces or preserves something else is

one of the things desirable for something else. It might be said that it is

possible for what is desirable in itself to be desirable for something else as

well: but still to define what is desirable in itself in such a way is none the

less wrong: for the essence contains par excellence what is best in anything,

and it is better for a thing to be desirable in itself than to be desirable for

something else, so that this is rather what the definition too ought to have

indicated.<

div id="section62" class="section" title="13">


13


See also whether in defining anything a man has defined it as an ‘A and

B’, or as a ‘product of A and B’ or as an ‘A+B’. If he defines it as and B’, the

definition will be true of both and yet of neither of them; suppose, e.g. justice

to be defined as ‘temperance and courage.’ For if of two persons each has one

of the two only, both and yet neither will be just: for both together have

justice,  and  yet  each  singly  fails  to  have  it.  Even  if  the  situation  here

described does not so far appear very absurd because of the occurrence of this

kind of thing in other cases also (for it is quite possible for two men to have a

mina between them, though neither of them has it by himself), yet least that

they should have contrary attributes surely seems quite absurd; and yet this

will follow if the one be temperate and yet a coward, and the other, though

brave, be a profligate; for then both will exhibit both justice and injustice: for

if justice be temperance and bravery, then injustice will be cowardice and

profligacy. In general, too, all the ways of showing that the whole is not the

same as the sum of its parts are useful in meeting the type just described; for

a man who defines in this way seems to assert that the parts are the same as

the  whole.  The  arguments  are  particularly  appropriate  in  cases  where  the

process of putting the parts together is obvious, as in a house and other things

of that sort: for there, clearly, you may have the parts and yet not have the

whole, so that parts and whole cannot be the same.

If, however, he has said that the term being defined is not ‘A and B’ but

the ‘product of A and B’, look and see in the first place if A and B cannot in

the nature of things have a single product: for some things are so related to

one  another  that  nothing  can  come  of  them,  e.g.  a  line  and  a  number.

Moreover, see if the term that has been defined is in the nature of things

found primarily in some single subject, whereas the things which he has said

produce it are not found primarily in any single subject, but each in a separate

one. If so, clearly that term could not be the product of these things: for the

whole is bound to be in the same things wherein its parts are, so that the

whole will then be found primarily not in one subject only, but in a number

of them. If, on the other hand, both parts and whole are found primarily in

some single subject, see if that medium is not the same, but one thing in thecase of the whole and another in that of the parts. Again, see whether the

parts perish together with the whole: for it ought to happen, vice versa, that

the whole perishes when the parts perish; when the whole perishes, there is

no necessity that the parts should perish too. Or again, see if the whole be

good or evil, and the parts neither, or, vice versa, if the parts be good or evil

and  the  whole  neither.  For  it  is  impossible  either  for  a  neutral  thing  to

produce  something  good  or  bad,  or  for  things  good  or  bad  to  produce  a

neutral thing. Or again, see if the one thing is more distinctly good than the

other is evil, and yet the product be no more good than evil, e.g. suppose

shamelessness be defined as ‘the product of courage and false opinion’: here

the goodness of courage exceeds the evil of false opinion; accordingly the

product of these ought to have corresponded to this excess, and to be either

good without qualification, or at least more good than evil. Or it may be that

this does not necessarily follow, unless each be in itself good or bad; for

many  things  that  are  productive  are  not  good  in  themselves,  but  only  in

combination; or, per contra, they are good taken singly, and bad or neutral in

combination. What has just been said is most clearly illustrated in the case of

things that make for health or sickness; for some drugs are such that each

taken alone is good, but if they are both administered in a mixture, bad.

  Again, see whether the whole, as produced from a better and worse, fails to

be  worse  than  the  better  and  better  than  the  worse  element.  This  again,

however, need not necessarily be the case, unless the elements compounded

be in themselves good; if they are not, the whole may very well not be good,

as in the cases just instanced.

  Moreover, see if the whole be synonymous with one of the elements: for it

ought not to be, any more than in the case of syllables: for the syllable is not

synonymous with any of the letters of which it is made up.

  Moreover, see if he has failed to state the manner of their composition: for

the mere mention of its elements is not enough to make the thing intelligible.

For the essence of any compound thing is not merely that it is a product of

so-and-so, but that it is a product of them compounded in such and such a

way, just as in the case of a house: for here the materials do not make a house

irrespective of the way they are put together.

If a man has defined an object as ‘A+B’, the first thing to be said is that

‘A+B’ means the same either as ‘A and B’, or as the ‘product of A and B.’

for ‘honey+water’ means either the honey and the water, or the ‘drink made

of honey and water’. If, then, he admits that ‘A+B’ is + B’ is the same aseither of these two things, the same criticisms will apply as have already been

given for meeting each of them. Moreover, distinguish between the different

senses in which one thing may be said to be ‘+’ another, and see if there is

none of them in which A could be said to exist ‘+ B.’ Thus e.g. supposing the

expression to mean that they exist either in some identical thing capable of

containing them (as e.g. justice and courage are found in the soul), or else in

the same place or in the same time, and if this be in no way true of the A and

B in question, clearly the definition rendered could not hold of anything, as

there is no possible way in which A can exist B’. If, however, among the

various senses above distinguished, it be true that A and B are each found in

the same time as the other, look and see if possibly the two are not used in the

same relation. Thus e.g. suppose courage to have been defined as ‘daring

with right reasoning’: here it is possible that the person exhibits daring in

robbery, and right reasoning in regard to the means of health: but he may

have  ‘the  former  quality+the  latter’  at  the  same  time,  and  not  as  yet  be

courageous! Moreover, even though both be used in the same relation as

well, e.g. in relation to medical treatment (for a man may exhibit both daring

and right reasoning in respect of medical treatment), still, none the less, not

even this combination of ‘the one+the other ‘makes him ‘courageous’. For

the two must not relate to any casual object that is the same, any more than

each to a different object; rather, they must relate to the function of courage,

e.g. meeting the perils of war, or whatever is more properly speaking its

function than this.

  Some definitions rendered in this form fail to come under the aforesaid

division at all, e.g. a definition of anger as ‘pain with a consciousness of

being  slighted’.  For  what  this  means  to  say  is  that  it  is  because  of  a

consciousness of this sort that the pain occurs; but to occur ‘because of’ a

thing is not the same as to occur ‘+ a thing’ in any of its aforesaid senses.

<

div id="section63" class="section" title="14">


14


  Again, if he have described the whole compounded as the ‘composition’ of

these things (e.g. ‘a living creature’ as a ‘composition of soul and body’),

first of all see whether he has omitted to state the kind of composition, as

(e.g.) in a definition of ‘flesh’ or ‘bone’ as the ‘composition of fire, earth, andair’. For it is not enough to say it is a composition, but you should also go on

to  define  the  kind  of  composition:  for  these  things  do  not  form  flesh

irrespective of the manner of their composition, but when compounded in one

way they form flesh, when in another, bone. It appears, moreover, that neither

of  the  aforesaid  substances  is  the  same  as  a  ‘composition’  at  all:  for  a

composition always has a decomposition as its contrary, whereas neither of

the aforesaid has any contrary. Moreover, if it is equally probable that every

compound is a composition or else that none is, and every kind of living

creature,  though  a  compound,  is  never  a  composition,  then  no  other

compound could be a composition either.

  Again, if in the nature of a thing two contraries are equally liable to occur,

and  the  thing  has  been  defined  through  the  one,  clearly  it  has  not  been

defined; else there will be more than one definition of the same thing; for

how is it any more a definition to define it through this one than through the

other, seeing that both alike are naturally liable to occur in it? Such is the

definition  of  the  soul,  if  defined  as  a  substance  capable  of  receiving

knowledge: for it has a like capacity for receiving ignorance.

Also, even when one cannot attack the definition as a whole for lack of

acquaintance with the whole, one should attack some part of it, if one knows

that part and sees it to be incorrectly rendered: for if the part be demolished,

so too is the whole definition. Where, again, a definition is obscure, one

should first of all correct and reshape it in order to make some part of it clear

and get a handle for attack, and then proceed to examine it. For the answerer

is bound either to accept the sense as taken by the questioner, or else himself

to explain clearly whatever it is that his definition means. Moreover, just as in

the assemblies the ordinary practice is to move an emendation of the existing

law and, if the emendation is better, they repeal the existing law, so one ought

to do in the case of definitions as well: one ought oneself to propose a second

definition: for if it is seen to be better, and more indicative of the object

defined, clearly the definition already laid down will have been demolished,

on the principle that there cannot be more than one definition of the same

thing.

In combating definitions it is always one of the chief elementary principles

to take by oneself a happy shot at a definition of the object before one, or to

adopt some correctly expressed definition. For one is bound, with the model

(as  it  were)  before  one’s  eyes,  to  discern  both  any  shortcoming  in  any

features that the definition ought to have, and also any superfluous addition,so that one is better supplied with lines of attack.

As to definitions, then, let so much suffice.                                Topics, Book VII


Translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge


<

div id="book7" class="book" title="Book VII">


1


  Whether two things are ‘the same’ or ‘different’, in the most literal of the

meanings ascribed to ‘sameness’ (and we said’ that ‘the same’ applies in the

most literal sense to what is numerically one), may be examined in the light

of their inflexions and coordinates and opposites. For if justice be the same as

courage, then too the just man is the same as the brave man, and ‘justly’ is

the same as ‘bravely’. Likewise, too, in the case of their opposites: for if two

things  be  the  same,  their  opposites  also  will  be  the  same,  in  any  of  the

recognized forms of opposition. For it is the same thing to take the opposite

of the one or that of the other, seeing that they are the same. Again it may be

examined in the light of those things which tend to produce or to destroy the

things in question of their formation and destruction, and in general of any

thing that is related in like manner to each. For where things are absolutely

the same, their formations and destructions also are the same, and so are the

things that tend to produce or to destroy them. Look and see also, in a case

where one of two things is said to be something or other in a superlative

degree, if the other of these alleged identical things can also be described by a

superlative in the same respect. Thus Xenocrates argues that the happy life

and the good life are the same, seeing that of all forms of life the good life is

the most desirable and so also is the happy life: for ‘the most desirable’ and

the greatest’ apply but to one thing.’ Likewise also in other cases of the kind.

Each, however, of the two things termed ‘greatest’ or most desirable’ must be

numerically one: otherwise no proof will have been given that they are the

same; for it does not follow because Peloponnesians and Spartans are the

bravest of the Greeks, that Peloponnesians are the same as Spartans, seeing

that ‘Peloponnesian’ is not any one person nor yet ‘Spartan’; it only follows

that  the  one  must  be  included  under  the  other  as  ‘Spartans’  are  under‘Peloponnesians’: for otherwise, if the one class be not included under the

other, each will be better than the other. For then the Peloponnesians are

bound to be better than the Spartans, seeing that the one class is not included

under  the  other;  for  they  are  better  than  anybody  else.  Likewise  also  the

Spartans must perforce be better than the Peloponnesians; for they too are

better than anybody else; each then is better than the other! Clearly therefore

what is styled ‘best’ and ‘greatest’ must be a single thing, if it is to be proved

to be ‘the same’ as another. This also is why Xenocrates fails to prove his

case: for the happy life is not numerically single, nor yet the good life, so that

it does not follow that, because they are both the most desirable, they are

therefore the same, but only that the one falls under the other.

  Again, look and see if, supposing the one to be the same as something, the

other also is the same as it: for if they be not both the same as the same thing,

clearly neither are they the same as one another.

  Moreover, examine them in the light of their accidents or of the things of

which they are accidents: for any accident belonging to the one must belong

also to the other, and if the one belong to anything as an accident, so must the

other also. If in any of these respects there is a discrepancy, clearly they are

not the same.

See further whether, instead of both being found in one class of predicates,

the one signifies a quality and the other a quantity or relation. Again, see if

the genus of each be not the same, the one being ‘good’ and the other evil’, or

the one being ‘virtue’ and the other ‘knowledge’: or see if, though the genus

is the same, the differentiae predicted of either be not the same, the one (e.g.)

being  distinguished  as  a  ‘speculative’  science,  the  other  as  a  ‘practical’

science. Likewise also in other cases.

  Moreover, from the point of view of ‘degrees’, see if the one admits an

increase of degree but not the other, or if though both admit it, they do not

admit  it  at  the  same  time;  just  as  it  is  not  the  case  that  a  man  desires

intercourse more intensely, the more intensely he is in love, so that love and

the desire for intercourse are not the same.

  Moreover, examine them by means of an addition, and see whether the

addition of each to the same thing fails to make the same whole; or if the

subtraction of the same thing from each leaves a different remainder. Suppose

(e.g.) that he has declared ‘double a half’ to be the same as ‘a multiple of a

half’: then, subtracting the words ‘a half’ from each, the remainders ought to

have signified the same thing: but they do not; for ‘double’ and ‘a multipleof’ do not signify the same thing.

  Inquire also not only if some impossible consequence results directly from

the statement made, that A and B are the same, but also whether it is possible

for  a  supposition  to  bring  it  about;  as  happens  to  those  who  assert  that

‘empty’ is the same as ‘full of air’: for clearly if the air be exhausted, the

vessel will not be less but more empty, though it will no longer be full of air.

So that by a supposition, which may be true or may be false (it makes no

difference which), the one character is annulled and not the other, showing

that they are not the same.

  Speaking generally, one ought to be on the look-out for any discrepancy

anywhere in any sort of predicate of each term, and in the things of which

they are predicated. For all that is predicated of the one should be predicated

also of the other, and of whatever the one is a predicate, the other should be a

predicate of it as well.

  Moreover, as ‘sameness’ is a term used in many senses, see whether things

that are the same in one way are the same also in a different way. For there is

either  no  necessity  or  even  no  possibility  that  things  that  are  the  same

specifically or generically should be numerically the same, and it is with the

question  whether  they  are  or  are  not  the  same  in  that  sense  that  we  are

concerned.

  Moreover, see whether the one can exist without the other; for, if so, they

could not be the same.

<

div id="section65" class="section" title="2">


2


  Such is the number of the commonplace rules that relate to ‘sameness’. It

is  clear  from  what  has  been  said  that  all  the  destructive  commonplaces

relating to sameness are useful also in questions of definition, as was said

before:’ for if what is signified by the term and by the expression be not the

same, clearly the expression rendered could not be a definition. None of the

constructive  commonplaces,  on  the  other  hand,  helps  in  the  matter  of

definition; for it is not enough to show the sameness of content between the

expression and the term, in order to establish that the former is a definition,

but a definition must have also all the other characters already announced.

<div id="section66" class="section" title="3">


3


This then is the way, and these the arguments, whereby the attempt to

demolish a definition should always be made. If, on the other hand, we desire

to establish one, the first thing to observe is that few if any who engage in

discussion arrive at a definition by reasoning: they always assume something

of the kind as their starting points-both in geometry and in arithmetic and the

other  studies  of  that  kind.  In  the  second  place,  to  say  accurately  what  a

definition  is,  and  how  it  should  be  given,  belongs  to  another  inquiry.  At

present it concerns us only so far as is required for our present purpose, and

accordingly we need only make the bare statement that to reason to a thing’s

definition and essence is quite possible. For if a definition is an expression

signifying the essence of the thing and the predicates contained therein ought

also to be the only ones which are predicated of the thing in the category of

essence; and genera and differentiae are so predicated in that category: it is

obvious that if one were to get an admission that so and so are the only

attributes predicated in that category, the expression containing so and so

would of necessity be a definition; for it is impossible that anything else

should be a definition, seeing that there is not anything else predicated of the

thing in the category of essence.

That a definition may thus be reached by a process of reasoning is obvious.

The  means  whereby  it  should  be  established  have  been  more  precisely

defined elsewhere, but for the purposes of the inquiry now before us the same

commonplace rules serve. For we have to examine into the contraries and

other opposites of the thing, surveying the expressions used both as wholes

and in detail: for if the opposite definition defines that opposite term, the

definition  given  must  of  necessity  be  that  of  the  term  before  us.  Seeing,

however, that contraries may be conjoined in more than one way, we have to

select from those contraries the one whose contrary definition seems most

obvious. The expressions, then, have to be examined each as a whole in the

way we have said, and also in detail as follows. First of all, see that the genus

rendered  is  correctly  rendered;  for  if  the  contrary  thing  be  found  in  the

contrary genus to that stated in the definition, and the thing before you is not

in  that  same  genus,  then  it  would  clearly  be  in  the  contrary  genus:  for

contraries must of necessity be either in the same genus or in contrary genera.The  differentiae,  too,  that  are  predicated  of  contraries  we  expect  to  be

contrary, e.g. those of white and black, for the one tends to pierce the vision,

while the other tends to compress it. So that if contrary differentiae to those

in the definition are predicated of the contrary term, then those rendered in

the definition would be predicated of the term before us. Seeing, then, that

both the genus and the differentiae have been rightly rendered, clearly the

expression given must be the right definition. It might be replied that there is

no necessity why contrary differentiae should be predicated of contraries,

unless the contraries be found within the same genus: of things whose genera

are themselves contraries it may very well be that the same differentia is used

of both, e.g. of justice and injustice; for the one is a virtue and the other a

vice of the soul: ‘of the soul’, therefore, is the differentia in both cases, seeing

that the body as well has its virtue and vice. But this much at least is true, that

the differentiae of contraries are either contrary or else the same. If, then, the

contrary differentia to that given be predicated of the contrary term and not of

the one in hand, clearly the differentia stated must be predicated of the latter.

Speaking  generally,  seeing  that  the  definition  consists  of  genus  and

differentiae, if the definition of the contrary term be apparent, the definition

of the term before you will be apparent also: for since its contrary is found

either  in  the  same  genus  or  in  the  contrary  genus,  and  likewise  also  the

differentiae predicated of opposites are either contrary to, or the same as,

each other, clearly of the term before you there will be predicated either the

same genus as of its contrary, while, of its differentiae, either all are contrary

to those of its contrary, or at least some of them are so while the rest remain

the same; or, vice versa, the differentiae will be the same and the genera

contrary; or both genera and differentiae will be contrary. And that is all; for

that both should be the same is not possible; else contraries will have the

same definition.

  Moreover,  look  at  it  from  the  point  of  view  of  its  inflexions  and

coordinates.  For  genera  and  definitions  are  bound  to  correspond  in  either

case.  Thus  if  forgetfulness  be  the  loss  of  knowledge,  to  forget  is  to  lose

knowledge, and to have forgotten is to have lost knowledge. If, then, any one

whatever of these is agreed to, the others must of necessity be agreed to as

well.  Likewise,  also,  if  destruction  is  the  decomposition  of  the  thing’s

essence,  then  to  be  destroyed  is  to  have  its  essence  decomposed,  and

‘destructively’ means ‘in such a way as to decompose its essence’; if again

‘destructive’  means  ‘apt  to  decompose  something’s  essence’,  then  also‘destruction’ means ‘the decomposition of its essence’. Likewise also with

the  rest:  an  admission  of  any  one  of  them  whatever,  and  all  the  rest  are

admitted too.

  Moreover, look at it from the point of view of things that stand in relations

that  are  like  each  other.  For  if  ‘healthy’  means  ‘productive  of  health’,

‘vigorous’  too  will  mean  ‘productive  of  vigour’,  and  ‘useful’  will  mean

‘productive of good.’ For each of these things is related in like manner to its

own peculiar end, so that if one of them is defined as ‘productive of’ that end,

this will also be the definition of each of the rest as well.

  Moreover, look at it from the point of and like degrees, in all the ways in

which it is possible to establish a result by comparing two and two together.

Thus if A defines a better than B defines and B is a definition of so too is A

of a. Further, if A’s claim to define a is like B’s to define B, and B defines B,

then A too defines a. This examination from the point of view of greater

degrees is of no use when a single definition is compared with two things, or

two definitions with one thing; for there cannot possibly be one definition of

two things or two of the same thing.

<

div id="section67" class="section" title="4">


4


The  most  handy  of  all  the  commonplace  arguments  are  those  just

mentioned and those from co-ordinates and inflexions, and these therefore are

those which it is most important to master and to have ready to hand: for they

are the most useful on the greatest number of occasions. Of the rest, too, the

most important are those of most general application: for these are the most

effective, e.g. that you should examine the individual cases, and then look to

see in the case of their various species whether the definition applies. For the

species is synonymous with its individuals. This sort of inquiry is of service

against those who assume the existence of Ideas, as has been said before.’

Moreover see if a man has used a term metaphorically, or predicated it of

itself  as  though  it  were  something  different.  So  too  if  any  other  of  the

commonplace  rules  is  of  general  application  and  effective,  it  should  be

employed.

<

div id="section68" class="section" title="5">5


That  it  is  more  difficult  to  establish  than  to  overthrow  a  definition,  is

obvious from considerations presently to be urged. For to see for oneself, and

to secure from those whom one is questioning, an admission of premisses of

this  sort  is  no  simple  matter,  e.g.  that  of  the  elements  of  the  definition

rendered the one is genus and the other differentia, and that only the genus

and differentiae are predicated in the category of essence. Yet without these

premisses it is impossible to reason to a definition; for if any other things as

well are predicated of the thing in the category of essence, there is no telling

whether the formula stated or some other one is its definition, for a definition

is an expression indicating the essence of a thing. The point is clear also from

the  following:  It  is  easier  to  draw  one  conclusion  than  many.  Now  in

demolishing a definition it is sufficient to argue against one point only (for if

we have overthrown any single point whatsoever, we shall have demolished

the definition); whereas in establishing a definition, one is bound to bring

people to the view that everything contained in the definition is attributable.

Moreover,  in  establishing  a  case,  the  reasoning  brought  forward  must  be

universal: for the definition put forward must be predicated of everything of

which  the  term  is  predicated,  and  must  moreover  be  convertible,  if  the

definition rendered is to be peculiar to the subject. In overthrowing a view, on

the  other  hand,  there  is  no  longer  any  necessity  to  show  one’s  point

universally: for it is enough to show that the formula is untrue of any one of

the things embraced under the term.

  Further, even supposing it should be necessary to overthrow something by

a universal proposition, not even so is there any need to prove the converse of

the proposition in the process of overthrowing the definition. For merely to

show that the definition fails to be predicated of every one of the things of

which the term is predicated, is enough to overthrow it universally: and there

is no need to prove the converse of this in order to show that the term is

predicated of things of which the expression is not predicated. Moreover,

even if it applies to everything embraced under the term, but not to it alone,

the definition is thereby demolished.

The case stands likewise in regard to the property and genus of a term also.

For in both cases it is easier to overthrow than to establish. As regards the

property this is clear from what has been said: for as a rule the property is

rendered in a complex phrase, so that to overthrow it, it is only necessary todemolish one of the terms used, whereas to establish it is necessary to reason

to them all. Then, too, nearly all the other rules that apply to the definition

will apply also to the property of a thing. For in establishing a property one

has to show that it is true of everything included under the term in question,

whereas to overthrow one it is enough to show in a single case only that it

fails to belong: further, even if it belongs to everything falling under the term,

but not to that only, it is overthrown in this case as well, as was explained in

the case of the definition. In regard to the genus, it is clear that you are bound

to establish it in one way only, viz. by showing that it belongs in every case,

while of overthrowing it there are two ways: for if it has been shown that it

belongs either never or not in a certain case, the original statement has been

demolished. Moreover, in establishing a genus it is not enough to show that it

belongs,  but  also  that  it  belongs  as  genus  has  to  be  shown;  whereas  in

overthrowing it, it is enough to show its failure to belong either in some

particular case or in every case. It appears, in fact, as though, just as in other

things to destroy is easier than to create, so in these matters too to overthrow

is easier than to establish.

In the case of an accidental attribute the universal proposition is easier to

overthrow than to establish; for to establish it, one has to show that it belongs

in every case, whereas to overthrow it, it is enough to show that it does not

belong  in  one  single  case.  The  particular  proposition  is,  on  the  contrary,

easier to establish than to overthrow: for to establish it, it is enough to show

that it belongs in a particular instance, whereas to overthrow it, it has to be

shown that it never belongs at all.

It is clear also that the easiest thing of all is to overthrow a definition. For

on account of the number of statements involved we are presented in the

definition  with  the  greatest  number  of  points  for  attack,  and  the  more

plentiful  the  material,  the  quicker  an  argument  comes:  for  there  is  more

likelihood of a mistake occurring in a large than in a small number of things.

Moreover,  the  other  rules  too  may  be  used  as  means  for  attacking  a

definition: for if either the formula be not peculiar, or the genus rendered be

the  wrong  one,  or  something  included  in  the  formula  fail  to  belong,  the

definition is thereby demolished. On the other hand, against the others we

cannot bring all of the arguments drawn from definitions, nor yet of the rest:

for  only  those  relating  to  accidental  attributes  apply  generally  to  all  the

aforesaid kinds of attribute. For while each of the aforesaid kinds of attribute

must belong to the thing in question, yet the genus may very well not belongas a property without as yet being thereby demolished. Likewise also the

property need not belong as a genus, nor the accident as a genus or property,

so long as they do belong. So that it is impossible to use one set as a basis of

attack upon the other except in the case of definition. Clearly, then, it is the

easiest of all things to demolish a definition, while to establish one is the

hardest. For there one both has to establish all those other points by reasoning

(i.e. that the attributes stated belong, and that the genus rendered is the true

genus, and that the formula is peculiar to the term), and moreover, besides

this, that the formula indicates the essence of the thing; and this has to be

done correctly.

Of the rest, the property is most nearly of this kind: for it is easier to

demolish, because as a rule it contains several terms; while it is the hardest to

establish, both because of the number of things that people must be brought

to accept, and, besides this, because it belongs to its subject alone and is

predicated convertibly with its subject.

The easiest thing of all to establish is an accidental predicate: for in other

cases one has to show not only that the predicate belongs, but also that it

belongs in such and such a particular way: whereas in the case of the accident

it is enough to show merely that it belongs. On the other hand, an accidental

predicate  is  the  hardest  thing  to  overthrow,  because  it  affords  the  least

material:  for  in  stating  accident  a  man  does  not  add  how  the  predicate

belongs; and accordingly, while in other cases it is possible to demolish what

is said in two ways, by showing either that the predicate does not belong, or

that  it  does  not  belong  in  the  particular  way  stated,  in  the  case  of  an

accidental predicate the only way to demolish it is to show that it does not

belong at all.

The  commonplace  arguments  through  which  we  shall  be  well  supplied

with lines of argument with regard to our several problems have now been

enumerated at about sufficient length.                                Topics, Book VIII


Translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge


<

div id="book8" class="book" title="Book VIII">


1


Next there fall to be discussed the problems of arrangement and method in

putting questions. Any one who intends to frame questions must, first of all,

select the ground from which he should make his attack; secondly, he must

frame them and arrange them one by one to himself; thirdly and lastly, he

must  proceed  actually  to  put  them  to  the  other  party.  Now  so  far  as  the

selection  of  his  ground  is  concerned  the  problem  is  one  alike  for  the

philosopher and the dialectician; but how to go on to arrange his points and

frame his questions concerns the dialectician only: for in every problem of

that  kind  a  reference  to  another  party  is  involved.  Not  so  with  the

philosopher, and the man who is investigating by himself: the premisses of

his reasoning, although true and familiar, may be refused by the answerer

because they lie too near the original statement and so he foresees what will

follow if he grants them: but for this the philosopher does not care. Nay, he

may possibly be even anxious to secure axioms as familiar and as near to the

question  in  hand  as  possible:  for  these  are  the  bases  on  which  scientific

reasonings are built up.

The sources from which one’s commonplace arguments should be drawn

have already been described:’ we have now to discuss the arrangement and

formation of questions and first to distinguish the premisses, other than the

necessary premisses, which have to be adopted. By necessary premisses are

meant those through which the actual reasoning is constructed. Those which

are secured other than these are of four kinds; they serve either inductively to

secure the universal premiss being granted, or to lend weight to the argument,

or to conceal the conclusion, or to render the argument more clear. Beside

these there is no other premiss which need be secured: these are the ones

whereby  you  should  try  to  multiply  and  formulate  your  questions.  Thosewhich are used to conceal the conclusion serve a controversial purpose only;

but  inasmuch  as  an  undertaking  of  this  sort  is  always  conducted  against

another person, we are obliged to employ them as well.

The necessary premisses through which the reasoning is effected, ought

not to be propounded directly in so many words. Rather one should soar as

far aloof from them as possible. Thus if one desires to secure an admission

that the knowledge of contraries is one, one should ask him to admit it not of

contraries, but of opposites: for, if he grants this, one will then argue that the

knowledge of contraries is also the same, seeing that contraries are opposites;

if he does not, one should secure the admission by induction, by formulating

a proposition to that effect in the case of some particular pair of contraries.

For  one  must  secure  the  necessary  premisses  either  by  reasoning  or  by

induction,  or  else  partly  by  one  and  partly  by  the  other,  although  any

propositions which are too obvious to be denied may be formulated in so

many words. This is because the coming conclusion is less easily discerned at

the greater distance and in the process of induction, while at the same time,

even if one cannot reach the required premisses in this way, it is still open to

one to formulate them in so many words. The premisses, other than these,

that were mentioned above, must be secured with a view to the latter. The

way to employ them respectively is as follows: Induction should proceed

from individual cases to the universal and from the known to the unknown;

and  the  objects  of  perception  are  better  known,  to  most  people  if  not

invariably.  Concealment  of  one’s  plan  is  obtained  by  securing  through

prosyllogisms  the  premisses  through  which  the  proof  of  the  original

proposition is going to be constructed-and as many of them as possible. This

is likely to be effected by making syllogisms to prove not only the necessary

premisses  but  also  some  of  those  which  are  required  to  establish  them.

Moreover, do not state the conclusions of these premisses but draw them later

one  after  another;  for  this  is  likely  to  keep  the  answerer  at  the  greatest

possible distance from the original proposition. Speaking generally, a man

who  desires  to  get  information  by  a  concealed  method  should  so  put  his

questions  that  when  he  has  put  his  whole  argument  and  has  stated  the

conclusion,  people  still  ask  ‘Well,  but  why  is  that?’  This  result  will  be

secured best of all by the method above described: for if one states only the

final conclusion, it is unclear how it comes about; for the answerer does not

foresee on what grounds it is based, because the previous syllogisms have not

been  made  articulate  to  him:  while  the  final  syllogism,  showing  theconclusion, is likely to be kept least articulate if we lay down not the secured

propositions on which it is based, but only the grounds on which we reason to

them.

It is a useful rule, too, not to secure the admissions claimed as the bases of

the syllogisms in their proper order, but alternately those that conduce to one

conclusion and those that conduce to another; for, if those which go together

are set side by side, the conclusion that will result from them is more obvious

in advance.

One  should  also,  wherever  possible,  secure  the  universal  premiss  by  a

definition  relating  not  to  the  precise  terms  themselves  but  to  their  co-

ordinates; for people deceive themselves, whenever the definition is taken in

regard to a co-ordinate, into thinking that they are not making the admission

universally. An instance would be, supposing one had to secure the admission

that the angry man desires vengeance on account of an apparent slight, and

were to secure this, that ‘anger’ is a desire for vengeance on account of an

apparent slight: for, clearly, if this were secured, we should have universally

what we intend. If, on the other hand, people formulate propositions relating

to the actual terms themselves, they often find that the answerer refuses to

grant them because on the actual term itself he is readier with his objection,

e.g. that the ‘angry man’ does not desire vengeance, because we become

angry with our parents, but we do not desire vengeance on them. Very likely

the objection is not valid; for upon some people it is vengeance enough to

cause them pain and make them sorry; but still it gives a certain plausibility

and  air  of  reasonableness  to  the  denial  of  the  proposition.  In  the  case,

however, of the definition of ‘anger’ it is not so easy to find an objection.

  Moreover, formulate your proposition as though you did so not for its own

sake, but in order to get at something else: for people are shy of granting

what  an  opponent’s  case  really  requires.  Speaking  generally,  a  questioner

should leave it as far as possible doubtful whether he wishes to secure an

admission of his proposition or of its opposite: for if it be uncertain what their

opponent’s  argument  requires,  people  are  more  ready  to  say  what  they

themselves think.

  Moreover,  try  to  secure  admissions  by  means  of  likeness:  for  such

admissions are plausible, and the universal involved is less patent; e.g. make

the other person admit that as knowledge and ignorance of contraries is the

same, so too perception of contraries is the same; or vice versa, that since the

perception is the same, so is the knowledge also. This argument resemblesinduction, but is not the same thing; for in induction it is the universal whose

admission  is  secured  from  the  particulars,  whereas  in  arguments  from

likeness, what is secured is not the universal under which all the like cases

fall.

It is a good rule also, occasionally to bring an objection against oneself: for

answerers are put off their guard against those who appear to be arguing

impartially.  It  is  useful  too,  to  add  that  ‘So  and  so  is  generally  held  or

commonly said’; for people are shy of upsetting the received opinion unless

they have some positive objection to urge: and at the same time they are

cautious about upsetting such things because they themselves too find them

useful.  Moreover,  do  not  be  insistent,  even  though  you  really  require  the

point: for insistence always arouses the more opposition. Further, formulate

your premiss as though it were a mere illustration: for people admit the more

readily a proposition made to serve some other purpose, and not required on

its own account. Moreover, do not formulate the very proposition you need to

secure, but rather something from which that necessarily follows: for people

are more willing to admit the latter, because it is not so clear from this what

the result will be, and if the one has been secured, the other has been secured

also. Again, one should put last the point which one most wishes to have

conceded; for people are specially inclined to deny the first questions put to

them, because most people in asking questions put first the points which they

are most eager to secure. On the other hand, in dealing with some people

propositions of this sort should be put forward first: for ill-tempered men

admit most readily what comes first, unless the conclusion that will result

actually stares them in the face, while at the close of an argument they show

their ill-temper. Likewise also with those who consider themselves smart at

answering: for when they have admitted most of what you want they finally

talk clap-trap to the effect that the conclusion does not follow from their

admissions: yet they say ‘Yes’ readily, confident in their own character, and

imagining that they cannot suffer any reverse. Moreover, it is well to expand

the argument and insert things that it does not require at all, as do those who

draw false geometrical figures: for in the multitude of details the whereabouts

of the fallacy is obscured. For this reason also a questioner sometimes evades

observation as he adds in a corner what, if he formulated it by itself, would

not be granted.

For concealment, then, the rules which should be followed are the above.

Ornament  is  attained  by  induction  and  distinction  of  things  closely  akin.What sort of process induction is obvious: as for distinction, an instance of

the kind of thing meant is the distinction of one form of knowledge as better

than another by being either more accurate, or concerned with better objects;

or the distinction of sciences into speculative, practical, and productive. For

everything of this kind lends additional ornament to the argument, though

there is no necessity to say them, so far as the conclusion goes.

For clearness, examples and comparisons should be adduced, and let the

illustrations be relevant and drawn from things that we know, as in Homer

and not as in Choerilus; for then the proposition is likely to become clearer.

<

div id="section70" class="section" title="2">


2


In  dialectics,  syllogism  should  be  employed  in  reasoning  against

dialecticians rather than against the crowd: induction, on the other hand, is

most  useful  against  the  crowd.  This  point  has  been  treated  previously  as

well.’ In induction, it is possible in some cases to ask the question in its

universal form, but in others this is not easy, because there is no established

general term that covers all the resemblances: in this case, when people need

to secure the universal, they use the phrase ‘in all cases of this sort’. But it is

one of the very hardest things to distinguish which of the things adduced are

‘of this sort’, and which are not: and in this connexion people often throw

dust  in  each  others’  eyes  in  their  discussion,  the  one  party  asserting  the

likeness of things that are not alike, and the other disputing the likeness of

things that are. One ought, therefore, to try oneself to coin a word to cover all

things of the given sort, so as to leave no opportunity either to the answerer to

dispute, and say that the thing advanced does not answer to a like description,

or to the questioner to suggest falsely that it does answer to a like description,

for many things appear to answer to like descriptions that do not really do so.

If one has made an induction on the strength of several cases and yet the

answerer refuses to grant the universal proposition, then it is fair to demand

his objection. But until one has oneself stated in what cases it is so, it is not

fair to demand that he shall say in what cases it is not so: for one should make

the induction first, and then demand the objection. One ought, moreover, to

claim that the objections should not be brought in reference to the actual

subject of the proposition, unless that subject happen to be the one and onlything of the kind, as for instance two is the one prime number among the

even numbers: for, unless he can say that this subject is unique of its kind, the

objector  ought  to  make  his  objection  in  regard  to  some  other.  People

sometimes object to a universal proposition, and bring their objection not in

regard to the thing itself, but in regard to some homonym of it: thus they

argue that a man can very well have a colour or a foot or a hand other than

his own, for a painter may have a colour that is not his own, and a cook may

have a foot that is not his own. To meet them, therefore, you should draw the

distinction  before  putting  your  question  in  such  cases:  for  so  long  as  the

ambiguity remains undetected, so long will the objection to the proposition

be  deemed  valid.  If,  however,  he  checks  the  series  of  questions  by  an

objection in regard not to some homonym, but to the actual thing asserted, the

questioner should withdraw the point objected to, and form the remainder

into a universal proposition, until he secures what he requires; e.g. in the case

of forgetfulness and having forgotten: for people refuse to admit that the man

who has lost his knowledge of a thing has forgotten it, because if the thing

alters, he has lost knowledge of it, but he has not forgotten it. Accordingly the

thing to do is to withdraw the part objected to, and assert the remainder, e.g.

that if a person have lost knowledge of a thing while it still remains, he then

has forgotten it. One should similarly treat those who object to the statement

that ‘the greater the good, the greater the evil that is its opposite’: for they

allege that health, which is a less good thing than vigour, has a greater evil as

its  opposite:  for  disease  is  a  greater  evil  than  debility.  In  this  case  too,

therefore, we have to withdraw the point objected to; for when it has been

withdrawn, the man is more likely to admit the proposition, e.g. that ‘the

greater good has the greater evil as its opposite, unless the one good involves

the other as well’, as vigour involves health. This should be done not only

when he formulates an objection, but also if, without so doing, he refuses to

admit the point because he foresees something of the kind: for if the point

objected to be withdrawn, he will be forced to admit the proposition because

he cannot foresee in the rest of it any case where it does not hold true: if he

refuse  to  admit  it,  then  when  asked  for  an  objection  he  certainly  will  be

unable to render one. Propositions that are partly false and partly true are of

this type: for in the case of these it is possible by withdrawing a part to leave

the rest true. If, however, you formulate the proposition on the strength of

many cases and he has no objection to bring, you may claim that he shall

admit  it:  for  a  premiss  is  valid  in  dialectics  which  thus  holds  in  severalinstances and to which no objection is forthcoming.

  Whenever it is possible to reason to the same conclusion either through or

without a reduction per impossibile, if one is demonstrating and not arguing

dialectically it makes no difference which method of reasoning be adopted,

but in argument with another reasoning per impossibile should be avoided.

For where one has reasoned without the reduction per impossibile, no dispute

can arise; if, on the other hand, one does reason to an impossible conclusion,

unless its falsehood is too plainly manifest, people deny that it is impossible,

so that the questioners do not get what they want.

One should put forward all propositions that hold true of several cases, and

to  which  either  no  objection  whatever  appears  or  at  least  not  any  on  the

surface: for when people cannot see any case in which it is not so, they admit

it for true.

The conclusion should not be put in the form of a question; if it be, and the

man shakes his head, it looks as if the reasoning had failed. For often, even if

it be not put as a question but advanced as a consequence, people deny it, and

then those who do not see that it follows upon the previous admissions do not

realize that those who deny it have been refuted: when, then, the one man

merely asks it as a question without even saying that it so follows, and the

other denies it, it looks altogether as if the reasoning had failed.

  Not  every  universal  question  can  form  a  dialectical  proposition  as

ordinarily understood, e.g. ‘What is man?’ or ‘How many meanings has “the

good”?’ For a dialectical premiss must be of a form to which it is possible to

reply ‘Yes’ or ‘No’, whereas to the aforesaid it is not possible. For this reason

questions of this kind are not dialectical unless the questioner himself draws

distinctions or divisions before expressing them, e.g. ‘Good means this, or

this, does it not?’ For questions of this sort are easily answered by a Yes or a

No. Hence one should endeavour to formulate propositions of this kind in this

form. It is at the same time also perhaps fair to ask the other man how many

meanings of ‘the good’ there are, whenever you have yourself distinguished

and formulated them, and he will not admit them at all.

Any one who keeps on asking one thing for a long time is a bad inquirer.

For  if  he  does  so  though  the  person  questioned  keeps  on  answering  the

questions, clearly he asks a large number of questions, or else asks the same

question a large number of times: in the one case he merely babbles, in the

other he fails to reason: for reasoning always consists of a small number of

premisses. If, on the other hand, he does it because the person questioneddoes not answer the questions, he is at fault in not taking him to task or

breaking off the discussion.

<

div id="section71" class="section" title="3">


3


  There are certain hypotheses upon which it is at once difficult to bring, and

easy to stand up to, an argument. Such (e.g.) are those things which stand

first and those which stand last in the order of nature. For the former require

definition, while the latter have to be arrived at through many steps if one

wishes  to  secure  a  continuous  proof  from  first  principles,  or  else  all

discussion about them wears the air of mere sophistry: for to prove anything

is impossible unless one begins with the appropriate principles, and connects

inference  with  inference  till  the  last  are  reached.  Now  to  define  first

principles is just what answerers do not care to do, nor do they pay any

attention if the questioner makes a definition: and yet until it is clear what it

is that is proposed, it is not easy to discuss it. This sort of thing happens

particularly in the case of the first principles: for while the other propositions

are shown through these, these cannot be shown through anything else: we

are  obliged  to  understand  every  item  of  that  sort  by  a  definition.  The

inferences, too, that lie too close to the first principle are hard to treat in

argument: for it is not possible to bring many arguments in regard to them,

because of the small number of those steps, between the conclusion and the

principle,  whereby  the  succeeding  propositions  have  to  be  shown.  The

hardest, however, of all definitions to treat in argument are those that employ

terms about which, in the first place, it is uncertain whether they are used in

one  sense  or  several,  and,  further,  whether  they  are  used  literally  or

metaphorically by the definer. For because of their obscurity, it is impossible

to argue upon such terms; and because of the impossibility of saying whether

this obscurity is due to their being used metaphorically, it is impossible to

refute them.

In  general,  it  is  safe  to  suppose  that,  whenever  any  problem  proves

intractable, it either needs definition or else bears either several senses, or a

metaphorical sense, or it is not far removed from the first principles; or else

the reason is that we have yet to discover in the first place just this-in which

of the aforesaid directions the source of our difficulty lies: when we havemade this clear, then obviously our business must be either to define or to

distinguish, or to supply the intermediate premisses: for it is through these

that the final conclusions are shown.

It often happens that a difficulty is found in discussing or arguing a given

position because the definition has not been correctly rendered: e.g. ‘Has one

thing  one  contrary  or  many?’:  here  when  the  term  ‘contraries’  has  been

properly defined, it is easy to bring people to see whether it is possible for the

same thing to have several contraries or not: in the same way also with other

terms requiring definition. It appears also in mathematics that the difficulty in

using a figure is sometimes due to a defect in definition; e.g. in proving that

the line which cuts the plane parallel to one side divides similarly both the

line which it cuts and the area; whereas if the definition be given, the fact

asserted  becomes  immediately  clear:  for  the  areas  have  the  same  fraction

subtracted from them as have the sides: and this is the definition of ‘the same

ratio’. The most primary of the elementary principles are without exception

very easy to show, if the definitions involved, e.g. the nature of a line or of a

circle, be laid down; only the arguments that can be brought in regard to each

of them are not many, because there are not many intermediate steps. If, on

the other hand, the definition of the starting-points be not laid down, to show

them  is  difficult  and  may  even  prove  quite  impossible.  The  case  of  the

significance  of  verbal  expressions  is  like  that  of  these  mathematical

conceptions.

One may be sure then, whenever a position is hard to discuss, that one or

other of the aforesaid things has happened to it. Whenever, on the other hand,

it is a harder task to argue to the point claimed, i.e. the premiss, than to the

resulting position, a doubt may arise whether such claims should be admitted

or not: for if a man is going to refuse to admit it and claim that you shall

argue to it as well, he will be giving the signal for a harder undertaking than

was originally proposed: if, on the other hand, he grants it, he will be giving

the original thesis credence on the strength of what is less credible than itself.

If, then, it is essential not to enhance the difficulty of the problem, he had

better  grant  it;  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  be  essential  to  reason  through

premisses that are better assured, he had better refuse. In other words, in

serious inquiry he ought not to grant it, unless he be more sure about it than

about the conclusion; whereas in a dialectical exercise he may do so if he is

merely satisfied of its truth. Clearly, then, the circumstances under which

such admissions should be claimed are different for a mere questioner and fora serious teacher.

<

div id="section72" class="section" title="4">


4


As to the formulation, then, and arrangement of one’s questions, about

enough has been said.

  With regard to the giving of answers, we must first define what is the

business of a good answerer, as of a good questioner. The business of the

questioner is so to develop the argument as to make the answerer utter the

most extrvagant paradoxes that necessarily follow because of his position:

while  that  of  the  answerer  is  to  make  it  appear  that  it  is  not  he  who  is

responsible for the absurdity or paradox, but only his position: for one may,

perhaps, distinguish between the mistake of taking up a wrong position to

start with, and that of not maintaining it properly, when once taken up.

<

div id="section73" class="section" title="5">


5


  Inasmuch as no rules are laid down for those who argue for the sake of

training and of examination:-and the aim of those engaged in teaching or

learning is quite different from that of those engaged in a competition; as is

the  latter  from  that  of  those  who  discuss  things  together  in  the  spirit  of

inquiry: for a learner should always state what he thinks: for no one is even

trying to teach him what is false; whereas in a competition the business of the

questioner is to appear by all means to produce an effect upon the other,

while that of the answerer is to appear unaffected by him; on the other hand,

in an assembly of disputants discussing in the spirit not of a competition but

of an examination and inquiry, there are as yet no articulate rules about what

the answerer should aim at, and what kind of things he should and should not

grant for the correct or incorrect defence of his position:-inasmuch, then, as

we have no tradition bequeathed to us by others, let us try to say something

upon the matter for ourselves.

The  thesis  laid  down  by  the  answerer  before  facing  the  questioner’sargument is bound of necessity to be one that is either generally accepted or

generally rejected or else is neither: and moreover is so accepted or rejected

either absolutely or else with a restriction, e.g. by some given person, by the

speaker  or  by  some  one  else.  The  manner,  however,  of  its  acceptance  or

rejection, whatever it be, makes no difference: for the right way to answer,

i.e. to admit or to refuse to admit what has been asked, will be the same in

either case. If, then, the statement laid down by the answerer be generally

rejected,  the  conclusion  aimed  at  by  the  questioner  is  bound  to  be  one

generally accepted, whereas if the former be generally accepted, the latter is

generally rejected: for the conclusion which the questioner tries to draw is

always the opposite of the statement laid down. If, on the other hand, what is

laid down is generally neither rejected nor accepted, the conclusion will be of

the same type as well. Now since a man who reasons correctly demonstrates

his proposed conclusion from premisses that are more generally accepted,

and more familiar, it is clear that (1) where the view laid down by him is one

that generally is absolutely rejected, the answerer ought not to grant either

what is thus absolutely not accepted at all, or what is accepted indeed, but

accepted less generally than the questioner’s conclusion. For if the statement

laid down by the answerer be generally rejected, the conclusion aimed at by

the questioner will be one that is generally accepted, so that the premisses

secured by the questioner should all be views generally accepted, and more

generally accepted than his proposed conclusion, if the less familiar is to be

inferred through the more familiar. Consequently, if any of the questions put

to him be not of this character, the answerer should not grant them. (2) If, on

the  other  hand,  the  statement  laid  down  by  the  answerer  be  generally

accepted  without  qualification,  clearly  the  conclusion  sought  by  the

questioner will be one generally rejected without qualification. Accordingly,

the answerer should admit all views that are generally accepted and, of those

that are not generally accepted, all that are less generally rejected than the

conclusion sought by the questioner. For then he will probably be thought to

have argued sufficiently well. (3) Likewise, too, if the statement laid down by

the answerer be neither rejected generally nor generally accepted; for then,

too, anything that appears to be true should be granted, and, of the views not

generally  accepted,  any  that  are  more  generally  accepted  than  the

questioner’s conclusion; for in that case the result will be that the arguments

will be more generally accepted. If, then, the view laid down by the answerer

be one that is generally accepted or rejected without qualification, then theviews  that  are  accepted  absolutely  must  be  taken  as  the  standard  of

comparison:  whereas  if  the  view  laid  down  be  one  that  is  not  generally

accepted or rejected, but only by the answerer, then the standard whereby the

latter must judge what is generally accepted or not, and must grant or refuse

to grant the point asked, is himself. If, again, the answerer be defending some

one else’s opinion, then clearly it will be the latter’s judgement to which he

must have regard in granting or denying the various points. This is why those,

too, who introduce other’s opinions, e.g. that ‘good and evil are the same

thing,  as  Heraclitus  says,’  refuse  to  admit  the  impossibility  of  contraries

belonging  at  the  same  time  to  the  same  thing;  not  because  they  do  not

themselves believe this, but because on Heraclitus’ principles one has to say

so. The same thing is done also by those who take on the defence of one

another’s positions; their aim being to speak as would the man who stated the

position.

<

div id="section74" class="section" title="6">


6


It is clear, then, what the aims of the answerer should be, whether the

position he lays down be a view generally accepted without qualification or

accepted by some definite person. Now every question asked is bound to

involve  some  view  that  is  either  generally  held  or  generally  rejected  or

neither, and is also bound to be either relevant to the argument or irrelevant:

if then it be a view generally accepted and irrelevant, the answerer should

grant it and remark that it is the accepted view: if it be a view not generally

accepted and irrelevant, he should grant it but add a comment that it is not

generally accepted, in order to avoid the appearance of being a simpleton. If

it be relevant and also be generally accepted, he should admit that it is the

view  generally  accepted  but  say  that  it  lies  too  close  to  the  original

proposition, and that if it be granted the problem proposed collapses. If what

is  claimed  by  the  questioner  be  relevant  but  too  generally  rejected,  the

answerer, while admitting that if it be granted the conclusion sought follows,

should yet protest that the proposition is too absurd to be admitted. Suppose,

again, it be a view that is neither rejected generally nor generally accepted,

then, if it be irrelevant to the argument, it may be granted without restriction;

if, however, it be relevant, the answerer should add the comment that, if it begranted, the original problem collapses. For then the answerer will not be

held to be personally accountable for what happens to him, if he grants the

several points with his eyes open, and also the questioner will be able to draw

his inference, seeing that all the premisses that are more generally accepted

than the conclusion are granted him. Those who try to draw an inference

from premisses more generally rejected than the conclusion clearly do not

reason correctly: hence, when men ask these things, they ought not to be

granted.

<

div id="section75" class="section" title="7">


7


The questioner should be met in a like manner also in the case of terms

used  obscurely,  i.e.  in  several  senses.  For  the  answerer,  if  he  does  not

understand,  is  always  permitted  to  say  ‘I  do  not  understand’:  he  is  not

compelled to reply ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ to a question which may mean different

things. Clearly, then, in the first place, if what is said be not clear, he ought

not  to  hesitate  to  say  that  he  does  not  understand  it;  for  often  people

encounter some difficulty from assenting to questions that are not clearly put.

If he understands the question and yet it covers many senses, then supposing

what it says to be universally true or false, he should give it an unqualified

assent or denial: if, on the other hand, it be partly true and partly false, he

should add a comment that it bears different senses, and also that in one it is

true, in the other false: for if he leave this distinction till later, it becomes

uncertain whether originally as well he perceived the ambiguity or not. If he

does not foresee the ambiguity, but assents to the question having in view the

one sense of the words, then, if the questioner takes it in the other sense, he

should say, ‘That was not what I had in view when I admitted it; I meant the

other sense’: for if a term or expression covers more than one thing, it is easy

to disagree. If, however, the question is both clear and simple, he should

answer either ‘Yes’ or ‘No’.

<

div id="section76" class="section" title="8">


8A premiss in reasoning always either is one of the constituent elements in

the reasoning, or else goes to establish one of these: (and you can always tell

when it is secured in order to establish something else by the fact of a number

of similar questions being put: for as a rule people secure their universal by

means  either  of  induction  or  of  likeness):-accordingly  the  particular

propositions should all be admitted, if they are true and generally held. On

the other hand, against the universal one should try to bring some negative

instance; for to bring the argument to a standstill without a negative instance,

either real or apparent, shows ill-temper. If, then, a man refuses to grant the

universal when supported by many instances, although he has no negative

instance  to  show,  he  obviously  shows  ill-temper.  If,  moreover,  he  cannot

even attempt a counter-proof that it is not true, far more likely is he to be

thought ill-tempered-although even counter-proof is not enough: for we often

hear arguments that are contrary to common opinions, whose solution is yet

difficult, e.g. the argument of Zeno that it is impossible to move or to traverse

the stadium;-but still, this is no reason for omitting to assert the opposites of

these views. If, then, a man refuses to admit the proposition without having

either  a  negative  instance  or  some  counter-argument  to  bring  against  it,

clearly he is ill-tempered: for ill-temper in argument consists in answering in

ways other than the above, so as to wreck the reasoning.

<

div id="section77" class="section" title="9">


9


Before maintaining either a thesis or a definition the answerer should try

his hand at attacking it by himself; for clearly his business is to oppose those

positions from which questioners demolish what he has laid down.

He should beware of maintaining a hypothesis that is generally rejected:

and this it may be in two ways: for it may be one which results in absurd

statements, e.g. suppose any one were to say that everything is in motion or

that nothing is; and also there are all those which only a bad character would

choose, and which are implicitly opposed to men’s wishes, e.g. that pleasure

is the good, and that to do injustice is better than to suffer it. For people then

hate him, supposing him to maintain them not for the sake of argument but

because he really thinks them.

<div id="section78" class="section" title="10">


10


Of all arguments that reason to a false conclusion the right solution is to

demolish  the  point  on  which  the  fallacy  that  occurs  depends:  for  the

demolition  of  any  random  point  is  no  solution,  even  though  the  point

demolished be false. For the argument may contain many falsehoods, e.g.

suppose  some  one  to  secure  the  premisses,  ‘He  who  sits,  writes’  and

‘Socrates is sitting’: for from these it follows that ‘Socrates is writing’. Now

we may demolish the proposition ‘Socrates is sitting’, and still be no nearer a

solution of the argument; it may be true that the point claimed is false; but it

is not on that that fallacy of the argument depends: for supposing that any one

should happen to be sitting and not writing, it would be impossible in such a

case to apply the same solution. Accordingly, it is not this that needs to be

demolished, but rather that ‘He who sits, writes’: for he who sits does not

always write. He, then, who has demolished the point on which the fallacy

depends, has given the solution of the argument completely. Any one who

knows that it is on such and such a point that the argument depends, knows

the solution of it, just as in the case of a figure falsely drawn. For it is not

enough to object, even if the point demolished be a falsehood, but the reason

of the fallacy should also be proved: for then it would be clear whether the

man makes his objection with his eyes open or not.

  There  are  four  possible  ways  of  preventing  a  man  from  working  his

argument to a conclusion. It can be done either by demolishing the point on

which the falsehood that comes about depends, or by stating an objection

directed against the questioner: for often when a solution has not as a matter

of fact been brought, yet the questioner is rendered thereby unable to pursue

the argument any farther. Thirdly, one may object to the questions asked: for

it  may  happen  that  what  the  questioner  wants  does  not  follow  from  the

questions  he  has  asked  because  he  has  asked  them  badly,  whereas  if

something additional be granted the conclusion comes about. If, then, the

questioner  be  unable  to  pursue  his  argument  farther,  the  objection  would

properly be directed against the questioner; if he can do so, then it would be

against his questions. The fourth and worst kind of objection is that which is

directed to the time allowed for discussion: for some people bring objections

of a kind which would take longer to answer than the length of the discussionin hand.

  There are then, as we said, four ways of making objections: but of them the

first alone is a solution: the others are just hindrances and stumbling-blocks

to prevent the conclusions.

<

div id="section79" class="section" title="11">


11


  Adverse  criticism  of  an  argument  on  its  own  merits,  and  of  it  when

presented in the form of questions, are two different things. For often the

failure to carry through the argument correctly in discussion is due to the

person questioned, because he will not grant the steps of which a correct

argument  might  have  been  made  against  his  position:  for  it  is  not  in  the

power of the one side only to effect properly a result that depends on both

alike. Accordingly it sometimes becomes necessary to attack the speaker and

not his position, when the answerer lies in wait for the points that are contrary

to  the  questioner  and  becomes  abusive  as  well:  when  people  lose  their

tempers  in  this  way,  their  argument  becomes  a  contest,  not  a  discussion.

Moreover,  since  arguments  of  this  kind  are  held  not  for  the  sake  of

instruction but for purposes of practice and examination, clearly one has to

reason not only to true conclusions, but also to false ones, and not always

through true premisses, but sometimes through false as well. For often, when

a true proposition is put forward, the dialectician is compelled to demolish it:

and then false propositions have to be formulated. Sometimes also when a

false proposition is put forward, it has to be demolished by means of false

propositions: for it is possible for a given man to believe what is not the fact

more firmly than the truth. Accordingly, if the argument be made to depend

on something that he holds, it will be easier to persuade or help him. He,

however, who would rightly convert any one to a different opinion should do

so in a dialectical and not in a contentious manner, just as a geometrician

should reason geometrically, whether his conclusion be false or true: what

kind of syllogisms are dialectical has already been said. The principle that a

man who hinders the common business is a bad partner, clearly applies to an

argument as well; for in arguments as well there is a common aim in view,

except with mere contestants, for these cannot both reach the same goal; for

more than one cannot possibly win. It makes no difference whether he effectsthis as answerer or as questioner: for both he who asks contentious questions

is a bad dialectician, and also he who in answering fails to grant the obvious

answer or to understand the point of the questioner’s inquiry. What has been

said, then, makes it clear that adverse criticism is not to be passed in a like

strain upon the argument on its own merits, and upon the questioner: for it

may very well be that the argument is bad, but that the questioner has argued

with the answerer in the best possible way: for when men lose their tempers,

it may perhaps be impossible to make one’s inferences straight-forwardly as

one would wish: we have to do as we can.

  Inasmuch as it is indeterminate when people are claiming the admission of

contrary things, and when they are claiming what originally they set out to

prove-for often when they are talking by themselves they say contrary things,

and admit afterwards what they have previously denied; for which reason

they often assent, when questioned, to contrary things and to what originally

had to be proved-the argument is sure to become vitiated. The responsibility,

however, for this rests with the answerer, because while refusing to grant

other points, he does grant points of that kind. It is, then, clear that adverse

criticism is not to be passed in a like manner upon questioners and upon their

arguments.

In itself an argument is liable to five kinds of adverse criticism:

(1)  The  first  is  when  neither  the  proposed  conclusion  nor  indeed  any

conclusion at all is drawn from the questions asked, and when most, if not all,

of the premisses on which the conclusion rests are false or generally rejected,

when, moreover, neither any withdrawals nor additions nor both together can

bring the conclusions about.

(2) The second is, supposing the reasoning, though constructed from the

premisses, and in the manner, described above, were to be irrelevant to the

original position.

(3)  The  third  is,  supposing  certain  additions  would  bring  an  inference

about but yet these additions were to be weaker than those that were put as

questions and less generally held than the conclusion.

(4)  Again,  supposing  certain  withdrawals  could  effect  the  same:  for

sometimes people secure more premisses than are necessary, so that it is not

through them that the inference comes about.

(5)  Moreover,  suppose  the  premisses  be  less  generally  held  and  less

credible than the conclusion, or if, though true, they require more trouble to

prove than the proposed view.One must not claim that the reasoning to a proposed view shall in every

case equally be a view generally accepted and convincing: for it is a direct

result of the nature of things that some subjects of inquiry shall be easier and

some harder, so that if a man brings people to accept his point from opinions

that  are  as  generally  received  as  the  case  admits,  he  has  argued  his  case

correctly. Clearly, then, not even the argument itself is open to the same

adverse criticism when taken in relation to the proposed conclusion and when

taken by itself. For there is nothing to prevent the argument being open to

reproach  in  itself,  and  yet  commendable  in  relation  to  the  proposed

conclusion, or again, vice versa, being commendable in itself, and yet open to

reproach in relation to the proposed conclusion, whenever there are many

propositions both generally held and also true whereby it could easily be

proved.  It  is  possible  also  that  an  argument,  even  though  brought  to  a

conclusion, may sometimes be worse than one which is not so concluded,

whenever the premisses of the former are silly, while its conclusion is not so;

whereas the latter, though requiring certain additions, requires only such as

are generally held and true, and moreover does not rest as an argument on

these additions. With those which bring about a true conclusion by means of

false premisses, it is not fair to find fault: for a false conclusion must of

necessity always be reached from a false premiss, but a true conclusion may

sometimes  be  drawn  even  from  false  premisses;  as  is  clear  from  the

Analytics.

  Whenever  by  the  argument  stated  something  is  demonstrated,  but  that

something is other than what is wanted and has no bearing whatever on the

conclusion, then no inference as to the latter can be drawn from it: and if

there appears to be, it will be a sophism, not a proof. A philosopheme is a

demonstrative inference: an epichireme is a dialectical inference: a sophism is

a contentious inference: an aporeme is an inference that reasons dialectically

to a contradiction.

If something were to be shown from premisses, both of which are views

generally accepted, but not accepted with like conviction, it may very well be

that the conclusion shown is something held more strongly than either. If, on

the other hand, general opinion be for the one and neither for nor against the

other, or if it be for the one and against the other, then, if the pro and con be

alike in the case of the premisses, they will be alike for the conclusion also:

if, on the other hand, the one preponderates, the conclusion too will follow

suit.It is also a fault in reasoning when a man shows something through a long

chain of steps, when he might employ fewer steps and those already included

in his argument: suppose him to be showing (e.g.) that one opinion is more

properly so called than another, and suppose him to make his postulates as

follows:  ‘x-in-itself  is  more  fully  x  than  anything  else’:  ‘there  genuinely

exists an object of opinion in itself’: therefore ‘the object-of-opinion-in-itself

is more fully an object of opinion than the particular objects of opinion’. Now

‘a relative term is more fully itself when its correlate is more fully itself’: and

‘there exists a genuine opinion-in-itself, which will be “opinion” in a more

accurate sense than the particular opinions’: and it has been postulated both

that ‘a genuine opinion-in-itself exists’, and that ‘x-in-itself is more fully x

than anything else’: therefore ‘this will be opinion in a more accurate sense’.

Wherein lies the viciousness of the reasoning? Simply in that it conceals the

ground on which the argument depends.

<

div id="section80" class="section" title="12">


12


An argument is clear in one, and that the most ordinary, sense, if it be so

brought to a conclusion as to make no further questions necessary: in another

sense,  and  this  is  the  type  most  usually  advanced,  when  the  propositions

secured are such as compel the conclusion, and the argument is concluded

through premisses that are themselves conclusions: moreover, it is so also if

some step is omitted that generally is firmly accepted.

An argument is called fallacious in four senses: (1) when it appears to be

brought  to  a  conclusion,  and  is  not  really  so-what  is  called  ‘contentious’

reasoning:  (2)  when  it  comes  to  a  conclusion  but  not  to  the  conclusion

proposed-which  happens  principally  in  the  case  of  reductiones  ad

impossibile: (3) when it comes to the proposed conclusion but not according

to  the  mode  of  inquiry  appropriate  to  the  case,  as  happens  when  a  non-

medical  argument  is  taken  to  be  a  medical  one,  or  one  which  is  not

geometrical for a geometrical argument, or one which is not dialectical for

dialectical, whether the result reached be true or false: (4) if the conclusion be

reached through false premisses: of this type the conclusion is sometimes

false, sometimes true: for while a false conclusion is always the result of false

premisses, a true conclusion may be drawn even from premisses that are nottrue, as was said above as well.

  Fallacy in argument is due to a mistake of the arguer rather than of the

argument: yet it is not always the fault of the arguer either, but only when he

is not aware of it: for we often accept on its merits in preference to many true

ones an argument which demolishes some true proposition if it does so from

premisses as far as possible generally accepted. For an argument of that kind

does demonstrate other things that are true: for one of the premisses laid

down ought never to be there at all, and this will then be demonstrated. If,

however, a true conclusion were to be reached through premisses that are

false and utterly childish, the argument is worse than many arguments that

lead  to  a  false  conclusion,  though  an  argument  which  leads  to  a  false

conclusion may also be of this type. Clearly then the first thing to ask in

regard to the argument in itself is, ‘Has it a conclusion?’; the second, ‘Is the

conclusion  true  or  false?’;  the  third,  ‘Of  what  kind  of  premisses  does  it

consist?’: for if the latter, though false, be generally accepted, the argument is

dialectical, whereas if, though true, they be generally rejected, it is bad: if

they be both false and also entirely contrary to general opinion, clearly it is

bad, either altogether or else in relation to the particular matter in hand.

<

div id="section81" class="section" title="13">


13


Of the ways in which a questioner may beg the original question and also

beg  contraries  the  true  account  has  been  given  in  the  Analytics:’  but  an

account on the level of general opinion must be given now.

People appear to beg their original question in five ways: the first and most

obvious being if any one begs the actual point requiring to be shown: this is

easily detected when put in so many words; but it is more apt to escape

detection in the case of different terms, or a term and an expression, that

mean  the  same  thing.  A  second  way  occurs  whenever  any  one  begs

universally  something  which  he  has  to  demonstrate  in  a  particular  case:

suppose (e.g.) he were trying to prove that the knowledge of contraries is one

and were to claim that the knowledge of opposites in general is one: for then

he is generally thought to be begging, along with a number of other things,

that which he ought to have shown by itself. A third way is if any one were to

beg in particular cases what he undertakes to show universally: e.g. if heundertook  to  show  that  the  knowledge  of  contraries  is  always  one,  and

begged it of certain pairs of contraries: for he also is generally considered to

be begging independently and by itself what, together with a number of other

things, he ought to have shown. Again, a man begs the question if he begs his

conclusion piecemeal: supposing e.g. that he had to show that medicine is a

science of what leads to health and to disease, and were to claim first the one,

then the other; or, fifthly, if he were to beg the one or the other of a pair of

statements that necessarily involve one other; e.g. if he had to show that the

diagonal is incommensurable with the side, and were to beg that the side is

incommensurable with the diagonal.

The ways in which people assume contraries are equal in number to those

in which they beg their original question. For it would happen, firstly, if any

one were to beg an opposite affirmation and negation; secondly, if he were to

beg the contrary terms of an antithesis, e.g. that the same thing is good and

evil; thirdly, suppose any one were to claim something universally and then

proceed to beg its contradictory in some particular case, e.g. if having secured

that the knowledge of contraries is one, he were to claim that the knowledge

of what makes for health or for disease is different; or, fourthly, suppose him,

after postulating the latter view, to try to secure universally the contradictory

statement. Again, fifthly, suppose a man begs the contrary of the conclusion

which necessarily comes about through the premisses laid down; and this

would  happen  suppose,  even  without  begging  the  opposites  in  so  many

words, he were to beg two premisses such that this contradictory statement

that is opposite to the first conclusion will follow from them. The securing of

contraries differs from begging the original question in this way: in the latter

case the mistake lies in regard to the conclusion; for it is by a glance at the

conclusion that we tell that the original question has been begged: whereas

contrary views lie in the premisses, viz. in a certain relation which they bear

to one another.

<

div id="section82" class="section" title="14">


14


The best way to secure training and practice in arguments of this kind is in

the first place to get into the habit of converting the arguments. For in this

way we shall be better equipped for dealing with the proposition stated, andafter  a  few  attempts  we  shall  know  several  arguments  by  heart.  For  by

‘conversion’ of an argument is meant the taking the reverse of the conclusion

together with the remaining propositions asked and so demolishing one of

those that were conceded: for it follows necessarily that if the conclusion be

untrue, some one of the premisses is demolished, seeing that, given all the

premisses, the conclusion was bound to follow. Always, in dealing with any

proposition, be on the look-out for a line of argument both pro and con: and

on discovering it at once set about looking for the solution of it: for in this

way you will soon find that you have trained yourself at the same time in

both asking questions and answering them. If we cannot find any one else to

argue  with,  we  should  argue  with  ourselves.  Select,  moreover,  arguments

relating to the same thesis and range them side by side: for this produces a

plentiful  supply  of  arguments  for  carrying  a  point  by  sheer  force,  and  in

refutation  also  it  is  of  great  service,  whenever  one  is  well  stocked  with

arguments pro and con: for then you find yourself on your guard against

contrary statements to the one you wish to secure. Moreover, as contributing

to knowledge and to philosophic wisdom the power of discerning and holding

in one view the results of either of two hypotheses is no mean instrument; for

it then only remains to make a right choice of one of them. For a task of this

kind a certain natural ability is required: in fact real natural ability just is the

power right to choose the true and shun the false. Men of natural ability can

do this; for by a right liking or disliking for whatever is proposed to them

they rightly select what is best.

It is best to know by heart arguments upon those questions which are of

most frequent occurrence, and particularly in regard to those propositions

which are ultimate: for in discussing these answerers frequently give up in

despair. Moreover, get a good stock of definitions: and have those of familiar

and primary ideas at your fingers’ ends: for it is through these that reasonings

are  effected.  You  should  try,  moreover,  to  master  the  heads  under  which

other arguments mostly tend to fall. For just as in geometry it is useful to be

practised in the elements, and in arithmetic to have the multiplication table up

to ten at one’s fingers’ ends-and indeed it makes a great difference in one’s

knowledge of the multiples of other numbers too-likewise also in arguments

it is a great advantage to be well up in regard to first principles, and to have a

thorough knowledge of premisses at the tip of one’s tongue. For just as in a

person with a trained memory, a memory of things themselves is immediately

caused by the mere mention of their loci, so these habits too will make a manreadier  in  reasoning,  because  he  has  his  premisses  classified  before  his

mind’s  eye,  each  under  its  number.  It  is  better  to  commit  to  memory  a

premiss of general application than an argument: for it is difficult to be even

moderately ready with a first principle, or hypothesis.

  Moreover,  you  should  get  into  the  habit  of  turning  one  argument  into

several, and conceal your procedure as darkly as you can: this kind of effect

is best produced by keeping as far as possible away from topics akin to the

subject of the argument. This can be done with arguments that are entirely

universal, e.g. the statement that ‘there cannot be one knowledge of more

than one thing’: for that is the case with both relative terms and contraries and

co-ordinates.

  Records of discussions should be made in a universal form, even though

one has argued only some particular case: for this will enable one to turn a

single  rule  into  several.  A  like  rule  applies  in  Rhetoric  as  well  to

enthymemes.  For  yourself,  however,  you  should  as  far  as  possible  avoid

universalizing  your  reasonings.  You  should,  moreover,  always  examine

arguments to see whether they rest on principles of general application: for all

particular  arguments  really  reason  universally,  as  well,  i.e.  a  particular

demonstration  always  contains  a  universal  demonstration,  because  it  is

impossible to reason at all without using universals.

You should display your training in inductive reasoning against a young

man, in deductive against an expert. You should try, moreover, to secure

from  those  skilled  in  deduction  their  premisses,  from  inductive  reasoners

their parallel cases; for this is the thing in which they are respectively trained.

In general, too, from your exercises in argumentation you should try to carry

away either a syllogism on some subject or a refutation or a proposition or an

objection,  or  whether  some  one  put  his  question  properly  or  improperly

(whether it was yourself or some one else) and the point which made it the

one or the other. For this is what gives one ability, and the whole object of

training  is  to  acquire  ability,  especially  in  regard  to  propositions  and

objections. For it is the skilled propounder and objector who is, speaking

generally, a dialectician. To formulate a proposition is to form a number of

things into one-for the conclusion to which the argument leads must be taken

generally, as a single thing-whereas to formulate an objection is to make one

thing into many; for the objector either distinguishes or demolishes, partly

granting, partly denying the statements proposed.

Do not argue with every one, nor practise upon the man in the street: forthere are some people with whom any argument is bound to degenerate. For

against any one who is ready to try all means in order to seem not to be

beaten, it is indeed fair to try all means of bringing about one’s conclusion:

but it is not good form. Wherefore the best rule is, not lightly to engage with

casual acquaintances, or bad argument is sure to result. For you see how in

practising together people cannot refrain from contentious argument.

It is best also to have ready-made arguments relating to those questions in

which a very small stock will furnish us with arguments serviceable on a very

large number of occasions. These are those that are universal, and those in

regard to which it is rather difficult to produce points for ourselves from

matters of everyday experience.                        On Sophistical Refutations


Translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge


<

div id="book1" class="book" title="Book I">


1


Let us now discuss sophistic refutations, i.e. what appear to be refutations

but are really fallacies instead. We will begin in the natural order with the

first.

That some reasonings are genuine, while others seem to be so but are not,

is evident. This happens with arguments, as also elsewhere, through a certain

likeness between the genuine and the sham. For physically some people are

in a vigorous condition, while others merely seem to be so by blowing and

rigging themselves out as the tribesmen do their victims for sacrifice; and

some people are beautiful thanks to their beauty, while others seem to be so,

by dint of embellishing themselves. So it is, too, with inanimate things; for of

these, too, some are really silver and others gold, while others are not and

merely seem to be such to our sense; e.g. things made of litharge and tin seem

to be of silver, while those made of yellow metal look golden. In the same

way both reasoning and refutation are sometimes genuine, sometimes not,

though  inexperience  may  make  them  appear  so:  for  inexperienced  people

obtain only, as it were, a distant view of these things. For reasoning rests on

certain  statements  such  that  they  involve  necessarily  the  assertion  of

something other than what has been stated, through what has been stated:

refutation is reasoning involving the contradictory of the given conclusion.

Now some of them do not really achieve this, though they seem to do so for a

number of reasons; and of these the most prolific and usual domain is the

argument that turns upon names only. It is impossible in a discussion to bring

in the actual things discussed: we use their names as symbols instead of them;

and  therefore  we  suppose  that  what  follows  in  the  names,  follows  in  the

things  as  well,  just  as  people  who  calculate  suppose  in  regard  to  their

counters. But the two cases (names and things) are not alike. For names arefinite and so is the sum-total of formulae, while things are infinite in number.

Inevitably, then, the same formulae, and a single name, have a number of

meanings.  Accordingly  just  as,  in  counting,  those  who  are  not  clever  in

manipulating their counters are taken in by the experts, in the same way in

arguments too those who are not well acquainted with the force of names

misreason both in their own discussions and when they listen to others. For

this  reason,  then,  and  for  others  to  be  mentioned  later,  there  exists  both

reasoning and refutation that is apparent but not real. Now for some people it

is better worth while to seem to be wise, than to be wise without seeming to

be (for the art of the sophist is the semblance of wisdom without the reality,

and  the  sophist  is  one  who  makes  money  from  an  apparent  but  unreal

wisdom); for them, then, it is clearly essential also to seem to accomplish the

task of a wise man rather than to accomplish it without seeming to do so. To

reduce it to a single point of contrast it is the business of one who knows a

thing, himself to avoid fallacies in the subjects which he knows and to be able

to show up the man who makes them; and of these accomplishments the one

depends on the faculty to render an answer, and the other upon the securing

of one. Those, then, who would be sophists are bound to study the class of

arguments aforesaid: for it is worth their while: for a faculty of this kind will

make a man seem to be wise, and this is the purpose they happen to have in

view.

  Clearly, then, there exists a class of arguments of this kind, and it is at this

kind of ability that those aim whom we call sophists. Let us now go on to

discuss how many kinds there are of sophistical arguments, and how many in

number are the elements of which this faculty is composed, and how many

branches  there  happen  to  be  of  this  inquiry,  and  the  other  factors  that

contribute to this art.

<

div id="section2" class="section" title="2">


2


Of arguments in dialogue form there are four classes:

  Didactic, Dialectical, Examination-arguments, and Contentious arguments.

Didactic arguments are those that reason from the principles appropriate to

each subject and not from the opinions held by the answerer (for the learner

should take things on trust): dialectical arguments are those that reason frompremisses  generally  accepted,  to  the  contradictory  of  a  given  thesis:

examination-arguments  are  those  that  reason  from  premisses  which  are

accepted  by  the  answerer  and  which  any  one  who  pretends  to  possess

knowledge of the subject is bound to know-in what manner, has been defined

in another treatise: contentious arguments are those that reason or appear to

reason to a conclusion from premisses that appear to be generally accepted

but  are  not  so.  The  subject,  then,  of  demonstrative  arguments  has  been

discussed  in  the  Analytics,  while  that  of  dialectic  arguments  and

examination-arguments has been discussed elsewhere: let us now proceed to

speak of the arguments used in competitions and contests.

<

div id="section3" class="section" title="3">


3


First we must grasp the number of aims entertained by those who argue as

competitors  and  rivals  to  the  death.  These  are  five  in  number,  refutation,

fallacy,  paradox,  solecism,  and  fifthly  to  reduce  the  opponent  in  the

discussion to babbling-i.e. to constrain him to repeat himself a number of

times: or it is to produce the appearance of each of these things without the

reality. For they choose if possible plainly to refute the other party, or as the

second best to show that he is committing some fallacy, or as a third best to

lead him into paradox, or fourthly to reduce him to solecism, i.e. to make the

answerer,  in  consequence  of  the  argument,  to  use  an  ungrammatical

expression; or, as a last resort, to make him repeat himself.

<

div id="section4" class="section" title="4">


4


  There are two styles of refutation: for some depend on the language used,

while some are independent of language. Those ways of producing the false

appearance of an argument which depend on language are six in number:

they are ambiguity, amphiboly, combination, division of words, accent, form

of expression. Of this we may assure ourselves both by induction, and by

syllogistic proof based on this-and it may be on other assumptions as well-that this is the number of ways in which we might fall to mean the same thing

by the same names or expressions. Arguments such as the following depend

upon  ambiguity.  ‘Those  learn  who  know:  for  it  is  those  who  know  their

letters who learn the letters dictated to them’. For to ‘learn’ is ambiguous; it

signifies both ‘to understand’ by the use of knowledge, and also ‘to acquire

knowledge’. Again, ‘Evils are good: for what needs to be is good, and evils

must needs be’. For ‘what needs to be’ has a double meaning: it means what

is inevitable, as often is the case with evils, too (for evil of some kind is

inevitable), while on the other hand we say of good things as well that they

‘need to be’. Moreover, ‘The same man is both seated and standing and he is

both sick and in health: for it is he who stood up who is standing, and he who

is recovering who is in health: but it is the seated man who stood up, and the

sick man who was recovering’. For ‘The sick man does so and so’, or ‘has so

and so done to him’ is not single in meaning: sometimes it means ‘the man

who is sick or is seated now’, sometimes ‘the man who was sick formerly’.

Of course, the man who was recovering was the sick man, who really was

sick at the time: but the man who is in health is not sick at the same time: he

is ‘the sick man’ in the sense not that he is sick now, but that he was sick

formerly. Examples such as the following depend upon amphiboly: ‘I wish

that you the enemy may capture’. Also the thesis, ‘There must be knowledge

of what one knows’: for it is possible by this phrase to mean that knowledge

belongs to both the knower and the known. Also, ‘There must be sight of

what one sees: one sees the pillar: ergo the pillar has sight’. Also, ‘What you

profess to-be, that you profess to-be: you profess a stone to-be: ergo you

profess-to-be a stone’. Also, ‘Speaking of the silent is possible’: for ‘speaking

of the silent’ also has a double meaning: it may mean that the speaker is silent

or that the things of which he speaks are so. There are three varieties of these

ambiguities and amphibolies: (1) When either the expression or the name has

strictly more than one meaning, e.g. aetos and the ‘dog’; (2) when by custom

we use them so; (3) when words that have a simple sense taken alone have

more  than  one  meaning  in  combination;  e.g.  ‘knowing  letters’.  For  each

word, both ‘knowing’ and ‘letters’, possibly has a single meaning: but both

together  have  more  than  one-either  that  the  letters  themselves  have

knowledge or that someone else has it of them.

  Amphiboly and ambiguity, then, depend on these modes of speech. Upon

the combination of words there depend instances such as the following: ‘A

man can walk while sitting, and can write while not writing’. For the meaningis not the same if one divides the words and if one combines them in saying

that ‘it is possible to walk-while-sitting’ and write while not writing]. The

same applies to the latter phrase, too, if one combines the words ‘to write-

while-not-writing’: for then it means that he has the power to write and not to

write at once; whereas if one does not combine them, it means that when he

is not writing he has the power to write. Also, ‘He now if he has learnt his

letters’. Moreover, there is the saying that ‘One single thing if you can carry a

crowd you can carry too’.

  Upon division depend the propositions that 5 is 2 and 3, and odd, and that

the greater is equal: for it is that amount and more besides. For the same

phrase would not be thought always to have the same meaning when divided

and when combined, e.g. ‘I made thee a slave once a free man’, and ‘God-

like Achilles left fifty a hundred men’.

An argument depending upon accent it is not easy to construct in unwritten

discussion; in written discussions and in poetry it is easier. Thus (e.g.) some

people emend Homer against those who criticize as unnatural his expression

to men ou kataputhetai ombro. For they solve the difficulty by a change of

accent, pronouncing the ou with an acuter accent. Also, in the passage about

Agamemnon’s dream, they say that Zeus did not himself say ‘We grant him

the fulfilment of his prayer’, but that he bade the dream grant it. Instances

such as these, then, turn upon the accentuation.

  Others come about owing to the form of expression used, when what is

really different is expressed in the same form, e.g. a masculine thing by a

feminine termination, or a feminine thing by a masculine, or a neuter by

either a masculine or a feminine; or, again, when a quality is expressed by a

termination proper to quantity or vice versa, or what is active by a passive

word, or a state by an active word, and so forth with the other divisions

previously’ laid down. For it is possible to use an expression to denote what

does not belong to the class of actions at all as though it did so belong. Thus

(e.g.)  ‘flourishing’  is  a  word  which  in  the  form  of  its  expression  is  like

‘cutting’  or  ‘building’:  yet  the  one  denotes  a  certain  quality-i.e.  a  certain

condition-while the other denotes a certain action. In the same manner also in

the other instances.

  Refutations,  then,  that  depend  upon  language  are  drawn  from  these

common-place rules. Of fallacies, on the other hand, that are independent of

language there are seven kinds:

(1) that which depends upon Accident:(2) the use of an expression absolutely or not absolutely but with some

qualification of respect or place, or time, or relation:

(3) that which depends upon ignorance of what ‘refutation’ is:

(4) that which depends upon the consequent:

(5) that which depends upon assuming the original conclusion:

(6) stating as cause what is not the cause:

(7) the making of more than one question into one.

<

div id="section5" class="section" title="5">


5


  Fallacies, then, that depend on Accident occur whenever any attribute is

claimed to belong in like manner to a thing and to its accident. For since the

same  thing  has  many  accidents  there  is  no  necessity  that  all  the  same

attributes should belong to all of a thing’s predicates and to their subject as

well. Thus (e.g.), ‘If Coriscus be different from “man”, he is different from

himself: for he is a man’: or ‘If he be different from Socrates, and Socrates be

a man, then’, they say, ‘he has admitted that Coriscus is different from a man,

because it so happens (accidit) that the person from whom he said that he

(Coriscus) is different is a man’.

  Those that depend on whether an expression is used absolutely or in a

certain  respect  and  not  strictly,  occur  whenever  an  expression  used  in  a

particular  sense  is  taken  as  though  it  were  used  absolutely,  e.g.  in  the

argument ‘If what is not is the object of an opinion, then what is not is’: for it

is not the same thing ‘to be x’ and ‘to be’ absolutely. Or again, ‘What is, is

not, if it is not a particular kind of being, e.g. if it is not a man.’ For it is not

the same thing ‘not to be x’ and ‘not to be’ at all: it looks as if it were,

because of the closeness of the expression, i.e. because ‘to be x’ is but little

different from ‘to be’, and ‘not to be x’ from ‘not to be’. Likewise also with

any argument that turns upon the point whether an expression is used in a

certain respect or used absolutely. Thus e.g. ‘Suppose an Indian to be black

all  over,  but  white  in  respect  of  his  teeth;  then  he  is  both  white  and  not

white.’ Or if both characters belong in a particular respect, then, they say,

‘contrary attributes belong at the same time’. This kind of thing is in some

cases easily seen by any one, e.g. suppose a man were to secure the statement

that  the  Ethiopian  is  black,  and  were  then  to  ask  whether  he  is  white  inrespect of his teeth; and then, if he be white in that respect, were to suppose

at the conclusion of his questions that therefore he had proved dialectically

that  he  was  both  white  and  not  white.  But  in  some  cases  it  often  passes

undetected,  viz.  in  all  cases  where,  whenever  a  statement  is  made  of

something in a certain respect, it would be generally thought that the absolute

statement follows as well; and also in all cases where it is not easy to see

which of the attributes ought to be rendered strictly. A situation of this kind

arises,  where  both  the  opposite  attributes  belong  alike:  for  then  there  is

general support for the view that one must agree absolutely to the assertion of

both, or of neither: e.g. if a thing is half white and half black, is it white or

black?

  Other fallacies occur because the terms ‘proof’ or ‘refutation’ have not

been defined, and because something is left out in their definition. For to

refute is to contradict one and the same attribute-not merely the name, but the

reality-and a name that is not merely synonymous but the same name-and to

confute it from the propositions granted, necessarily, without including in the

reckoning the original point to be proved, in the same respect and relation

and  manner  and  time  in  which  it  was  asserted.  A  ‘false  assertion’  about

anything has to be defined in the same way. Some people, however, omit

some  one  of  the  said  conditions  and  give  a  merely  apparent  refutation,

showing (e.g.) that the same thing is both double and not double: for two is

double of one, but not double of three. Or, it may be, they show that it is both

double and not double of the same thing, but not that it is so in the same

respect: for it is double in length but not double in breadth. Or, it may be,

they show it to be both double and not double of the same thing and in the

same respect and manner, but not that it is so at the same time: and therefore

their refutation is merely apparent. One might, with some violence, bring this

fallacy into the group of fallacies dependent on language as well.

  Those that depend on the assumption of the original point to be proved,

occur in the same way, and in as many ways, as it is possible to beg the

original point; they appear to refute because men lack the power to keep their

eyes at once upon what is the same and what is different.

The refutation which depends upon the consequent arises because people

suppose  that  the  relation  of  consequence  is  convertible.  For  whenever,

suppose  A  is,  B  necessarily  is,  they  then  suppose  also  that  if  B  is,  A

necessarily is. This is also the source of the deceptions that attend opinions

based on sense-perception. For people often suppose bile to be honey becausehoney is attended by a yellow colour: also, since after rain the ground is wet

in consequence, we suppose that if the ground is wet, it has been raining;

whereas that does not necessarily follow. In rhetoric proofs from signs are

based on consequences. For when rhetoricians wish to show that a man is an

adulterer, they take hold of some consequence of an adulterous life, viz. that

the man is smartly dressed, or that he is observed to wander about at night.

There are, however, many people of whom these things are true, while the

charge in question is untrue. It happens like this also in real reasoning; e.g.

Melissus’ argument, that the universe is eternal, assumes that the universe has

not come to be (for from what is not nothing could possibly come to be) and

that what has come to be has done so from a first beginning. If, therefore, the

universe has not come to be, it has no first beginning, and is therefore eternal.

But this does not necessarily follow: for even if what has come to be always

has a first beginning, it does not also follow that what has a first beginning

has come to be; any more than it follows that if a man in a fever be hot, a

man who is hot must be in a fever.

The refutation which depends upon treating as cause what is not a cause,

occurs whenever what is not a cause is inserted in the argument, as though

the refutation depended upon it. This kind of thing happens in arguments that

reason  ad  impossible:  for  in  these  we  are  bound  to  demolish  one  of  the

premisses. If, then, the false cause be reckoned in among the questions that

are necessary to establish the resulting impossibility, it will often be thought

that the refutation depends upon it, e.g. in the proof that the ‘soul’ and ‘life’

are  not  the  same:  for  if  coming-to-be  be  contrary  to  perishing,  then  a

particular form of perishing will have a particular form of coming-to-be as its

contrary: now death is a particular form of perishing and is contrary to life:

life, therefore, is a coming to-be, and to live is to come-to-be. But this is

impossible: accordingly, the ‘soul’ and ‘life’ are not the same. Now this is not

proved: for the impossibility results all the same, even if one does not say that

life is the same as the soul, but merely says that life is contrary to death,

which is a form of perishing, and that perishing has ‘coming-to-be’ as its

contrary. Arguments of that kind, then, though not inconclusive absolutely,

are  inconclusive  in  relation  to  the  proposed  conclusion.  Also  even  the

questioners themselves often fail quite as much to see a point of that kind.

  Such, then, are the arguments that depend upon the consequent and upon

false cause. Those that depend upon the making of two questions into one

occur whenever the plurality is undetected and a single answer is returned asif to a single question. Now, in some cases, it is easy to see that there is more

than one, and that an answer is not to be given, e.g. ‘Does the earth consist of

sea, or the sky?’ But in some cases it is less easy, and then people treat the

question  as  one,  and  either  confess  their  defeat  by  failing  to  answer  the

question, or are exposed to an apparent refutation. Thus ‘Is A and is B a

man?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘Then  if  any  one  hits  A  and  B,  he  will  strike  a  man’

(singular),’not men’ (plural). Or again, where part is good and part bad, ‘is

the whole good or bad?’ For whichever he says, it is possible that he might be

thought to expose himself to an apparent refutation or to make an apparently

false statement: for to say that something is good which is not good, or not

good  which  is  good,  is  to  make  a  false  statement.  Sometimes,  however,

additional  premisses  may  actually  give  rise  to  a  genuine  refutation;  e.g.

suppose a man were to grant that the descriptions ‘white’ and ‘naked’ and

‘blind’ apply to one thing and to a number of things in a like sense. For if

‘blind’ describes a thing that cannot see though nature designed it to see, it

will also describe things that cannot see though nature designed them to do

so. Whenever, then, one thing can see while another cannot, they will either

both be able to see or else both be blind; which is impossible.

<

div id="section6" class="section" title="6">


6


The right way, then, is either to divide apparent proofs and refutations as

above, or else to refer them all to ignorance of what ‘refutation’ is, and make

that our starting-point: for it is possible to analyse all the aforesaid modes of

fallacy into breaches of the definition of a refutation. In the first place, we

may see if they are inconclusive: for the conclusion ought to result from the

premisses laid down, so as to compel us necessarily to state it and not merely

to seem to compel us. Next we should also take the definition bit by bit, and

try the fallacy thereby. For of the fallacies that consist in language, some

depend upon a double meaning, e.g. ambiguity of words and of phrases, and

the fallacy of like verbal forms (for we habitually speak of everything as

though  it  were  a  particular  substance)-while  fallacies  of  combination  and

division and accent arise because the phrase in question or the term as altered

is not the same as was intended. Even this, however, should be the same, just

as  the  thing  signified  should  be  as  well,  if  a  refutation  or  proof  is  to  beeffected;  e.g.  if  the  point  concerns  a  doublet,  then  you  should  draw  the

conclusion of a ‘doublet’, not of a ‘cloak’. For the former conclusion also

would be true, but it has not been proved; we need a further question to show

that ‘doublet’ means the same thing, in order to satisfy any one who asks why

you think your point proved.

  Fallacies that depend on Accident are clear cases of ignoratio elenchi when

once ‘proof’ has been defined. For the same definition ought to hold good of

‘refutation’ too, except that a mention of ‘the contradictory’ is here added: for

a  refutation  is  a  proof  of  the  contradictory.  If,  then,  there  is  no  proof  as

regards an accident of anything, there is no refutation. For supposing, when A

and B are, C must necessarily be, and C is white, there is no necessity for it to

be white on account of the syllogism. So, if the triangle has its angles equal to

two right-angles, and it happens to be a figure, or the simplest element or

starting point, it is not because it is a figure or a starting point or simplest

element  that  it  has  this  character.  For  the  demonstration  proves  the  point

about it not qua figure or qua simplest element, but qua triangle. Likewise

also in other cases. If, then, refutation is a proof, an argument which argued

per accidens could not be a refutation. It is, however, just in this that the

experts  and  men  of  science  generally  suffer  refutation  at  the  hand  of  the

unscientific: for the latter meet the scientists with reasonings constituted per

accidens; and the scientists for lack of the power to draw distinctions either

say ‘Yes’ to their questions, or else people suppose them to have said ‘Yes’,

although they have not.

  Those that depend upon whether something is said in a certain respect only

or said absolutely, are clear cases of ignoratio elenchi because the affirmation

and the denial are not concerned with the same point. For of ‘white in a

certain  respect’  the  negation  is  ‘not  white  in  a  certain  respect’,  while  of

‘white  absolutely’  it  is  ‘not  white,  absolutely’.  If,  then,  a  man  treats  the

admission that a thing is ‘white in a certain respect’ as though it were said to

be white absolutely, he does not effect a refutation, but merely appears to do

so owing to ignorance of what refutation is.

The  clearest  cases  of  all,  however,  are  those  that  were  previously

described’ as depending upon the definition of a ‘refutation’: and this is also

why they were called by that name. For the appearance of a refutation is

produced because of the omission in the definition, and if we divide fallacies

in the above manner, we ought to set ‘Defective definition’ as a common

mark upon them all.  Those that depend upon the assumption of the original point and upon

stating as the cause what is not the cause, are clearly shown to be cases of

ignoratio elenchi through the definition thereof. For the conclusion ought to

come about ‘because these things are so’, and this does not happen where the

premisses are not causes of it: and again it should come about without taking

into account the original point, and this is not the case with those arguments

which depend upon begging the original point.

  Those that depend upon the assumption of the original point and upon

stating as the cause what is not the cause, are clearly shown to be cases of

ignoratio elenchi through the definition thereof. For the conclusion ought to

come about ‘because these things are so’, and this does not happen where the

premisses are not causes of it: and again it should come about without taking

into account the original point, and this is not the case with those arguments

which depend upon begging the original point.

  Those that depend upon the consequent are a branch of Accident: for the

consequent is an accident, only it differs from the accident in this, that you

may secure an admission of the accident in the case of one thing only (e.g.

the identity of a yellow thing and honey and of a white thing and swan),

whereas the consequent always involves more than one thing: for we claim

that things that are the same as one and the same thing are also the same as

one  another,  and  this  is  the  ground  of  a  refutation  dependent  on  the

consequent. It is, however, not always true, e.g. suppose that and B are the

same as C per accidens; for both ‘snow’ and the ‘swan’ are the same as

something white’. Or again, as in Melissus’ argument, a man assumes that to

‘have been generated’ and to ‘have a beginning’ are the same thing, or to

‘become equal’ and to ‘assume the same magnitude’. For because what has

been generated has a beginning, he claims also that what has a beginning has

been generated, and argues as though both what has been generated and what

is finite were the same because each has a beginning. Likewise also in the

case of things that are made equal he assumes that if things that assume one

and the same magnitude become equal, then also things that become equal

assume one magnitude: i.e. he assumes the consequent. Inasmuch, then, as a

refutation depending on accident consists in ignorance of what a refutation is,

clearly so also does a refutation depending on the consequent. We shall have

further to examine this in another way as well.

  Those fallacies that depend upon the making of several questions into one

consist  in  our  failure  to  dissect  the  definition  of  ‘proposition’.  For  aproposition is a single statement about a single thing. For the same definition

applies to ‘one single thing only’ and to the ‘thing’, simply, e.g. to ‘man’ and

to ‘one single man only’ and likewise also in other cases. If, then, a ‘single

proposition’  be  one  which  claims  a  single  thing  of  a  single  thing,  a

‘proposition’, simply, will also be the putting of a question of that kind. Now

since a proof starts from propositions and refutation is a proof, refutation, too,

will start from propositions. If, then, a proposition is a single statement about

a single thing, it is obvious that this fallacy too consists in ignorance of what

a refutation is: for in it what is not a proposition appears to be one. If, then,

the answerer has returned an answer as though to a single question, there will

be a refutation; while if he has returned one not really but apparently, there

will be an apparent refutation of his thesis. All the types of fallacy, then, fall

under  ignorance  of  what  a  refutation  is,  some  of  them  because  the

contradiction,  which  is  the  distinctive  mark  of  a  refutation,  is  merely

apparent, and the rest failing to conform to the definition of a proof.

<

div id="section7" class="section" title="7">


7


The  deception  comes  about  in  the  case  of  arguments  that  depend  on

ambiguity  of  words  and  of  phrases  because  we  are  unable  to  divide  the

ambiguous term (for some terms it is not easy to divide, e.g. ‘unity’, ‘being’,

and ‘sameness’), while in those that depend on combination and division, it is

because  we  suppose  that  it  makes  no  difference  whether  the  phrase  be

combined or divided, as is indeed the case with most phrases. Likewise also

with those that depend on accent: for the lowering or raising of the voice

upon a phrase is thought not to alter its meaning-with any phrase, or not with

many.  With  those  that  depend  on  the  of  expression  it  is  because  of  the

likeness of expression. For it is hard to distinguish what kind of things are

signified by the same and what by different kinds of expression: for a man

who can do this is practically next door to the understanding of the truth. A

special reason why a man is liable to be hurried into assent to the fallacy is

that we suppose every predicate of everything to be an individual thing, and

we understand it as being one with the thing: and we therefore treat it as a

substance: for it is to that which is one with a thing or substance, as also to

substance itself, that ‘individually’ and ‘being’ are deemed to belong in thefullest sense. For this reason, too, this type of fallacy is to be ranked among

those that depend on language; in the first place, because the deception is

effected the more readily when we are inquiring into a problem in company

with others than when we do so by ourselves (for an inquiry with another

person is carried on by means of speech, whereas an inquiry by oneself is

carried on quite as much by means of the object itself); secondly a man is

liable to be deceived, even when inquiring by himself, when he takes speech

as the basis of his inquiry: moreover the deception arises out of the likeness

(of two different things), and the likeness arises out of the language. With

those fallacies that depend upon Accident, deception comes about because we

cannot distinguish the sameness and otherness of terms, i.e. their unity and

multiplicity, or what kinds of predicate have all the same accidents as their

subject. Likewise also with those that depend on the Consequent: for the

consequent is a branch of Accident. Moreover, in many cases appearances

point to this-and the claim is made that if is inseparable from B, so also is B

from  With  those  that  depend  upon  an  imperfection  in  the  definition  of  a

refutation, and with those that depend upon the difference between a qualified

and  an  absolute  statement,  the  deception  consists  in  the  smallness  of  the

difference  involved;  for  we  treat  the  limitation  to  the  particular  thing  or

respect or manner or time as adding nothing to the meaning, and so grant the

statement  universally.  Likewise  also  in  the  case  of  those  that  assume  the

original  point,  and  those  of  false  cause,  and  all  that  treat  a  number  of

questions as one: for in all of them the deception lies in the smallness of the

difference: for our failure to be quite exact in our definition of ‘premiss’ and

of ‘proof’ is due to the aforesaid reason.

<

div id="section8" class="section" title="8">


8


  Since we know on how many points apparent syllogisms depend, we know

also on how many sophistical syllogisms and refutations may depend. By a

sophistical refutation and syllogism I mean not only a syllogism or refutation

which appears to be valid but is not, but also one which, though it is valid,

only appears to be appropriate to the thing in question. These are those which

fail to refute and prove people to be ignorant according to the nature of the

thing in question, which was the function of the art of examination. Now theart  of  examining  is  a  branch  of  dialectic:  and  this  may  prove  a  false

conclusion because of the ignorance of the answerer. Sophistic refutations on

the other hand, even though they prove the contradictory of his thesis, do not

make clear whether he is ignorant: for sophists entangle the scientist as well

with these arguments.

That we know them by the same line of inquiry is clear: for the same

considerations which make it appear to an audience that the points required

for the proof were asked in the questions and that the conclusion was proved,

would make the answerer think so as well, so that false proof will occur

through all or some of these means: for what a man has not been asked but

thinks he has granted, he would also grant if he were asked. Of course, in

some cases the moment we add the missing question, we also show up its

falsity, e.g. in fallacies that depend on language and on solecism. If then,

fallacious proofs of the contradictory of a thesis depend on their appearing to

refute,  it  is  clear  that  the  considerations  on  which  both  proofs  of  false

conclusions and an apparent refutation depend must be the same in number.

Now an apparent refutation depends upon the elements involved in a genuine

one: for the failure of one or other of these must make the refutation merely

apparent, e.g. that which depends on the failure of the conclusion to follow

from the argument (the argument ad impossible) and that which treats two

questions as one and so depends upon a flaw in the premiss, and that which

depends on the substitution of an accident for an essential attribute, and-a

branch of the last-that which depends upon the consequent: more over, the

conclusion may follow not in fact but only verbally: then, instead of proving

the  contradictory  universally  and  in  the  same  respect  and  relation  and

manner, the fallacy may be dependent on some limit of extent or on one or

other of these qualifications: moreover, there is the assumption of the original

point  to  be  proved,  in  violation  of  the  clause  ‘without  reckoning  in  the

original point’. Thus we should have the number of considerations on which

the fallacious proofs depend: for they could not depend on more, but all will

depend on the points aforesaid.

A sophistical refutation is a refutation not absolutely but relatively to some

one: and so is a proof, in the same way. For unless that which depends upon

ambiguity assumes that the ambiguous term has a single meaning, and that

which  depends  on  like  verbal  forms  assumes  that  substance  is  the  only

category, and the rest in the same way, there will be neither refutations nor

proofs, either absolutely or relatively to the answerer: whereas if they doassume these things, they will stand, relatively to the answerer; but absolutely

they will not stand: for they have not secured a statement that does have a

single meaning, but only one that appears to have, and that only from this

particular man.

<

div id="section9" class="section" title="9">


9


The number of considerations on which depend the refutations of those

who  are  refuted,  we  ought  not  to  try  to  grasp  without  a  knowledge  of

everything that is. This, however, is not the province of any special study: for

possibly the sciences are infinite in number, so that obviously demonstrations

may  be  infinite  too.  Now  refutations  may  be  true  as  well  as  false:  for

whenever it is possible to demonstrate something, it is also possible to refute

the man who maintains the contradictory of the truth; e.g. if a man has stated

that the diagonal is commensurate with the side of the square, one might

refute  him  by  demonstrating  that  it  is  incommensurate.  Accordingly,  to

exhaust all possible refutations we shall have to have scientific knowledge of

everything:  for  some  refutations  depend  upon  the  principles  that  rule  in

geometry and the conclusions that follow from these, others upon those that

rule in medicine, and others upon those of the other sciences. For the matter

of that, the false refutations likewise belong to the number of the infinite: for

according to every art there is false proof, e.g. according to geometry there is

false  geometrical  proof,  and  according  to  medicine  there  is  false  medical

proof. By ‘according to the art’, I mean ‘according to the principles of it’.

Clearly, then, it is not of all refutations, but only of those that depend upon

dialectic that we need to grasp the common-place rules: for these stand in a

common relation to every art and faculty. And as regards the refutation that is

according  to  one  or  other  of  the  particular  sciences  it  is  the  task  of  that

particular scientist to examine whether it is merely apparent without being

real, and, if it be real, what is the reason for it: whereas it is the business of

dialecticians so to examine the refutation that proceeds from the common

first principles that fall under no particular special study. For if we grasp the

startingpoints of the accepted proofs on any subject whatever we grasp those

of the refutations current on that subject. For a refutation is the proof of the

contradictory  of  a  given  thesis,  so  that  either  one  or  two  proofs  of  thecontradictory  constitute  a  refutation.  We  grasp,  then,  the  number  of

considerations on which all such depend: if, however, we grasp this, we also

grasp their solutions as well; for the objections to these are the solutions of

them. We also grasp the number of considerations on which those refutations

depend, that are merely apparent-apparent, I mean, not to everybody, but to

people of a certain stamp; for it is an indefinite task if one is to inquire how

many are the considerations that make them apparent to the man in the street.

Accordingly it is clear that the dialectician’s business is to be able to grasp on

how many considerations depends the formation, through the common first

principles, of a refutation that is either real or apparent, i.e. either dialectical

or apparently dialectical, or suitable for an examination.

<

div id="section10" class="section" title="10">


10


It is no true distinction between arguments which some people draw when

they say that some arguments are directed against the expression, and others

against the thought expressed: for it is absurd to suppose that some arguments

are directed against the expression and others against the thought, and that

they are not the same. For what is failure to direct an argument against the

thought except what occurs whenever a man does not in using the expression

think it to be used in his question in the same sense in which the person

questioned granted it? And this is the same thing as to direct the argument

against the expression. On the other hand, it is directed against the thought

whenever a man uses the expression in the same sense which the answerer

had in mind when he granted it. If now any (i.e. both the questioner and the

person  questioned),  in  dealing  with  an  expression  with  more  than  one

meaning,  were  to  suppose  it  to  have  one  meaning-as  e.g.  it  may  be  that

‘Being’ and ‘One’ have many meanings, and yet both the answerer answers

and the questioner puts his question supposing it to be one, and the argument

is to the effect that ‘All things are one’-will this discussion be directed any

more  against  the  expression  than  against  the  thought  of  the  person

questioned? If, on the other hand, one of them supposes the expression to

have many meanings, it is clear that such a discussion will not be directed

against the thought. Such being the meanings of the phrases in question, they

clearly cannot describe two separate classes of argument. For, in the firstplace, it is possible for any such argument as bears more than one meaning to

be  directed  against  the  expression  and  against  the  thought,  and  next  it  is

possible for any argument whatsoever; for the fact of being directed against

the thought consists not in the nature of the argument, but in the special

attitude of the answerer towards the points he concedes. Next, all of them

may be directed to the expression. For ‘to be directed against the expression’

means in this doctrine ‘not to be directed against the thought’. For if not all

are directed against either expression or thought, there will be certain other

arguments directed neither against the expression nor against the thought,

whereas they say that all must be one or the other, and divide them all as

directed either against the expression or against the thought, while others

(they say) there are none. But in point of fact those that depend on mere

expression are only a branch of those syllogisms that depend on a multiplicity

of  meanings.  For  the  absurd  statement  has  actually  been  made  that  the

description ‘dependent on mere expression’ describes all the arguments that

depend on language: whereas some of these are fallacies not because the

answerer adopts a particular attitude towards them, but because the argument

itself involves the asking of a question such as bears more than one meaning.

It is, too, altogether absurd to discuss Refutation without first discussing

Proof: for a refutation is a proof, so that one ought to discuss proof as well

before describing false refutation: for a refutation of that kind is a merely

apparent proof of the contradictory of a thesis. Accordingly, the reason of the

falsity will be either in the proof or in the contradiction (for mention of the

‘contradiction’ must be added), while sometimes it is in both, if the refutation

be merely apparent. In the argument that speaking of the silent is possible it

lies in the contradiction, not in the proof; in the argument that one can give

what one does not possess, it lies in both; in the proof that Homer’s poem is a

figure through its being a cycle it lies in the proof. An argument that does not

fail in either respect is a true proof.

But,  to  return  to  the  point  whence  our  argument  digressed,  are

mathematical reasonings directed against the thought, or not? And if any one

thinks ‘triangle’ to be a word with many meanings, and granted it in some

different sense from the figure which was proved to contain two right angles,

has  the  questioner  here  directed  his  argument  against  the  thought  of  the

former or not?

  Moreover, if the expression bears many senses, while the answerer does

not understand or suppose it to have them, surely the questioner here hasdirected his argument against his thought! Or how else ought he to put his

question  except  by  suggesting  a  distinction-suppose  one’s  question  to  be

speaking of the silent possible or not?’-as follows, ‘Is the answer “No” in one

sense, but “Yes” in another?’ If, then, any one were to answer that it was not

possible in any sense and the other were to argue that it was, has not his

argument  been  directed  against  the  thought  of  the  answerer?  Yet  his

argument is supposed to be one of those that depend on the expression. There

is  not,  then,  any  definite  kind  of  arguments  that  is  directed  against  the

thought. Some arguments are, indeed, directed against the expression: but

these are not all even apparent refutations, let alone all refutations. For there

are also apparent refutations which do not depend upon language, e.g. those

that depend upon accident, and others.

If, however, any one claims that one should actually draw the distinction,

and say, ‘By “speaking of the silent” I mean, in one sense this and in the

other  sense  that’,  surely  to  claim  this  is  in  the  first  place  absurd  (for

sometimes the questioner does not see the ambiguity of his question, and he

cannot possibly draw a distinction which he does not think to be there): in the

second place, what else but this will didactic argument be? For it will make

manifest the state of the case to one who has never considered, and does not

know or suppose that there is any other meaning but one. For what is there to

prevent the same thing also happening to us in cases where there is no double

meaning? ‘Are the units in four equal to the twos? Observe that the twos are

contained in four in one sense in this way, in another sense in that’. Also, ‘Is

the knowledge of contraries one or not? Observe that some contraries are

known,  while  others  are  unknown’.  Thus  the  man  who  makes  this  claim

seems  to  be  unaware  of  the  difference  between  didactic  and  dialectical

argument, and of the fact that while he who argues didactically should not

ask questions but make things clear himself, the other should merely ask

questions.

<

div id="section11" class="section" title="11">


11


  Moreover, to claim a ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ answer is the business not of a man

who is showing something, but of one who is holding an examination. For the

art of examining is a branch of dialectic and has in view not the man who hasknowledge, but the ignorant pretender. He, then, is a dialectician who regards

the common principles with their application to the particular matter in hand,

while he who only appears to do this is a sophist. Now for contentious and

sophistical  reasoning:  (1)  one  such  is  a  merely  apparent  reasoning,  on

subjects on which dialectical reasoning is the proper method of examination,

even though its conclusion be true: for it misleads us in regard to the cause:

also (2) there are those misreasonings which do not conform to the line of

inquiry proper to the particular subject, but are generally thought to conform

to  the  art  in  question.  For  false  diagrams  of  geometrical  figures  are  not

contentious (for the resulting fallacies conform to the subject of the art)-any

more than is any false diagram that may be offered in proof of a truth-e.g.

Hippocrates’ figure or the squaring of the circle by means of the lunules. But

Bryson’s method of squaring the circle, even if the circle is thereby squared,

is still sophistical because it does not conform to the subject in hand. So,

then,  any  merely  apparent  reasoning  about  these  things  is  a  contentious

argument, and any reasoning that merely appears to conform to the subject in

hand, even though it be genuine reasoning, is a contentious argument: for it is

merely apparent in its conformity to the subject-matter, so that it is deceptive

and plays foul. For just as a foul in a race is a definite type of fault, and is a

kind of foul fighting, so the art of contentious reasoning is foul fighting in

disputation: for in the former case those who are resolved to win at all costs

snatch  at  everything,  and  so  in  the  latter  case  do  contentious  reasoners.

Those,  then,  who  do  this  in  order  to  win  the  mere  victory  are  generally

considered to be contentious and quarrelsome persons, while those who do it

to win a reputation with a view to making money are sophistical. For the art

of sophistry is, as we said,’ a kind of art of money-making from a merely

apparent  wisdom,  and  this  is  why  they  aim  at  a  merely  apparent

demonstration: and quarrelsome persons and sophists both employ the same

arguments, but not with the same motives: and the same argument will be

sophistical and contentious, but not in the same respect; rather, it will be

contentious in so far as its aim is an apparent victory, while in so far as its

aim is an apparent wisdom, it will be sophistical: for the art of sophistry is a

certain appearance of wisdom without the reality. The contentious argument

stands in somewhat the same relation to the dialectical as the drawer of false

diagrams to the geometrician; for it beguiles by misreasoning from the same

principles as dialectic uses, just as the drawer of a false diagram beguiles the

geometrician. But whereas the latter is not a contentious reasoner, because hebases his false diagram on the principles and conclusions that fall under the

art  of  geometry,  the  argument  which  is  subordinate  to  the  principles  of

dialectic will yet clearly be contentious as regards other subjects. Thus, e.g.

though the squaring of the circle by means of the lunules is not contentious,

Bryson’s solution is contentious: and the former argument cannot be adapted

to any subject except geometry, because it proceeds from principles that are

peculiar  to  geometry,  whereas  the  latter  can  be  adapted  as  an  argument

against all the number of people who do not know what is or is not possible

in each particular context: for it will apply to them all. Or there is the method

whereby Antiphon squared the circle. Or again, an argument which denied

that it was better to take a walk after dinner, because of Zeno’s argument,

would not be a proper argument for a doctor, because Zeno’s argument is of

general application. If, then, the relation of the contentious argument to the

dialectical  were  exactly  like  that  of  the  drawer  of  false  diagrams  to  the

geometrician, a contentious argument upon the aforesaid subjects could not

have existed. But, as it is, the dialectical argument is not concerned with any

definite kind of being, nor does it show anything, nor is it even an argument

such as we find in the general philosophy of being. For all beings are not

contained in any one kind, nor, if they were, could they possibly fall under

the same principles. Accordingly, no art that is a method of showing the

nature of anything proceeds by asking questions: for it does not permit a man

to grant whichever he likes of the two alternatives in the question: for they

will not both of them yield a proof. Dialectic, on the other hand, does proceed

by questioning, whereas if it were concerned to show things, it would have

refrained from putting questions, even if not about everything, at least about

the  first  principles  and  the  special  principles  that  apply  to  the  particular

subject in hand. For suppose the answerer not to grant these, it would then no

longer have had any grounds from which to argue any longer against the

objection. Dialectic is at the same time a mode of examination as well. For

neither  is  the  art  of  examination  an  accomplishment  of  the  same  kind  as

geometry,  but  one  which  a  man  may  possess,  even  though  he  has  not

knowledge. For it is possible even for one without knowledge to hold an

examination of one who is without knowledge, if also the latter grants him

points taken not from thing that he knows or from the special principles of

the subject under discussion but from all that range of consequences attaching

to the subject which a man may indeed know without knowing the theory of

the subject, but which if he do not know, he is bound to be ignorant of thetheory. So then clearly the art of examining does not consist in knowledge of

any definite subject. For this reason, too, it deals with everything: for every

‘theory’  of  anything  employs  also  certain  common  principles.  Hence

everybody, including even amateurs, makes use in a way of dialectic and the

practice of examining: for all undertake to some extent a rough trial of those

who profess to know things. What serves them here is the general principles:

for they know these of themselves just as well as the scientist, even if in what

they say they seem to the latter to go wildly astray from them. All, then, are

engaged in refutation; for they take a hand as amateurs in the same task with

which  dialectic  is  concerned  professionally;  and  he  is  a  dialectician  who

examines by the help of a theory of reasoning. Now there are many identical

principles  which  are  true  of  everything,  though  they  are  not  such  as  to

constitute  a  particular  nature,  i.e.  a  particular  kind  of  being,  but  are  like

negative terms, while other principles are not of this kind but are special to

particular subjects; accordingly it is possible from these general principles to

hold an examination on everything, and that there should be a definite art of

so doing, and, moreover, an art which is not of the same kind as those which

demonstrate. This is why the contentious reasoner does not stand in the same

condition in all respects as the drawer of a false diagram: for the contentious

reasoner  will  not  be  given  to  misreasoning  from  any  definite  class  of

principles, but will deal with every class.

These, then, are the types of sophistical refutations: and that it belongs to

the dialectician to study these, and to be able to effect them, is not difficult to

see: for the investigation of premisses comprises the whole of this study.

<

div id="section12" class="section" title="12">


12


So much, then, for apparent refutations. As for showing that the answerer

is committing some fallacy, and drawing his argument into paradox-for this

was the second item of the sophist’s programme-in the first place, then, this is

best  brought  about  by  a  certain  manner  of  questioning  and  through  the

question. For to put the question without framing it with reference to any

definite subject is a good bait for these purposes: for people are more inclined

to make mistakes when they talk at large, and they talk at large when they

have no definite subject before them. Also the putting of several questions,even though the position against which one is arguing be quite definite, and

the claim that he shall say only what he thinks, create abundant opportunity

for drawing him into paradox or fallacy, and also, whether to any of these

questions he replies ‘Yes’ or replies ‘No’, of leading him on to statements

against which one is well off for a line of attack. Nowadays, however, men

are less able to play foul by these means than they were formerly: for people

rejoin with the question, ‘What has that to do with the original subject?’ It is,

too, an elementary rule for eliciting some fallacy or paradox that one should

never put a controversial question straight away, but say that one puts it from

the wish for information: for the process of inquiry thus invited gives room

for an attack.

A rule specially appropriate for showing up a fallacy is the sophistic rule,

that one should draw the answerer on to the kind of statements against which

one is well supplied with arguments: this can be done both properly and

improperly, as was said before.’ Again, to draw a paradoxical statement, look

and see to what school of philosophers the person arguing with you belongs,

and then question him as to some point wherein their doctrine is paradoxical

to most people: for with every school there is some point of that kind. It is an

elementary rule in these matters to have a collection of the special ‘theses’ of

the various schools among your propositions. The solution recommended as

appropriate here, too, is to point out that the paradox does not come about

because of the argument: whereas this is what his opponent always really

wants.

  Moreover,  argue  from  men’s  wishes  and  their  professed  opinions.  For

people do not wish the same things as they say they wish: they say what will

look best, whereas they wish what appears to be to their interest: e.g. they say

that a man ought to die nobly rather than to live in pleasure, and to live in

honest  poverty  rather  than  in  dishonourable  riches;  but  they  wish  the

opposite. Accordingly, a man who speaks according to his wishes must be led

into stating the professed opinions of people, while he who speaks according

to these must be led into admitting those that people keep hidden away: for in

either  case  they  are  bound  to  introduce  a  paradox;  for  they  will  speak

contrary either to men’s professed or to their hidden opinions.

The  widest  range  of  common-place  argument  for  leading  men  into

paradoxical statement is that which depends on the standards of Nature and

of the Law: it is so that both Callicles is drawn as arguing in the Gorgias, and

that all the men of old supposed the result to come about: for nature (theysaid) and law are opposites, and justice is a fine thing by a legal standard, but

not by that of nature. Accordingly, they said, the man whose statement agrees

with the standard of nature you should meet by the standard of the law, but

the man who agrees with the law by leading him to the facts of nature: for in

both  ways  paradoxical  statements  may  be  committed.  In  their  view  the

standard of nature was the truth, while that of the law was the opinion held by

the majority. So that it is clear that they, too, used to try either to refute the

answerer or to make him make paradoxical statements, just as the men of to-

day do as well.

  Some questions are such that in both forms the answer is paradoxical; e.g.

‘Ought one to obey the wise or one’s father?’ and ‘Ought one to do what is

expedient or what is just?’ and ‘Is it preferable to suffer injustice or to do an

injury?’ You should lead people, then, into views opposite to the majority

and to the philosophers; if any one speaks as do the expert reasoners, lead

him into opposition to the majority, while if he speaks as do the majority,

then  into  opposition  to  the  reasoners.  For  some  say  that  of  necessity  the

happy man is just, whereas it is paradoxical to the many that a king should be

happy. To lead a man into paradoxes of this sort is the same as to lead him

into the opposition of the standards of nature and law: for the law represents

the  opinion  of  the  majority,  whereas  philosophers  speak  according  to  the

standard of nature and the truth.

<

div id="section13" class="section" title="13">


13


  Paradoxes, then, you should seek to elicit by means of these common-place

rules. Now as for making any one babble, we have already said what we

mean  by  ‘to  babble’.  This  is  the  object  in  view  in  all  arguments  of  the

following kind: If it is all the same to state a term and to state its definition,

the ‘double’ and ‘double of half’ are the same: if then ‘double’ be the ‘double

of half’, it will be the ‘double of half of half’. And if, instead of ‘double’,

‘double of half’ be again put, then the same expression will be repeated three

times, ‘double of half of half of half’. Also ‘desire is of the pleasant, isn’t it?’

desire is conation for the pleasant: accordingly, ‘desire’ is ‘conation for the

pleasant for the pleasant’.

All arguments of this kind occur in dealing (1) with any relative termswhich not only have relative genera, but are also themselves relative, and are

rendered in relation to one and the same thing, as e.g. conation is conation for

something,  and  desire  is  desire  of  something,  and  double  is  double  of

something,  i.e.  double  of  half:  also  in  dealing  (2)  with  any  terms  which,

though they be not relative terms at all, yet have their substance, viz. the

things of which they are the states or affections or what not, indicated as well

in their definition, they being predicated of these things. Thus e.g. ‘odd’ is a

‘number containing a middle’: but there is an ‘odd number’: therefore there is

a ‘number-containing-a-middle number’. Also, if snubness be a concavity of

the nose, and there be a snub nose, there is therefore a ‘concave-nose nose’.

People sometimes appear to produce this result, without really producing

it, because they do not add the question whether the expression ‘double’, just

by itself, has any meaning or no, and if so, whether it has the same meaning,

or a different one; but they draw their conclusion straight away. Still it seems,

inasmuch as the word is the same, to have the same meaning as well.

<

div id="section14" class="section" title="14">


14


We have said before what kind of thing ‘solecism’ is.’ It is possible both to

commit it, and to seem to do so without doing so, and to do so without

seeming to do so. Suppose, as Protagoras used to say that menis (’wrath’) and

pelex (’helmet’) are masculine: according to him a man who calls wrath a

‘destructress’ (oulomenen) commits a solecism, though he does not seem to

do  so  to  other  people,  where  he  who  calls  it  a  ‘destructor’  (oulomenon)

commits no solecism though he seems to do so. It is clear, then, that any one

could produce this effect by art as well: and for this reason many arguments

seem to lead to solecism which do not really do so, as happens in the case of

refutations.

  Almost  all  apparent  solecisms  depend  upon  the  word  ‘this’  (tode),  and

upon  occasions  when  the  inflection  denotes  neither  a  masculine  nor  a

feminine object but a neuter. For ‘he’ (outos) signifies a masculine, and ‘she’

(aute) feminine; but ‘this’ (touto), though meant to signify a neuter, often also

signifies one or other of the former: e.g. ‘What is this?’ ‘It is Calliope’; ‘it is a

log’; ‘it is Coriscus’. Now in the masculine and feminine the inflections are

all different, whereas in the neuter some are and some are not. Often, then,when ‘this’ (touto) has been granted, people reason as if ‘him’ (touton) had

been said: and likewise also they substitute one inflection for another. The

fallacy  comes  about  because  ‘this’  (touto)  is  a  common  form  of  several

inflections: for ‘this’ signifies sometimes ‘he’ (outos) and sometimes ‘him’

(touton). It should signify them alternately; when combined with ‘is’ (esti) it

should  be  ‘he’,  while  with  ‘being’  it  should  be  ‘him’:  e.g.  ‘Coriscus

(Kopiskos) is’, but ‘being Coriscus’ (Kopiskon). It happens in the same way

in  the  case  of  feminine  nouns  as  well,  and  in  the  case  of  the  so-called

‘chattels’ that have feminine or masculine designations. For only those names

which end in o and n, have the designation proper to a chattel, e.g. xulon

(’log’),  schoinion  (’rope’);  those  which  do  not  end  so  have  that  of  a

masculine or feminine object, though some of them we apply to chattels: e.g.

askos (’wineskin’) is a masculine noun, and kline (’bed’) a feminine. For this

reason in cases of this kind as well there will be a difference of the same sort

between  a  construction  with  ‘is’  (esti)  or  with  ‘being’  (to  einai).  Also,

Solecism  resembles  in  a  certain  way  those  refutations  which  are  said  to

depend on the like expression of unlike things. For, just as there we come

upon a material solecism, so here we come upon a verbal: for ‘man’ is both a

‘matter’ for expression and also a ‘word’: and so is white’.

It is clear, then, that for solecisms we must try to construct our argument

out of the aforesaid inflections.

These, then, are the types of contentious arguments, and the subdivisions

of those types, and the methods for conducting them aforesaid. But it makes

no little difference if the materials for putting the question be arranged in a

certain  manner  with  a  view  to  concealment,  as  in  the  case  of  dialectics.

Following then upon what we have said, this must be discussed first.

<

div id="section15" class="section" title="15">


15


  With a view then to refutation, one resource is length-for it is difficult to

keep several things in view at once; and to secure length the elementary rules

that have been stated before’ should be employed. One resource, on the other

hand,  is  speed;  for  when  people  are  left  behind  they  look  ahead  less.

Moreover, there is anger and contentiousness, for when agitated everybody is

less able to take care of himself. Elementary rules for producing anger are tomake  a  show  of  the  wish  to  play  foul,  and  to  be  altogether  shameless.

Moreover, there is the putting of one’s questions alternately, whether one has

more than one argument leading to the same conclusion, or whether one has

arguments to show both that something is so, and that it is not so: for the

result is that he has to be on his guard at the same time either against more

than  one  line,  or  against  contrary  lines,  of  argument.  In  general,  all  the

methods  described  before  of  producing  concealment  are  useful  also  for

purposes of contentious argument: for the object of concealment is to avoid

detection, and the object of this is to deceive.

To counter those who refuse to grant whatever they suppose to help one’s

argument, one should put the question negatively, as though desirous of the

opposite  answer,  or  at  any  rate  as  though  one  put  the  question  without

prejudice; for when it is obscure what answer one wants to secure, people are

less  refractory.  Also  when,  in  dealing  with  particulars,  a  man  grants  the

individual case, when the induction is done you should often not put the

universal  as  a  question,  but  take  it  for  granted  and  use  it:  for  sometimes

people themselves suppose that they have granted it, and also appear to the

audience to have done so, for they remember the induction and assume that

the questions could not have been put for nothing. In cases where there is no

term  to  indicate  the  universal,  still  you  should  avail  yourself  of  the

resemblance of the particulars to suit your purpose; for resemblance often

escapes detection. Also, with a view to obtaining your premiss, you ought to

put it in your question side by side with its contrary. E.g. if it were necessary

to secure the admission that ‘A man should obey his father in everything’,

ask  ‘Should  a  man  obey  his  parents  in  everything,  or  disobey  them  in

everything?’; and to secure that ‘A number multiplied by a large number is a

large number’, ask ‘Should one agree that it is a large number or a small

one?’ For then, if compelled to choose, one will be more inclined to think it a

large one: for the placing of their contraries close beside them makes things

look big to men, both relatively and absolutely, and worse and better.

A strong appearance of having been refuted is often produced by the most

highly  sophistical  of  all  the  unfair  tricks  of  questioners,  when  without

proving anything, instead of putting their final proposition as a question, they

state it as a conclusion, as though they had proved that ‘Therefore so-and-so

is not true’

It is also a sophistical trick, when a paradox has been laid down, first to

propose at the start some view that is generally accepted, and then claim thatthe answerer shall answer what he thinks about it, and to put one’s question

on matters of that kind in the form ‘Do you think that… ?’ For then, if the

question  be  taken  as  one  of  the  premisses  of  one’s  argument,  either  a

refutation or a paradox is bound to result; if he grants the view, a refutation;

if he refuses to grant it or even to admit it as the received opinion, a paradox;

if he refuses to grant it, but admits that it is the received opinion, something

very like a refutation, results.

  Moreover,  just  as  in  rhetorical  discourses,  so  also  in  those  aimed  at

refutation, you should examine the discrepancies of the answerer’s position

either with his own statements, or with those of persons whom he admits to

say and do aright, moreover with those of people who are generally supposed

to bear that kind of character, or who are like them, or with those of the

majority or of all men. Also just as answerers, too, often, when they are in

process of being confuted, draw a distinction, if their confutation is just about

to take place, so questioners also should resort to this from time to time to

counter objectors, pointing out, supposing that against one sense of the words

the objection holds, but not against the other, that they have taken it in the

latter sense, as e.g. Cleophon does in the Mandrobulus. They should also

break off their argument and cut down their other lines of attack, while in

answering, if a man perceives this being done beforehand, he should put in

his objection and have his say first. One should also lead attacks sometimes

against positions other than the one stated, on the understood condition that

one cannot find lines of attack against the view laid down, as Lycophron did

when  ordered  to  deliver  a  eulogy  upon  the  lyre.  To  counter  those  who

demand ‘Against what are you directing your effort?’, since one is generally

thought bound to state the charge made, while, on the other hand, some ways

of stating it make the defence too easy, you should state as your aim only the

general result that always happens in refutations, namely the contradiction of

his thesis —viz. that your effort is to deny what he has affirmed, or to affirm

what he denied: don’t say that you are trying to show that the knowledge of

contraries is, or is not, the same. One must not ask one’s conclusion in the

form  of  a  premiss,  while  some  conclusions  should  not  even  be  put  as

questions at all; one should take and use it as granted.

<

div id="section16" class="section" title="16">


16We  have  now  therefore  dealt  with  the  sources  of  questions,  and  the

methods of questioning in contentious disputations: next we have to speak of

answering, and of how solutions should be made, and of what requires them,

and of what use is served by arguments of this kind.

The use of them, then, is, for philosophy, twofold. For in the first place,

since for the most part they depend upon the expression, they put us in a

better condition for seeing in how many senses any term is used, and what

kind of resemblances and what kind of differences occur between things and

between  their  names.  In  the  second  place  they  are  useful  for  one’s  own

personal researches; for the man who is easily committed to a fallacy by

some one else, and does not perceive it, is likely to incur this fate of himself

also on many occasions. Thirdly and lastly, they further contribute to one’s

reputation, viz. the reputation of being well trained in everything, and not

inexperienced in anything: for that a party to arguments should find fault with

them, if he cannot definitely point out their weakness, creates a suspicion,

making  it  seem  as  though  it  were  not  the  truth  of  the  matter  but  merely

inexperience that put him out of temper.

  Answerers may clearly see how to meet arguments of this kind, if our

previous account was right of the sources whence fallacies came, and also our

distinctions adequate of the forms of dishonesty in putting questions. But it is

not the same thing take an argument in one’s hand and then to see and solve

its  faults,  as  it  is  to  be  able  to  meet  it  quickly  while  being  subjected  to

questions: for what we know, we often do not know in a different context.

Moreover, just as in other things speed is enhanced by training, so it is with

arguments too, so that supposing we are unpractised, even though a point be

clear to us, we are often too late for the right moment. Sometimes too it

happens as with diagrams; for there we can sometimes analyse the figure, but

not construct it again: so too in refutations, though we know the thing on

which the connexion of the argument depends, we still are at a loss to split

the argument apart.

<

div id="section17" class="section" title="17">


17


First then, just as we say that we ought sometimes to choose to prove

something in the general estimation rather than in truth, so also we havesometimes to solve arguments rather in the general estimation than according

to the truth. For it is a general rule in fighting contentious persons, to treat

them not as refuting, but as merely appearing to refute: for we say that they

don’t really prove their case, so that our object in correcting them must be to

dispel the appearance of it. For if refutation be an unambiguous contradiction

arrived at from certain views, there could be no need to draw distinctions

against amphiboly and ambiguity: they do not effect a proof. The only motive

for drawing further distinctions is that the conclusion reached looks like a

refutation.  What,  then,  we  have  to  beware  of,  is  not  being  refuted,  but

seeming to be, because of course the asking of amphibolies and of questions

that turn upon ambiguity, and all the other tricks of that kind, conceal even a

genuine refutation, and make it uncertain who is refuted and who is not. For

since one has the right at the end, when the conclusion is drawn, to say that

the  only  denial  made  of  One’s  statement  is  ambiguous,  no  matter  how

precisely he may have addressed his argument to the very same point as

oneself, it is not clear whether one has been refuted: for it is not clear whether

at the moment one is speaking the truth. If, on the other hand, one had drawn

a distinction, and questioned him on the ambiguous term or the amphiboly,

the  refutation  would  not  have  been  a  matter  of  uncertainty.  Also  what  is

incidentally the object of contentious arguers, though less so nowadays than

formerly,  would  have  been  fulfilled,  namely  that  the  person  questioned

should answer either ‘Yes’ or ‘No’: whereas nowadays the improper forms in

which questioners put their questions compel the party questioned to add

something to his answer in correction of the faultiness of the proposition as

put: for certainly, if the questioner distinguishes his meaning adequately, the

answerer is bound to reply either ‘Yes’ or ‘No’.

If  any  one  is  going  to  suppose  that  an  argument  which  turns  upon

ambiguity is a refutation, it will be impossible for an answerer to escape

being refuted in a sense: for in the case of visible objects one is bound of

necessity  to  deny  the  term  one  has  asserted,  and  to  assert  what  one  has

denied. For the remedy which some people have for this is quite unavailing.

They  say,  not  that  Coriscus  is  both  musical  and  unmusical,  but  that  this

Coriscus is musical and this Coriscus unmusical. But this will not do, for to

say ‘this Coriscus is unmusical’, or ‘musical’, and to say ‘this Coriscus’ is so,

is to use the same expression: and this he is both affirming and denying at

once. ‘But perhaps they do not mean the same.’ Well, nor did the simple

name in the former case: so where is the difference? If, however, he is toascribe to the one person the simple title ‘Coriscus’, while to the other he is

to add the prefix ‘one’ or ‘this’, he commits an absurdity: for the latter is no

more applicable to the one than to the other: for to whichever he adds it, it

makes no difference.

All  the  same,  since  if  a  man  does  not  distinguish  the  senses  of  an

amphiboly,  it  is  not  clear  whether  he  has  been  confuted  or  has  not  been

confuted, and since in arguments the right to distinguish them is granted, it is

evident that to grant the question simply without drawing any distinction is a

mistake, so that, even if not the man himself, at any rate his argument looks

as though it had been refuted. It often happens, however, that, though they

see the amphiboly, people hesitate to draw such distinctions, because of the

dense crowd of persons who propose questions of the kind, in order that they

may not be thought to be obstructionists at every turn: then, though they

would never have supposed that that was the point on which the argument

turned, they often find themselves faced by a paradox. Accordingly, since the

right of drawing the distinction is granted, one should not hesitate, as has

been said before.

If people never made two questions into one question, the fallacy that turns

upon  ambiguity  and  amphiboly  would  not  have  existed  either,  but  either

genuine refutation or none. For what is the difference between asking ‘Are

Callias and Themistocles musical?’ and what one might have asked if they,

being different, had had one name? For if the term applied means more than

one thing, he has asked more than one question. If then it be not right to

demand simply to be given a single answer to two questions, it is evident that

it is not proper to give a simple answer to any ambiguous question, not even

if the predicate be true of all the subjects, as some claim that one should. For

this is exactly as though he had asked ‘Are Coriscus and Callias at home or

not at home?’, supposing them to be both in or both out: for in both cases

there is a number of propositions: for though the simple answer be true, that

does not make the question one. For it is possible for it to be true to answer

even countless different questions when put to one, all together with either a

‘Yes’ or a ‘No’: but still one should not answer them with a single answer:

for that is the death of discussion. Rather, the case is like as though different

things has actually had the same name applied to them. If then, one should

not give a single answer to two questions, it is evident that we should not say

simply ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ in the case of ambiguous terms either: for the remark is

simply  a  remark,  not  an  answer  at  all,  although  among  disputants  suchremarks are loosely deemed to be answers, because they do not see what the

consequence is.

As we said, then, inasmuch as certain refutations are generally taken for

such, though not such really, in the same way also certain solutions will be

generally taken for solutions, though not really such. Now these, we say,

must sometimes be advanced rather than the true solutions in contentious

reasonings and in the encounter with ambiguity. The proper answer in saying

what one thinks is to say ‘Granted’; for in that way the likelihood of being

refuted on a side issue is minimized. If, on the other hand, one is compelled

to say something paradoxical, one should then be most careful to add that ‘it

seems’ so: for in that way one avoids the impression of being either refuted

or  paradoxical.  Since  it  is  clear  what  is  meant  by  ‘begging  the  original

question’,  and  people  think  that  they  must  at  all  costs  overthrow  the

premisses that lie near the conclusion, and plead in excuse for refusing to

grant him some of them that he is begging the original question, so whenever

any one claims from us a point such as is bound to follow as a consequence

from our thesis, but is false or paradoxical, we must plead the same: for the

necessary consequences are generally held to be a part of the thesis itself.

Moreover,  whenever  the  universal  has  been  secured  not  under  a  definite

name, but by a comparison of instances, one should say that the questioner

assumes it not in the sense in which it was granted nor in which he proposed

it in the premiss: for this too is a point upon which a refutation often depends.

If one is debarred from these defences one must pass to the argument that

the conclusion has not been properly shown, approaching it in the light of the

aforesaid distinction between the different kinds of fallacy.

In the case, then, of names that are used literally one is bound to answer

either simply or by drawing a distinction: the tacit understandings implied in

our  statements,  e.g.  in  answer  to  questions  that  are  not  put  clearly  but

elliptically-it  is  upon  this  that  the  consequent  refutation  depends.  For

example,  ‘Is  what  belongs  to  Athenians  the  property  of  Athenians?’  Yes.

‘And so it is likewise in other cases. But observe; man belongs to the animal

kingdom,  doesn’t  he?’  Yes.  ‘Then  man  is  the  property  of  the  animal

kingdom.’ But this is a fallacy: for we say that man ‘belongs to’ the animal

kingdom because he is an animal, just as we say that Lysander ‘belongs to’

the  Spartans,  because  he  is  a  Spartan.  It  is  evident,  then,  that  where  the

premiss put forward is not clear, one must not grant it simply.

  Whenever of two things it is generally thought that if the one is true theother is true of necessity, whereas, if the other is true, the first is not true of

necessity, one should, if asked which of them is true, grant the smaller one:

for the larger the number of premisses, the harder it is to draw a conclusion

from them. If, again, the sophist tries to secure that has a contrary while B

has not, suppose what he says is true, you should say that each has a contrary,

only for the one there is no established name.

  Since, again, in regard to some of the views they express, most people

would say that any one who did not admit them was telling a falsehood, while

they  would  not  say  this  in  regard  to  some,  e.g.  to  any  matters  whereon

opinion is divided (for most people have no distinct view whether the soul of

animals is destructible or immortal), accordingly (1) it is uncertain in which

of two senses the premiss proposed is usually meant-whether as maxims are

(for people call by the name of ‘maxims’ both true opinions and general

assertions) or like the doctrine ‘the diagonal of a square is incommensurate

with its side’: and moreover (2) whenever opinions are divided as to the truth,

we then have subjects of which it is very easy to change the terminology

undetected. For because of the uncertainty in which of the two senses the

premiss contains the truth, one will not be thought to be playing any trick,

while because of the division of opinion, one will not be thought to be telling

a falsehood. Change the terminology therefore, for the change will make the

position irrefutable.

  Moreover, whenever one foresees any question coming, one should put in

one’s objection and have one’s say beforehand: for by doing so one is likely

to embarrass the questioner most effectually.

<

div id="section18" class="section" title="18">


18


  Inasmuch as a proper solution is an exposure of false reasoning, showing

on what kind of question the falsity depends, and whereas ‘false reasoning’

has  a  double  meaning-for  it  is  used  either  if  a  false  conclusion  has  been

proved, or if there is only an apparent proof and no real one-there must be

both the kind of solution just described,’ and also the correction of a merely

apparent proof, so as to show upon which of the questions the appearance

depends. Thus it comes about that one solves arguments that are properly

reasoned  by  demolishing  them,  whereas  one  solves  merely  apparentarguments by drawing distinctions. Again, inasmuch as of arguments that are

properly reasoned some have a true and others a false conclusion, those that

are false in respect of their conclusion it is possible to solve in two ways; for

it  is  possible  both  by  demolishing  one  of  the  premisses  asked,  and  by

showing that the conclusion is not the real state of the case: those, on the

other hand, that are false in respect of the premisses can be solved only by a

demolition of one of them; for the conclusion is true. So that those who wish

to solve an argument should in the first place look and see if it is properly

reasoned, or is unreasoned; and next, whether the conclusion be true or false,

in order that we may effect the solution either by drawing some distinction or

by demolishing something, and demolishing it either in this way or in that, as

was  laid  down  before.  There  is  a  very  great  deal  of  difference  between

solving an argument when being subjected to questions and when not: for to

foresee traps is difficult, whereas to see them at one’s leisure is easier.

<

div id="section19" class="section" title="19">


19


Of the refutations, then, that depend upon ambiguity and amphiboly some

contain some question with more than one meaning, while others contain a

conclusion bearing a number of senses: e.g. in the proof that ‘speaking of the

silent’ is possible, the conclusion has a double meaning, while in the proof

that ‘he who knows does not understand what he knows’ one of the questions

contains an amphiboly. Also the double-edged saying is true in one context

but not in another: it means something that is and something that is not.

  Whenever, then, the many senses lie in the conclusion no refutation takes

place unless the sophist secures as well the contradiction of the conclusion he

means to prove; e.g. in the proof that ‘seeing of the blind’ is possible: for

without the contradiction there was no refutation. Whenever, on the other

hand, the many senses lie in the questions, there is no necessity to begin by

denying the double-edged premiss: for this was not the goal of the argument

but only its support. At the start, then, one should reply with regard to an

ambiguity, whether of a term or of a phrase, in this manner, that ‘in one sense

it is so, and in another not so’, as e.g. that ‘speaking of the silent’ is in one

sense possible but in another not possible: also that in one sense ‘one should

do what must needs be done’, but not in another: for ‘what must needs be’bears a number of senses. If, however, the ambiguity escapes one, one should

correct it at the end by making an addition to the question: ‘Is speaking of the

silent possible?’ ‘No, but to speak of while he is silent is possible.’ Also, in

cases which contain the ambiguity in their premisses, one should reply in like

manner:  ‘Do  people-then  not  understand  what  they  know?  “Yes,  but  not

those who know it in the manner described’: for it is not the same thing to say

that ‘those who know cannot understand what they know’, and to say that

‘those  who  know  something  in  this  particular  manner  cannot  do  so’.  In

general, too, even though he draws his conclusion in a quite unambiguous

manner, one should contend that what he has negated is not the fact which

one has asserted but only its name; and that therefore there is no refutation.

<

div id="section20" class="section" title="20">


20


It is evident also how one should solve those refutations that depend upon

the division and combination of words: for if the expression means something

different when divided and when combined, as soon as one’s opponent draws

his conclusion one should take the expression in the contrary way. All such

expressions as the following depend upon the combination or division of the

words:  ‘Was  X  being  beaten  with  that  with  which  you  saw  him  being

beaten?’ and ‘Did you see him being beaten with that with which he was

being beaten?’ This fallacy has also in it an element of amphiboly in the

questions,  but  it  really  depends  upon  combination.  For  the  meaning  that

depends upon the division of the words is not really a double meaning (for

the expression when divided is not the same), unless also the word that is

pronounced, according to its breathing, as eros and eros is a case of double

meaning. (In writing, indeed, a word is the same whenever it is written of the

same letters and in the same manner—and even there people nowadays put

marks at the side to show the pronunciation—but the spoken words are not

the same.) Accordingly an expression that depends upon division is not an

ambiguous  one.  It  is  evident  also  that  not  all  refutations  depend  upon

ambiguity as some people say they do.

The answerer, then, must divide the expression: for ‘I-saw-a-man-being-

beaten with my eyes’ is not the same as to say ‘I saw a man being-beaten-

with-my-eyes’. Also there is the argument of Euthydemus proving ‘Then youknow now in Sicily that there are triremes in Piraeus’: and again, ‘Can a good

man who is a cobbler be bad?’ ‘No.’ ‘But a good man may be a bad cobbler:

therefore  a  good  cobbler  will  be  bad.’  Again,  ‘Things  the  knowledge  of

which is good, are good things to learn, aren’t they?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘The knowledge,

however, of evil is good: therefore evil is a good thing to know.’ ‘Yes. But,

you see, evil is both evil and a thing-to-learn, so that evil is an evil-thing-to-

learn, although the knowledge of evils is good.’ Again, ‘Is it true to say in the

present moment that you are born?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Then you are born in the present

moment.’ ‘No; the expression as divided has a different meaning: for it is true

to say-in-the-present-moment that “you are born”, but not “You are born-in-

the-present-moment”.’ Again, ‘Could you do what you can, and as you can?’

‘Yes.’ ‘But when not harping, you have the power to harp: and therefore you

could harp when not harping.’ ‘No: he has not the power to harp-while-not-

harping; merely, when he is not doing it, he has the power to do it.’ Some

people solve this last refutation in another way as well. For, they say, if he

has granted that he can do anything in the way he can, still it does not follow

that he can harp when not harping: for it has not been granted that he will do

anything in every way in which he can; and it is not the same thing’ to do a

thing in the way he can’ and ‘to do it in every way in which he can’. But

evidently they do not solve it properly: for of arguments that depend upon the

same point the solution is the same, whereas this will not fit all cases of the

kind  nor  yet  all  ways  of  putting  the  questions:  it  is  valid  against  the

questioner, but not against his argument.

<

div id="section21" class="section" title="21">


21


  Accentuation gives rise to no fallacious arguments, either as written or as

spoken, except perhaps some few that might be made up; e.g. the following

argument. ‘Is ou katalueis a house?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Is then ou katalueis the negation

of katalueis?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘But you said that ou katalueis is a house: therefore the

house is a negation.’ How one should solve this, is clear: for the word does

not mean the same when spoken with an acuter and when spoken with a

graver accent.

<

div id="section22" class="section" title="22">22


It  is  clear  also  how  one  must  meet  those  fallacies  that  depend  on  the

identical expressions of things that are not identical, seeing that we are in

possession of the kinds of predications. For the one man, say, has granted,

when asked, that a term denoting a substance does not belong as an attribute,

while  the  other  has  shown  that  some  attribute  belongs  which  is  in  the

Category  of  Relation  or  of  Quantity,  but  is  usually  thought  to  denote  a

substance because of its expression; e.g. in the following argument: ‘Is it

possible to be doing and to have done the same thing at the same time?’ ‘No.’

‘But, you see, it is surely possible to be seeing and to have seen the same

thing at the same time, and in the same aspect.’ Again, ‘Is any mode of

passivity a mode of activity?’ ‘No.’ ‘Then “he is cut”, “he is burnt”, “he is

struck by some sensible object” are alike in expression and all denote some

form of passivity, while again “to say”, “to run”, “to see” are like one like

one another in expression: but, you see, “to see” is surely a form of being

struck by a sensible object; therefore it is at the same time a form of passivity

and of activity.’ Suppose, however, that in that case any one, after granting

that it is not possible to do and to have done the same thing in the same time,

were to say that it is possible to see and to have seen it, still he has not yet

been  refuted,  suppose  him  to  say  that  ‘to  see’  is  not  a  form  of  ‘doing’

(activity) but of ‘passivity’: for this question is required as well, though he is

supposed by the listener to have already granted it, when he granted that ‘to

cut’ is a form of present, and ‘to have cut’ a form of past, activity, and so on

with the other things that have a like expression. For the listener adds the rest

by himself, thinking the meaning to be alike: whereas really the meaning is

not alike, though it appears to be so because of the expression. The same

thing happens here as happens in cases of ambiguity: for in dealing with

ambiguous expressions the tyro in argument supposes the sophist to have

negated  the  fact  which  he  (the  tyro)  affirmed,  and  not  merely  the  name:

whereas there still wants the question whether in using the ambiguous term

he  had  a  single  meaning  in  view:  for  if  he  grants  that  that  was  so,  the

refutation will be effected.

Like the above are also the following arguments. It is asked if a man has

lost what he once had and afterwards has not: for a man will no longer have

ten dice even though he has only lost one die. No: rather it is that he has lost

what he had before and has not now; but there is no necessity for him to havelost as much or as many things as he has not now. So then, he asks the

questions as to what he has, and draws the conclusion as to the whole number

that he has: for ten is a number. If then he had asked to begin with, whether a

man no longer having the number of things he once had has lost the whole

number, no one would have granted it, but would have said ‘Either the whole

number or one of them’. Also there is the argument that ‘a man may give

what he has not got’: for he has not got only one die. No: rather it is that he

has given not what he had not got, but in a manner in which he had not got it,

viz. just the one. For the word ‘only’ does not signify a particular substance

or quality or number, but a manner relation, e.g. that it is not coupled with

any other. It is therefore just as if he had asked ‘Could a man give what he

has not got?’ and, on being given the answer ‘No’, were to ask if a man could

give  a  thing  quickly  when  he  had  not  got  it  quickly,  and,  on  this  being

granted, were to conclude that ‘a man could give what he had not got’. It is

quite evident that he has not proved his point: for to ‘give quickly’ is not to

give a thing, but to give in a certain manner; and a man could certainly give a

thing in a manner in which he has not got it, e.g. he might have got it with

pleasure and give it with pain.

Like these are also all arguments of the following kind: ‘Could a man

strike a blow with a hand which he has not got, or see with an eye which he

has not got?’ For he has not got only one eye. Some people solve this case,

where a man has more than one eye, or more than one of anything else, by

saying  also  that  he  has  only  one.  Others  also  solve  it  as  they  solve  the

refutation of the view that ‘what a man has, he has received’: for A gave only

one vote; and certainly B, they say, has only one vote from A. Others, again,

proceed by demolishing straight away the proposition asked, and admitting

that  it  is  quite  possible  to  have  what  one  has  not  received;  e.g.  to  have

received sweet wine, but then, owing to its going bad in the course of receipt,

to have it sour. But, as was said also above,’ all these persons direct their

solutions against the man, not against his argument. For if this were a genuine

solution,  then,  suppose  any  one  to  grant  the  opposite,  he  could  find  no

solution, just as happens in other cases; e.g. suppose the true solution to be

‘So-and-so  is  partly  true  and  partly  not’,  then,  if  the  answerer  grants  the

expression without any qualification, the sophist’s conclusion follows. If, on

the other hand, the conclusion does not follow, then that could not be the true

solution: and what we say in regard to the foregoing examples is that, even if

all the sophist’s premisses be granted, still no proof is effected.  Moreover,  the  following  too  belong  to  this  group  of  arguments.  ‘If

something be in writing did some one write it?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘But it is now in

writing that you are seated-a false statement, though it was true at the time

when it was written: therefore the statement that was written is at the same

time  false  and  true.’  But  this  is  fallacious,  for  the  falsity  or  truth  of  a

statement or opinion indicates not a substance but a quality: for the same

account applies to the case of an opinion as well. Again, ‘Is what a learner

learns what he learns?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘But suppose some one learns “slow” quick’.

Then his (the sophist’s) words denote not what the learner learns but how he

learns it. Also, ‘Does a man tread upon what he walks through? ‘Yes.’ ‘But X

walks through a whole day.’ No, rather the words denote not what he walks

through, but when he walks; just as when any one uses the words ‘to drink

the cup’ he denotes not what he drinks, but the vessel out of which he drinks.

Also, ‘Is it either by learning or by discovery that a man knows what he

knows?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘But suppose that of a pair of things he has discovered one

and learned the other, the pair is not known to him by either method.’ No:

‘what’ he knows, means’ every single thing’ he knows, individually; but this

does not mean ‘all the things’ he knows, collectively. Again, there is the

proof that there is a ‘third man’ distinct from Man and from individual men.

But that is a fallacy, for ‘Man’, and indeed every general predicate, denotes

not an individual substance, but a particular quality, or the being related to

something in a particular manner, or something of that sort. Likewise also in

the case of ‘Coriscus’ and ‘Coriscus the musician’ there is the problem, Are

they the same or different?’ For the one denotes an individual substance and

the other a quality, so that it cannot be isolated; though it is not the isolation

which  creates  the  ‘third  man’,  but  the  admission  that  it  is  an  individual

substance. For ‘Man’ cannot be an individual substance, as Callias is. Nor is

the  case  improved  one  whit  even  if  one  were  to  call  the  clement  he  has

isolated not an individual substance but a quality: for there will still be the

one beside the many, just as ‘Man’ was. It is evident then that one must not

grant that what is a common predicate applying to a class universally is an

individual substance, but must say that denotes either a quality, or a relation,

or a quantity, or something of that kind.

<

div id="section23" class="section" title="23">


23It is a general rule in dealing with arguments that depend on language that

the solution always follows the opposite of the point on which the argument

turns:  e.g.  if  the  argument  depends  upon  combination,  then  the  solution

consists  in  division;  if  upon  division,  then  in  combination.  Again,  if  it

depends on an acute accent, the solution is a grave accent; if on a grave

accent, it is an acute. If it depends on ambiguity, one can solve it by using the

opposite term; e.g. if you find yourself calling something inanimate, despite

your previous denial that it was so, show in what sense it is alive: if, on the

other hand, one has declared it to be inanimate and the sophist has proved it

to be animate, say how it is inanimate. Likewise also in a case of amphiboly.

If the argument depends on likeness of expression, the opposite will be the

solution. ‘Could a man give what he has not got? ‘No, not what he has not

got; but he could give it in a way in which he has not got it, e.g. one die by

itself.’ Does a man know either by learning or by discovery each thing that he

knows, singly? but not the things that he knows, collectively.’ Also a man

treads, perhaps, on any thing he walks through, but not on the time he walks

through. Likewise also in the case of the other examples.

<

div id="section24" class="section" title="24">


24


In  dealing  with  arguments  that  depend  on  Accident,  one  and  the  same

solution meets all cases. For since it is indeterminate when an attribute should

be ascribed to a thing, in cases where it belongs to the accident of the thing,

and  since  in  some  cases  it  is  generally  agreed  and  people  admit  that  it

belongs, while in others they deny that it need belong, we should therefore, as

soon as the conclusion has been drawn, say in answer to them all alike, that

there  is  no  need  for  such  an  attribute  to  belong.  One  must,  however,  be

prepared to adduce an example of the kind of attribute meant. All arguments

such as the following depend upon Accident. ‘Do you know what I am going

to  ask  you?  you  know  the  man  who  is  approaching’,  or  ‘the  man  in  the

mask’? ‘Is the statue your work of art?’ or ‘Is the dog your father?’ ‘Is the

product of a small number with a small number a small number?’ For it is

evident in all these cases that there is no necessity for the attribute which is

true of the thing’s accident to be true of the thing as well. For only to things

that are indistinguishable and one in essence is it generally agreed that all thesame attributes belong; whereas in the case of a good thing, to be good is not

the same as to be going to be the subject of a question; nor in the case of a

man approaching, or wearing a mask, is ‘to be approaching’ the same thing as

‘to be Coriscus’, so that suppose I know Coriscus, but do not know the man

who is approaching, it still isn’t the case that I both know and do not know

the same man; nor, again, if this is mine and is also a work of art, is it

therefore my work of art, but my property or thing or something else. (The

solution is after the same manner in the other cases as well.)

  Some  solve  these  refutations  by  demolishing  the  original  proposition

asked: for they say that it is possible to know and not to know the same thing,

only not in the same respect: accordingly, when they don’t know the man

who is coming towards them, but do know Corsicus, they assert that they do

know and don’t know the same object, but not in the same respect. Yet, as we

have already remarked, the correction of arguments that depend upon the

same point ought to be the same, whereas this one will not stand if one adopts

the same principle in regard not to knowing something, but to being, or to

being is a in a certain state, e.g. suppose that X is father, and is also yours: for

if in some cases this is true and it is possible to know and not to know the

same thing, yet with that case the solution stated has nothing to do. Certainly

there  is  nothing  to  prevent  the  same  argument  from  having  a  number  of

flaws; but it is not the exposition of any and every fault that constitutes a

solution: for it is possible for a man to show that a false conclusion has been

proved,  but  not  to  show  on  what  it  depends,  e.g.  in  the  case  of  Zeno’s

argument to prove that motion is impossible. So that even if any one were to

try to establish that this doctrine is an impossible one, he still is mistaken, and

even if he proved his case ten thousand times over, still this is no solution of

Zeno’s  argument:  for  the  solution  was  all  along  an  exposition  of  false

reasoning, showing on what its falsity depends. If then he has not proved his

case, or is trying to establish even a true proposition, or a false one, in a false

manner,  to  point  this  out  is  a  true  solution.  Possibly,  indeed,  the  present

suggestion may very well apply in some cases: but in these cases, at any rate,

not even this would be generally agreed: for he knows both that Coriscus is

Coriscus and that the approaching figure is approaching. To know and not to

know the same thing is generally thought to be possible, when e.g. one knows

that X is white, but does not realize that he is musical: for in that way he does

know and not know the same thing, though not in the same respect. But as to

the approaching figure and Coriscus he knows both that it is approaching andthat he is Coriscus.

A like mistake to that of those whom we have mentioned is that of those

who solve the proof that every number is a small number: for if, when the

conclusion is not proved, they pass this over and say that a conclusion has

been proved and is true, on the ground that every number is both great and

small, they make a mistake.

  Some people also use the principle of ambiguity to solve the aforesaid

reasonings, e.g. the proof that ‘X is your father’, or ‘son’, or ‘slave’. Yet it is

evident that if the appearance a proof depends upon a plurality of meanings,

the term, or the expression in question, ought to bear a number of literal

senses, whereas no one speaks of A as being ‘B’s child’ in the literal sense, if

B is the child’s master, but the combination depends upon Accident. ‘Is A

yours?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘And is A a child?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘Then the child A is yours,’ because

he happens to be both yours and a child; but he is not ‘your child’.

  There is also the proof that ‘something “of evils” is good’; for wisdom is a

‘knowledge “of evils”’. But the expression that this is ‘of so and-so’ (=’so-

and-so’s’) has not a number of meanings: it means that it is ‘so-and-so’s

property’. We may suppose of course, on the other hand, that it has a number

of meanings-for we also say that man is ‘of the animals’, though not their

property; and also that any term related to ‘evils’ in a way expressed by a

genitive case is on that account a so-and-so ‘of evils’, though it is not one of

the evils-but in that case the apparently different meanings seem to depend on

whether  the  term  is  used  relatively  or  absolutely.  ‘Yet  it  is  conceivably

possible to find a real ambiguity in the phrase “Something of evils is good”.’

Perhaps, but not with regard to the phrase in question. It would occur more

nearly, suppose that ‘A servant is good of the wicked’; though perhaps it is

not quite found even there: for a thing may be ‘good’ and be ‘X’s’ without

being at the same time ‘X’s good’. Nor is the saying that ‘Man is of the

animals’ a phrase with a number of meanings: for a phrase does not become

possessed of a number of meanings merely suppose we express it elliptically:

for we express ‘Give me the Iliad’ by quoting half a line of it, e.g. ‘Give me

“Sing, goddess, of the wrath… ”’

<

div id="section25" class="section" title="25">


25  Those  arguments  which  depend  upon  an  expression  that  is  valid  of  a

particular thing, or in a particular respect, or place, or manner, or relation, and

not  valid  absolutely,  should  be  solved  by  considering  the  conclusion  in

relation to its contradictory, to see if any of these things can possibly have

happened  to  it.  For  it  is  impossible  for  contraries  and  opposites  and  an

affirmative and a negative to belong to the same thing absolutely; there is,

however, nothing to prevent each from belonging in a particular respect or

relation or manner, or to prevent one of them from belonging in a particular

respect and the other absolutely. So that if this one belongs absolutely and

that one in a particular respect, there is as yet no refutation. This is a feature

one has to find in the conclusion by examining it in comparison with its

contradictory.

All arguments of the following kind have this feature: ‘Is it possible for

what is-not to be? “No.” But, you see, it is something, despite its not being.’

Likewise also, Being will not be; for it will not he some particular form of

being. Is it possible for the same man at the same time to be a keeper and a

breaker of his oath?’ ‘Can the same man at the same time both obey and

disobey the same man?’ Or isn’t it the case that being something in particular

and Being are not the same? On the other hand, Not-being, even if it be

something, need not also have absolute ‘being’ as well. Nor if a man keeps

his oath in this particular instance or in this particular respect, is he bound

also to be a keeper of oaths absolutely, but he who swears that he will break

his oath, and then breaks it, keeps this particular oath only; he is not a keeper

of  his  oath:  nor  is  the  disobedient  man  ‘obedient’,  though  he  obeys  one

particular command. The argument is similar, also, as regards the problem

whether the same man can at the same time say what is both false and true:

but it appears to be a troublesome question because it is not easy to see in

which of the two connexions the word ‘absolutely’ is to be rendered-with

‘true’ or with ‘false’. There is, however, nothing to prevent it from being

false absolutely, though true in some particular respect or relation, i.e. being

true in some things, though not ‘true’ absolutely. Likewise also in cases of

some  particular  relation  and  place  and  time.  For  all  arguments  of  the

following kind depend upon this.’ Is health, or wealth, a good thing?’ ‘Yes.’

‘But to the fool who does not use it aright it is not a good thing: therefore it is

both good and not good.’ ‘Is health, or political power, a good thing?’ ‘Yes.

“But sometimes it is not particularly good: therefore the same thing is both

good and not good to the same man.’ Or rather there is nothing to prevent athing, though good absolutely, being not good to a particular man, or being

good to a particular man, and yet not good or here. ‘Is that which the prudent

man would not wish, an evil?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘But to get rid of, he would not wish the

good: therefore the good is an evil.’ But that is a mistake; for it is not the

same thing to say ‘The good is an evil’ and ‘to get rid of the good is an evil’.

Likewise also the argument of the thief is mistaken. For it is not the case that

if the thief is an evil thing, acquiring things is also evil: what he wishes,

therefore, is not what is evil but what is good; for to acquire something good

is good. Also, disease is an evil thing, but not to get rid of disease. ‘Is the just

preferable  to  the  unjust,  and  what  takes  place  justly  to  what  takes  place

unjustly? ‘Yes.’ ‘But to to be put to death unjustly is preferable.’ ‘Is it just

that each should have his own?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘But whatever decisions a man comes

to on the strength of his personal opinion, even if it be a false opinion, are

valid in law: therefore the same result is both just and unjust.’ Also, should

one decide in favour of him who says what is unjust?’ ‘The former.’ ‘But you

see, it is just for the injured party to say fully the things he has suffered; and

these are fallacies. For because to suffer a thing unjustly is preferable, unjust

ways are not therefore preferable, though in this particular case the unjust

may very well be better than the just. Also, to have one’s own is just, while to

have what is another’s is not just: all the same, the decision in question may

very well be a just decision, whatever it be that the opinion of the man who

gave the decision supports: for because it is just in this particular case or in

this particular manner, it is not also just absolutely. Likewise also, though

things are unjust, there is nothing to prevent the speaking of them being just:

for because to speak of things is just, there is no necessity that the things

should be just, any more than because to speak of things be of use, the things

need be of use. Likewise also in the case of what is just. So that it is not the

case that because the things spoken of are unjust, the victory goes to him who

speaks unjust things: for he speaks of things that are just to speak of, though

absolutely, i.e. to suffer, they are unjust.

<

div id="section26" class="section" title="26">


26


  Refutations that depend on the definition of a refutation must, according to

the plan sketched above, be met by comparing together the conclusion withits contradictory, and seeing that it shall involve the same attribute in the

same respect and relation and manner and time. If this additional question be

put at the start, you should not admit that it is impossible for the same thing

to be both double and not double, but grant that it is possible, only not in such

a way as was agreed to constitute a refutation of your case. All the following

arguments depend upon a point of that kind. ‘Does a man who knows A to be

A, know the thing called A?’ and in the same way, ‘is one who is ignorant

that A is A ignorant of the thing called A?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘But one who knows that

Coriscus is Coriscus might be ignorant of the fact that he is musical, so that

he both knows and is ignorant of the same thing.’ Is a thing four cubits long

greater than a thing three cubits long?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘But a thing might grow from

three to four cubits in length; ‘now what is ‘greater’ is greater than a ‘less’:

accordingly the thing in question will be both greater and less than itself in

the same respect.

<

div id="section27" class="section" title="27">


27


As to refutations that depend on begging and assuming the original point to

be proved, suppose the nature of the question to be obvious, one should not

grant it, even though it be a view generally held, but should tell him the truth.

Suppose,  however,  that  it  escapes  one,  then,  thanks  to  the  badness  of

arguments  of  that  kind,  one  should  make  one’s  error  recoil  upon  the

questioner, and say that he has brought no argument: for a refutation must be

proved independently of the original point. Secondly, one should say that the

point was granted under the impression that he intended not to use it as a

premiss, but to reason against it, in the opposite way from that adopted in

refutations on side issues.

<

div id="section28" class="section" title="28">


28


Also,  those  refutations  that  bring  one  to  their  conclusion  through  the

consequent you should show up in the course of the argument itself. Themode in which consequences follow is twofold. For the argument either is

that as the universal follows on its particular-as (e.g.) ‘animal’ follows from

‘man’-so does the particular on its universal: for the claim is made that if A is

always found with B, then B also is always found with A. Or else it proceeds

by  way  of  the  opposites  of  the  terms  involved:  for  if  A  follows  B,  it  is

claimed that A’s opposite will follow B’s opposite. On this latter claim the

argument of Melissus also depends: for he claims that because that which has

come to be has a beginning, that which has not come to be has none, so that if

the heaven has not come to be, it is also eternal. But that is not so; for the

sequence is vice versa.

<

div id="section29" class="section" title="29">


29


In the case of any refutations whose reasoning depends on some addition,

look and see if upon its subtraction the absurdity follows none the less: and

then if so, the answerer should point this out, and say that he granted the

addition not because he really thought it, but for the sake of the argument,

whereas the questioner has not used it for the purpose of his argument at all.

<

div id="section30" class="section" title="30">


30


To  meet  those  refutations  which  make  several  questions  into  one,  one

should  draw  a  distinction  between  them  straight  away  at  the  start.  For  a

question must be single to which there is a single answer, so that one must

not affirm or deny several things of one thing, nor one thing of many, but one

of one. But just as in the case of ambiguous terms, an attribute belongs to a

term sometimes in both its senses, and sometimes in neither, so that a simple

answer does one, as it happens, no harm despite the fact that the question is

not simple, so it is in these cases of double questions too. Whenever, then, the

several attributes belong to the one subject, or the one to the many, the man

who  gives  a  simple  answer  encounters  no  obstacle  even  though  he  has

committed this mistake: but whenever an attribute belongs to one subject butnot to the other, or there is a question of a number of attributes belonging to a

number of subjects and in one sense both belong to both, while in another

sense, again, they do not, then there is trouble, so that one must beware of

this. Thus (e.g.) in the following arguments: Supposing to be good and B evil,

you will, if you give a single answer about both, be compelled to say that it is

true to call these good, and that it is true to call them evil and likewise to call

them neither good nor evil (for each of them has not each character), so that

the same thing will be both good and evil and neither good nor evil. Also,

since  everything  is  the  same  as  itself  and  different  from  anything  else,

inasmuch as the man who answers double questions simply can be made to

say that several things are ‘the same’ not as other things but ‘as themselves’,

and also that they are different from themselves, it follows that the same

things must be both the same as and different from themselves. Moreover, if

what is good becomes evil while what is evil is good, then they must both

become  two.  So  of  two  unequal  things  each  being  equal  to  itself,  it  will

follow that they are both equal and unequal to themselves.

Now these refutations fall into the province of other solutions as well: for

‘both’ and ‘all’ have more than one meaning, so that the resulting affirmation

and denial of the same thing does not occur, except verbally: and this is not

what we meant by a refutation. But it is clear that if there be not put a single

question on a number of points, but the answerer has affirmed or denied one

attribute only of one subject only, the absurdity will not come to pass.

<

div id="section31" class="section" title="31">


31


  With regard to those who draw one into repeating the same thing a number

of times, it is clear that one must not grant that predications of relative terms

have  any  meaning  in  abstraction  by  themselves,  e.g.  that  ‘double’  is  a

significant term apart from the whole phrase ‘double of half’ merely on the

ground that it figures in it. For ten figures in ‘ten minus one’ and in ‘not do’,

and generally the affirmation in the negation; but for all that, suppose any one

were to say, ‘This is not white’, he does not say that it is white. The bare

word ‘double’, one may perhaps say, has not even any meaning at all, any

more than has ‘the’ in ‘the half’: and even if it has a meaning, yet it has not

the same meaning as in the combination. Nor is ‘knowledge’ the same thingin a specific branch of it (suppose it, e.g. to be ‘medical knowledge’) as it is

in general: for in general it was the ‘knowledge of the knowable’. In the case

of terms that are predicated of the terms through which they are defined, you

should say the same thing, that the term defined is not the same in abstraction

as it is in the whole phrase. For ‘concave’ has a general meaning which is the

same in the case of a snub nose, and of a bandy leg, but when added to either

substantive  nothing  prevents  it  from  differentiating  its  meaning;  in  fact  it

bears one sense as applied to the nose, and another as applied to the leg: for

in the former connexion it means ‘snub’ and in the latter ‘bandyshaped’; i.e.

it makes no difference whether you say ‘a snub nose’ or ‘a concave nose’.

Moreover, the expression must not be granted in the nominative case: for it is

a  falsehood.  For  snubness  is  not  a  concave  nose  but  something  (e.g.  an

affection) belonging to a nose: hence, there is no absurdity in supposing that

the snub nose is a nose possessing the concavity that belongs to a nose.

<

div id="section32" class="section" title="32">


32


  With regard to solecisms, we have previously said what it is that appears to

bring them about; the method of their solution will be clear in the course of

the arguments themselves. Solecism is the result aimed at in all arguments of

the following kind: ‘Is a thing truly that which you truly call it?’ ‘Yes’. ‘But,

speaking of a stone, you call him real: therefore of a stone it follows that

“him is real”.’ No: rather, talking of a stone means not saying which’ but

‘whom’, and not ‘that’ but ‘him’. If, then, any one were to ask, ‘Is a stone

him whom you truly call him?’ he would be generally thought not to be

speaking good Greek, any more than if he were to ask, ‘Is he what you call

her?’ Speak in this way of a ‘stick’ or any neuter word, and the difference

does not break out. For this reason, also, no solecism is incurred, suppose any

one asks, ‘Is a thing what you say it to be?’ ‘Yes’. ‘But, speaking of a stick,

you  call  it  real:  therefore,  of  a  stick  it  follows  that  it  is  real.’  ‘Stone’,

however, and ‘he’ have masculine designations. Now suppose some one were

to ask, ‘Can “he” be a she” (a female)?’, and then again, ‘Well, but is not he

Coriscus?’ and then were to say, ‘Then he is a “she”,’ he has not proved the

solecism, even if the name ‘Coriscus’ does signify a ‘she’, if, on the other

hand, the answerer does not grant this: this point must be put as an additionalquestion: while if neither is it the fact nor does he grant it, then the sophist

has not proved his case either in fact or as against the person he has been

questioning. In like manner, then, in the above instance as well it must be

definitely put that ‘he’ means the stone. If, however, this neither is so nor is

granted,  the  conclusion  must  not  be  stated:  though  it  follows  apparently,

because the case (the accusative), that is really unlike, appears to be like the

nominative. ‘Is it true to say that this object is what you call it by name?’

‘Yes’. ‘But you call it by the name of a shield: this object therefore is “of a

shield”.’ No: not necessarily, because the meaning of ‘this object’ is not ‘of a

shield’ but ‘a shield’: ‘of a shield’ would be the meaning of ‘this object’s’.

Nor again if ‘He is what you call him by name’, while ‘the name you call him

by is Cleon’s’, is he therefore ‘Cleon’s’: for he is not ‘Cleon’s’, for what was

said was that ‘He, not his, is what I call him by name’. For the question, if put

in the latter way, would not even be Greek. ‘Do you know this?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘But

this is he: therefore you know he’. No: rather ‘this’ has not the same meaning

in ‘Do you know this?’ as in ‘This is a stone’; in the first it stands for an

accusative,  in  the  second  for  a  nominative  case.  ‘When  you  have

understanding  of  anything,  do  you  understand  it?’  ‘Yes.’  ‘But  you  have

understanding of a stone: therefore you understand of a stone.’ No: the one

phrase is in the genitive, ‘of a stone’, while the other is in the accusative, ‘a

stone’: and what was granted was that ‘you understand that, not of that, of

which you have understanding’, so that you understand not ‘of a stone’, but

‘the stone’.

  Thus that arguments of this kind do not prove solecism but merely appear

to do so, and both why they so appear and how you should meet them, is

clear from what has been said.

<

div id="section33" class="section" title="33">


33


We must also observe that of all the arguments aforesaid it is easier with

some to see why and where the reasoning leads the hearer astray, while with

others it is more difficult, though often they are the same arguments as the

former. For we must call an argument the same if it depends upon the same

point; but the same argument is apt to be thought by some to depend on

diction, by others on accident, and by others on something else, because eachof  them,  when  worked  with  different  terms,  is  not  so  clear  as  it  was.

Accordingly,  just  as  in  fallacies  that  depend  on  ambiguity,  which  are

generally thought to be the silliest form of fallacy, some are clear even to the

man in the street (for humorous phrases nearly all depend on diction; e.g.

‘The man got the cart down from the stand’; and ‘Where are you bound?’ ‘To

the yard arm’; and ‘Which cow will calve afore?’ ‘Neither, but both behind;’

and ‘Is the North wind clear?’ ‘No, indeed; for it has murdered the beggar

and the merchant.” Is he a Good enough-King?’ ‘No, indeed; a Rob-son’: and

so with the great majority of the rest as well), while others appear to elude the

most expert (and it is a symptom of this that they often fight about their

terms, e.g. whether the meaning of ‘Being’ and ‘One’ is the same in all their

applications or different; for some think that ‘Being’ and ‘One’ mean the

same; while others solve the argument of Zeno and Parmenides by asserting

that ‘One’ and ‘Being’ are used in a number of senses), likewise also as

regards  fallacies  of  Accident  and  each  of  the  other  types,  some  of  the

arguments will be easier to see while others are more difficult; also to grasp

to  which  class  a  fallacy  belongs,  and  whether  it  is  a  refutation  or  not  a

refutation, is not equally easy in all cases.

An incisive argument is one which produces the greatest perplexity: for

this is the one with the sharpest fang. Now perplexity is twofold, one which

occurs in reasoned arguments, respecting which of the propositions asked one

is to demolish, and the other in contentious arguments, respecting the manner

in which one is to assent to what is propounded. Therefore it is in syllogistic

arguments that the more incisive ones produce the keenest heart-searching.

Now a syllogistic argument is most incisive if from premisses that are as

generally accepted as possible it demolishes a conclusion that is accepted as

generally as possible. For the one argument, if the contradictory is changed

about, makes all the resulting syllogisms alike in character: for always from

premisses that are generally accepted it will prove a conclusion, negative or

positive as the case may be, that is just as generally accepted; and therefore

one is bound to feel perplexed. An argument, then, of this kind is the most

incisive, viz. the one that puts its conclusion on all fours with the propositions

asked; and second comes the one that argues from premisses, all of which are

equally convincing: for this will produce an equal perplexity as to what kind

of premiss, of those asked, one should demolish. Herein is a difficulty: for

one must demolish something, but what one must demolish is uncertain. Of

contentious arguments, on the other hand, the most incisive is the one which,in the first place, is characterized by an initial uncertainty whether it has been

properly reasoned or not; and also whether the solution depends on a false

premiss or on the drawing of a distinction; while, of the rest, the second place

is  held  by  that  whose  solution  clearly  depends  upon  a  distinction  or  a

demolition, and yet it does not reveal clearly which it is of the premisses

asked, whose demolition, or the drawing of a distinction within it, will bring

the solution about, but even leaves it vague whether it is on the conclusion or

on one of the premisses that the deception depends.

Now  sometimes  an  argument  which  has  not  been  properly  reasoned  is

silly,  supposing  the  assumptions  required  to  be  extremely  contrary  to  the

general view or false; but sometimes it ought not to be held in contempt. For

whenever some question is left out, of the kind that concerns both the subject

and the nerve of the argument, the reasoning that has both failed to secure

this as well, and also failed to reason properly, is silly; but when what is

omitted is some extraneous question, then it is by no means to be lightly

despised, but the argument is quite respectable, though the questioner has not

put his questions well.

Just as it is possible to bring a solution sometimes against the argument, at

others  against  the  questioner  and  his  mode  of  questioning,  and  at  others

against neither of these, likewise also it is possible to marshal one’s questions

and reasoning both against the thesis, and against the answerer and against

the time, whenever the solution requires a longer time to examine than the

period available.

<

div id="section34" class="section" title="34">


34


As  to  the  number,  then,  and  kind  of  sources  whence  fallacies  arise  in

discussion, and how we are to show that our opponent is committing a fallacy

and  make  him  utter  paradoxes;  moreover,  by  the  use  of  what  materials

solescism  is  brought  about,  and  how  to  question  and  what  is  the  way  to

arrange the questions; moreover, as to the question what use is served by all

arguments of this kind, and concerning the answerer’s part, both as a whole

in general, and in particular how to solve arguments and solecisms-on all

these  things  let  the  foregoing  discussion  suffice.  It  remains  to  recall  our

original proposal and to bring our discussion to a close with a few wordsupon it.

Our programme was, then, to discover some faculty of reasoning about any

theme put before us from the most generally accepted premisses that there

are. For that is the essential task of the art of discussion (dialectic) and of

examination (peirastic). Inasmuch, however, as it is annexed to it, on account

of the near presence of the art of sophistry (sophistic), not only to be able to

conduct an examination dialectically but also with a show of knowledge, we

therefore proposed for our treatise not only the aforesaid aim of being able to

exact an account of any view, but also the aim of ensuring that in standing up

to an argument we shall defend our thesis in the same manner by means of

views as generally held as possible. The reason of this we have explained; for

this, too, was why Socrates used to ask questions and not to answer them; for

he used to confess that he did not know. We have made clear, in the course of

what precedes, the number both of the points with reference to which, and of

the  materials  from  which,  this  will  be  accomplished,  and  also  from  what

sources we can become well supplied with these: we have shown, moreover,

how to question or arrange the questioning as a whole, and the problems

concerning the answers and solutions to be used against the reasonings of the

questioner.  We  have  also  cleared  up  the  problems  concerning  all  other

matters that belong to the same inquiry into arguments. In addition to this we

have been through the subject of Fallacies, as we have already stated above.

That our programme, then, has been adequately completed is clear. But we

must not omit to notice what has happened in regard to this inquiry. For in

the  case  of  all  discoveries  the  results  of  previous  labours  that  have  been

handed down from others have been advanced bit by bit by those who have

taken them on, whereas the original discoveries generally make advance that

is small at first though much more useful than the development which later

springs out of them. For it may be that in everything, as the saying is, ‘the

first start is the main part’: and for this reason also it is the most difficult; for

in  proportion  as  it  is  most  potent  in  its  influence,  so  it  is  smallest  in  its

compass  and  therefore  most  difficult  to  see:  whereas  when  this  is  once

discovered, it is easier to add and develop the remainder in connexion with it.

This is in fact what has happened in regard to rhetorical speeches and to

practically all the other arts: for those who discovered the beginnings of them

advanced them in all only a little way, whereas the celebrities of to-day are

the heirs (so to speak) of a long succession of men who have advanced them

bit by bit, and so have developed them to their present form, Tisias comingnext after the first founders, then Thrasymachus after Tisias, and Theodorus

next to him, while several people have made their several contributions to it:

and therefore it is not to be wondered at that the art has attained considerable

dimensions. Of this inquiry, on the other hand, it was not the case that part of

the  work  had  been  thoroughly  done  before,  while  part  had  not.  Nothing

existed at all. For the training given by the paid professors of contentious

arguments was like the treatment of the matter by Gorgias. For they used to

hand out speeches to be learned by heart, some rhetorical, others in the form

of question and answer, each side supposing that their arguments on either

side generally fall among them. And therefore the teaching they gave their

pupils was ready but rough. For they used to suppose that they trained people

by  imparting  to  them  not  the  art  but  its  products,  as  though  any  one

professing that he would impart a form of knowledge to obviate any pain in

the feet, were then not to teach a man the art of shoe-making or the sources

whence he can acquire anything of the kind, but were to present him with

several kinds of shoes of all sorts: for he has helped him to meet his need, but

has not imparted an art to him. Moreover, on the subject of Rhetoric there

exists much that has been said long ago, whereas on the subject of reasoning

we had nothing else of an earlier date to speak of at all, but were kept at work

for a long time in experimental researches. If, then, it seems to you after

inspection  that,  such  being  the  situation  as  it  existed  at  the  start,  our

investigation is in a satisfactory condition compared with the other inquiries

that have been developed by tradition, there must remain for all of you, or for

our students, the task of extending us your pardon for the shortcomings of the

inquiry, and for the discoveries thereof your warm thanks.                                    Part 2


                      Universal Physics                                  Physics, Book I


Translated by R. P. Hardie and R. K. Gaye


<

div id="section1" class="section" title="1">


1


  When  the  objects  of  an  inquiry,  in  any  department,  have  principles,

conditions, or elements, it is through acquaintance with these that knowledge,

that is to say scientific knowledge, is attained. For we do not think that we

know a thing until we are acquainted with its primary conditions or first

principles,  and  have  carried  our  analysis  as  far  as  its  simplest  elements.

Plainly therefore in the science of Nature, as in other branches of study, our

first task will be to try to determine what relates to its principles.

The natural way of doing this is to start from the things which are more

knowable and obvious to us and proceed towards those which are clearer and

more knowable by nature; for the same things are not ‘knowable relatively to

us’ and ‘knowable’ without qualification. So in the present inquiry we must

follow this method and advance from what is more obscure by nature, but

clearer to us, towards what is more clear and more knowable by nature.

Now what is to us plain and obvious at first is rather confused masses, the

elements and principles of which become known to us later by analysis. Thus

we must advance from generalities to particulars; for it is a whole that is best

known  to  sense-perception,  and  a  generality  is  a  kind  of  whole,

comprehending  many  things  within  it,  like  parts.  Much  the  same  thing

happens in the relation of the name to the formula. A name, e.g. ‘round’,

means vaguely a sort of whole: its definition analyses this into its particular

senses. Similarly a child begins by calling all men ‘father’, and all women

‘mother’, but later on distinguishes each of them.

<

div id="section2" class="section" title="2">


2The principles in question must be either (a) one or (b) more than one. If

(a) one, it must be either (i) motionless, as Parmenides and Melissus assert, or

(ii)  in  motion,  as  the  physicists  hold,  some  declaring  air  to  be  the  first

principle, others water. If (b) more than one, then either (i) a finite or (ii) an

infinite plurality. If (i) finite (but more than one), then either two or three or

four or some other number. If (ii) infinite, then either as Democritus believed

one in kind, but differing in shape or form; or different in kind and even

contrary.

A  similar  inquiry  is  made  by  those  who  inquire  into  the  number  of

existents: for they inquire whether the ultimate constituents of existing things

are one or many, and if many, whether a finite or an infinite plurality. So they

too are inquiring whether the principle or element is one or many.

Now  to  investigate  whether  Being  is  one  and  motionless  is  not  a

contribution to the science of Nature. For just as the geometer has nothing

more  to  say  to  one  who  denies  the  principles  of  his  science-this  being  a

question  for  a  different  science  or  for  or  common  to  all-so  a  man

investigating principles cannot argue with one who denies their existence. For

if Being is just one, and one in the way mentioned, there is a principle no

longer, since a principle must be the principle of some thing or things.

To  inquire  therefore  whether  Being  is  one  in  this  sense  would  be  like

arguing against any other position maintained for the sake of argument (such

as the Heraclitean thesis, or such a thesis as that Being is one man) or like

refuting a merely contentious argument-a description which applies to the

arguments both of Melissus and of Parmenides: their premisses are false and

their conclusions do not follow. Or rather the argument of Melissus is gross

and palpable and offers no difficulty at all: accept one ridiculous proposition

and the rest follows-a simple enough proceeding.

We physicists, on the other hand, must take for granted that the things that

exist by nature are, either all or some of them, in motion which is indeed

made plain by induction. Moreover, no man of science is bound to solve

every kind of difficulty that may be raised, but only as many as are drawn

falsely from the principles of the science: it is not our business to refute those

that do not arise in this way: just as it is the duty of the geometer to refute the

squaring of the circle by means of segments, but it is not his duty to refute

Antiphon’s proof. At the same time the holders of the theory of which we are

speaking do incidentally raise physical questions, though Nature is not their

subject:  so  it  will  perhaps  be  as  well  to  spend  a  few  words  on  them,especially as the inquiry is not without scientific interest.

The most pertinent question with which to begin will be this: In what sense

is it asserted that all things are one? For ‘is’ is used in many senses. Do they

mean that all things ‘are’ substance or quantities or qualities? And, further,

are all things one substance-one man, one horse, or one soul-or quality and

that one and the same-white or hot or something of the kind? These are all

very different doctrines and all impossible to maintain.

For if both substance and quantity and quality are, then, whether these

exist independently of each other or not, Being will be many.

If on the other hand it is asserted that all things are quality or quantity,

then, whether substance exists or not, an absurdity results, if the impossible

can properly be called absurd. For none of the others can exist independently:

substance alone is independent: for everything is predicated of substance as

subject. Now Melissus says that Being is infinite. It is then a quantity. For the

infinite  is  in  the  category  of  quantity,  whereas  substance  or  quality  or

affection cannot be infinite except through a concomitant attribute, that is, if

at the same time they are also quantities. For to define the infinite you must

use quantity in your formula, but not substance or quality. If then Being is

both substance and quantity, it is two, not one: if only substance, it is not

infinite and has no magnitude; for to have that it will have to be a quantity.

  Again, ‘one’ itself, no less than ‘being’, is used in many senses, so we

must consider in what sense the word is used when it is said that the All is

one.

Now we say that (a) the continuous is one or that (b) the indivisible is one,

or (c) things are said to be ‘one’, when their essence is one and the same, as

‘liquor’ and ‘drink’.

If  (a)  their  One  is  one  in  the  sense  of  continuous,  it  is  many,  for  the

continuous is divisible ad infinitum.

  There is, indeed, a difficulty about part and whole, perhaps not relevant to

the present argument, yet deserving consideration on its own account-namely,

whether the part and the whole are one or more than one, and how they can

be one or many, and, if they are more than one, in what sense they are more

than  one.  (Similarly  with  the  parts  of  wholes  which  are  not  continuous.)

Further,  if  each  of  the  two  parts  is  indivisibly  one  with  the  whole,  the

difficulty arises that they will be indivisibly one with each other also.

But to proceed: If (b) their One is one as indivisible, nothing will have

quantity or quality, and so the one will not be infinite, as Melissus says-nor,indeed, limited, as Parmenides says, for though the limit is indivisible, the

limited is not.

But if (c) all things are one in the sense of having the same definition, like

‘raiment’  and  ‘dress’,  then  it  turns  out  that  they  are  maintaining  the

Heraclitean doctrine, for it will be the same thing ‘to be good’ and ‘to be

bad’, and ‘to be good’ and ‘to be not good’, and so the same thing will be

‘good’ and ‘not good’, and man and horse; in fact, their view will be, not that

all things are one, but that they are nothing; and that ‘to be of such-and-such

a quality’ is the same as ‘to be of such-and-such a size’.

  Even the more recent of the ancient thinkers were in a pother lest the same

thing  should  turn  out  in  their  hands  both  one  and  many.  So  some,  like

Lycophron, were led to omit ‘is’, others to change the mode of expression

and  say  ‘the  man  has  been  whitened’  instead  of  ‘is  white’,  and  ‘walks’

instead of ‘is walking’, for fear that if they added the word ‘is’ they should be

making the one to be many-as if ‘one’ and ‘being’ were always used in one

and the same sense. What ‘is’ may be many either in definition (for example

‘to be white’ is one thing, ‘to be musical’ another, yet the same thing be both,

so the one is many) or by division, as the whole and its parts. On this point,

indeed, they were already getting into difficulties and admitted that the one

was many-as if there was any difficulty about the same thing being both one

and many, provided that these are not opposites; for ‘one’ may mean either

‘potentially one’ or ‘actually one’.

<

div id="section3" class="section" title="3">


3


If, then, we approach the thesis in this way it seems impossible for all

things to be one. Further, the arguments they use to prove their position are

not difficult to expose. For both of them reason contentiously-I mean both

Melissus and Parmenides. [Their premisses are false and their conclusions do

not follow. Or rather the argument of Melissus is gross and palpable and

offers  no  difficulty  at  all:  admit  one  ridiculous  proposition  and  the  rest

follows-a simple enough proceeding.] The fallacy of Melissus is obvious. For

he supposes that the assumption ‘what has come into being always has a

beginning’ justifies the assumption ‘what has not come into being has no

beginning’. Then this also is absurd, that in every case there should be abeginning of the thing-not of the time and not only in the case of coming to

be in the full sense but also in the case of coming to have a quality-as if

change never took place suddenly. Again, does it follow that Being, if one, is

motionless? Why should it not move, the whole of it within itself, as parts of

it do which are unities, e.g. this water? Again, why is qualitative change

impossible? But, further, Being cannot be one in form, though it may be in

what it is made of. (Even some of the physicists hold it to be one in the latter

way, though not in the former.) Man obviously differs from horse in form,

and contraries from each other.

The same kind of argument holds good against Parmenides also, besides

any that may apply specially to his view: the answer to him being that ‘this is

not true’ and ‘that does not follow’. His assumption that one is used in a

single sense only is false, because it is used in several. His conclusion does

not follow, because if we take only white things, and if ‘white’ has a single

meaning, none the less what is white will be many and not one. For what is

white will not be one either in the sense that it is continuous or in the sense

that it must be defined in only one way. ‘Whiteness’ will be different from

‘what has whiteness’. Nor does this mean that there is anything that can exist

separately, over and above what is white. For ‘whiteness’ and ‘that which is

white’ differ in definition, not in the sense that they are things which can

exist apart from each other. But Parmenides had not come in sight of this

distinction.

It is necessary for him, then, to assume not only that ‘being’ has the same

meaning, of whatever it is predicated, but further that it means (1) what just is

and (2) what is just one.

It must be so, for (1) an attribute is predicated of some subject, so that the

subject to which ‘being’ is attributed will not be, as it is something different

from ‘being’. Something, therefore, which is not will be. Hence ‘substance’

will not be a predicate of anything else. For the subject cannot be a being,

unless ‘being’ means several things, in such a way that each is something.

But ex hypothesi ‘being’ means only one thing.

If,  then,  ‘substance’  is  not  attributed  to  anything,  but  other  things  are

attributed to it, how does ‘substance’ mean what is rather than what is not?

For suppose that ‘substance’ is also ‘white’. Since the definition of the latter

is different (for being cannot even be attributed to white, as nothing is which

is not ‘substance’), it follows that ‘white’ is not-being—and that not in the

sense of a particular not-being, but in the sense that it is not at all. Hence‘substance’ is not; for it is true to say that it is white, which we found to mean

not-being.  If  to  avoid  this  we  say  that  even  ‘white’  means  substance,  it

follows that ‘being’ has more than one meaning.

In particular, then, Being will not have magnitude, if it is substance. For

each of the two parts must he in a different sense.

(2) Substance is plainly divisible into other substances, if we consider the

mere nature of a definition. For instance, if ‘man’ is a substance, ‘animal’ and

‘biped’  must  also  be  substances.  For  if  not  substances,  they  must  be

attributes-and if attributes, attributes either of (a) man or of (b) some other

subject. But neither is possible.

(a) An attribute is either that which may or may not belong to the subject

or that in whose definition the subject of which it is an attribute is involved.

Thus  ‘sitting’  is  an  example  of  a  separable  attribute,  while  ‘snubness’

contains the definition of ‘nose’, to which we attribute snubness. Further, the

definition of the whole is not contained in the definitions of the contents or

elements of the definitory formula; that of ‘man’ for instance in ‘biped’, or

that of ‘white man’ in ‘white’. If then this is so, and if ‘biped’ is supposed to

be an attribute of ‘man’, it must be either separable, so that ‘man’ might

possibly  not  be  ‘biped’,  or  the  definition  of  ‘man’  must  come  into  the

definition of ‘biped’-which is impossible, as the converse is the case.

(b)  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  suppose  that  ‘biped’  and  ‘animal’  are

attributes  not  of  man  but  of  something  else,  and  are  not  each  of  them  a

substance, then ‘man’ too will be an attribute of something else. But we must

assume that substance is not the attribute of anything, that the subject of

which both ‘biped’ and ‘animal’ and each separately are predicated is the

subject also of the complex ‘biped animal’.

Are we then to say that the All is composed of indivisible substances?

Some  thinkers  did,  in  point  of  fact,  give  way  to  both  arguments.  To  the

argument that all things are one if being means one thing, they conceded that

not-being  is;  to  that  from  bisection,  they  yielded  by  positing  atomic

magnitudes. But obviously it is not true that if being means one thing, and

cannot at the same time mean the contradictory of this, there will be nothing

which is not, for even if what is not cannot be without qualification, there is

no reason why it should not be a particular not-being. To say that all things

will  be  one,  if  there  is  nothing  besides  Being  itself,  is  absurd.  For  who

understands ‘being itself’ to be anything but a particular substance? But if

this is so, there is nothing to prevent there being many beings, as has beensaid.

It is, then, clearly impossible for Being to be one in this sense.

<

div id="section4" class="section" title="4">


4


The physicists on the other hand have two modes of explanation.

The  first  set  make  the  underlying  body  one  either  one  of  the  three  or

something else which is denser than fire and rarer than air then generate

everything  else  from  this,  and  obtain  multiplicity  by  condensation  and

rarefaction. Now these are contraries, which may be generalized into ‘excess

and defect’. (Compare Plato’s ‘Great and Small’-except that he make these

his matter, the one his form, while the others treat the one which underlies as

matter and the contraries as differentiae, i.e. forms).

The second set assert that the contrarieties are contained in the one and

emerge from it by segregation, for example Anaximander and also all those

who assert that ‘what is’ is one and many, like Empedocles and Anaxagoras;

for they too produce other things from their mixture by segregation. These

differ, however, from each other in that the former imagines a cycle of such

changes,  the  latter  a  single  series.  Anaxagoras  again  made  both  his

‘homceomerous’ substances and his contraries infinite in multitude, whereas

Empedocles posits only the so-called elements.

The theory of Anaxagoras that the principles are infinite in multitude was

probably due to his acceptance of the common opinion of the physicists that

nothing comes into being from not-being. For this is the reason why they use

the phrase ‘all things were together’ and the coming into being of such and

such a kind of thing is reduced to change of quality, while some spoke of

combination and separation. Moreover, the fact that the contraries proceed

from each other led them to the conclusion. The one, they reasoned, must

have already existed in the other; for since everything that comes into being

must arise either from what is or from what is not, and it is impossible for it

to arise from what is not (on this point all the physicists agree), they thought

that the truth of the alternative necessarily followed, namely that things come

into  being  out  of  existent  things,  i.e.  out  of  things  already  present,  but

imperceptible to our senses because of the smallness of their bulk. So they

assert  that  everything  has  been  mixed  in  every.  thing,  because  they  saweverything arising out of everything. But things, as they say, appear different

from one another and receive different names according to the nature of the

particles  which  are  numerically  predominant  among  the  innumerable

constituents of the mixture. For nothing, they say, is purely and entirely white

or black or sweet, bone or flesh, but the nature of a thing is held to be that of

which it contains the most.

Now (1) the infinite qua infinite is unknowable, so that what is infinite in

multitude or size is unknowable in quantity, and what is infinite in variety of

kind is unknowable in quality. But the principles in question are infinite both

in multitude and in kind. Therefore it is impossible to know things which are

composed of them; for it is when we know the nature and quantity of its

components that we suppose we know a complex.

  Further (2) if the parts of a whole may be of any size in the direction either

of greatness or of smallness (by ‘parts’ I mean components into which a

whole can be divided and which are actually present in it), it is necessary that

the  whole  thing  itself  may  be  of  any  size.  Clearly,  therefore,  since  it  is

impossible for an animal or plant to be indefinitely big or small, neither can

its parts be such, or the whole will be the same. But flesh, bone, and the like

are the parts of animals, and the fruits are the parts of plants. Hence it is

obvious that neither flesh, bone, nor any such thing can be of indefinite size

in the direction either of the greater or of the less.

  Again (3) according to the theory all such things are already present in one

another and do not come into being but are constituents which are separated

out, and a thing receives its designation from its chief constituent. Further,

anything may come out of anything-water by segregation from flesh and flesh

from  water.  Hence,  since  every  finite  body  is  exhausted  by  the  repeated

abstraction  of  a  finite  body,  it  seems  obviously  to  follow  that  everything

cannot subsist in everything else. For let flesh be extracted from water and

again more flesh be produced from the remainder by repeating the process of

separation:  then,  even  though  the  quantity  separated  out  will  continually

decrease, still it will not fall below a certain magnitude. If, therefore, the

process comes to an end, everything will not be in everything else (for there

will be no flesh in the remaining water); if on the other hand it does not, and

further extraction is always possible, there will be an infinite multitude of

finite equal particles in a finite quantity-which is impossible. Another proof

may be added: Since every body must diminish in size when something is

taken from it, and flesh is quantitatively definite in respect both of greatnessand smallness, it is clear that from the minimum quantity of flesh no body

can be separated out; for the flesh left would be less than the minimum of

flesh.

  Lastly (4) in each of his infinite bodies there would be already present

infinite  flesh  and  blood  and  brain—having  a  distinct  existence,  however,

from one another, and no less real than the infinite bodies, and each infinite:

which is contrary to reason.

The  statement  that  complete  separation  never  will  take  place  is  correct

enough,  though  Anaxagoras  is  not  fully  aware  of  what  it  means.  For

affections are indeed inseparable. If then colours and states had entered into

the  mixture,  and  if  separation  took  place,  there  would  be  a  ‘white’  or  a

‘healthy’ which was nothing but white or healthy, i.e. was not the predicate

of a subject. So his ‘Mind’ is an absurd person aiming at the impossible, if he

is supposed to wish to separate them, and it is impossible to do so, both in

respect of quantity and of quality—of quantity, because there is no minimum

magnitude, and of quality, because affections are inseparable.

Nor is Anaxagoras right about the coming to be of homogeneous bodies. It

is true there is a sense in which clay is divided into pieces of clay, but there is

another in which it is not. Water and air are, and are generated ‘from’ each

other, but not in the way in which bricks come ‘from’ a house and again a

house ‘from’ bricks; and it is better to assume a smaller and finite number of

principles, as Empedocles does.

<

div id="section5" class="section" title="5">


5


All thinkers then agree in making the contraries principles, both those who

describe the All as one and unmoved (for even Parmenides treats hot and cold

as principles under the names of fire and earth) and those too who use the

rare and the dense. The same is true of Democritus also, with his plenum and

void, both of which exist, be says, the one as being, the other as not-being.

Again he speaks of differences in position, shape, and order, and these are

genera of which the species are contraries, namely, of position, above and

below,  before  and  behind;  of  shape,  angular  and  angle-less,  straight  and

round.

It is plain then that they all in one way or another identify the contrarieswith the principles. And with good reason. For first principles must not be

derived from one another nor from anything else, while everything has to be

derived  from  them.  But  these  conditions  are  fulfilled  by  the  primary

contraries,  which  are  not  derived  from  anything  else  because  they  are

primary, nor from each other because they are contraries.

But we must see how this can be arrived at as a reasoned result, as well as

in the way just indicated.

Our first presupposition must be that in nature nothing acts on, or is acted

on by, any other thing at random, nor may anything come from anything else,

unless we mean that it does so in virtue of a concomitant attribute. For how

could  ‘white’  come  from  ‘musical’,  unless  ‘musical’  happened  to  be  an

attribute  of  the  not-white  or  of  the  black?  No,  ‘white’  comes  from  ‘not-

white’-and not from any ‘not-white’, but from black or some intermediate

colour. Similarly, ‘musical’ comes to be from ‘not-musical’, but not from any

thing other than musical, but from ‘unmusical’ or any intermediate state there

may be.

Nor again do things pass into the first chance thing; ‘white’ does not pass

into ‘musical’ (except, it may be, in virtue of a concomitant attribute), but

into ‘not-white’-and not into any chance thing which is not white, but into

black or an intermediate colour; ‘musical’ passes into ‘not-musical’-and not

into  any  chance  thing  other  than  musical,  but  into  ‘unmusical’  or  any

intermediate state there may be.

The same holds of other things also: even things which are not simple but

complex follow the same principle, but the opposite state has not received a

name, so we fail to notice the fact. What is in tune must come from what is

not in tune, and vice versa; the tuned passes into untunedness-and not into

any  untunedness,  but  into  the  corresponding  opposite.  It  does  not  matter

whether we take attunement, order, or composition for our illustration; the

principle  is  obviously  the  same  in  all,  and  in  fact  applies  equally  to  the

production of a house, a statue, or any other complex. A house comes from

certain things in a certain state of separation instead of conjunction, a statue

(or any other thing that has been shaped) from shapelessness-each of these

objects being partly order and partly composition.

If then this is true, everything that comes to be or passes away from, or

passes into, its contrary or an intermediate state. But the intermediates are

derived  from  the  contraries-colours,  for  instance,  from  black  and  white.

Everything,  therefore,  that  comes  to  be  by  a  natural  process  is  either  acontrary or a product of contraries.

Up to this point we have practically had most of the other writers on the

subject with us, as I have said already: for all of them identify their elements,

and  what  they  call  their  principles,  with  the  contraries,  giving  no  reason

indeed for the theory, but contrained as it were by the truth itself. They differ,

however, from one another in that some assume contraries which are more

primary, others contraries which are less so: some those more knowable in

the order of explanation, others those more familiar to sense. For some make

hot  and  cold,  or  again  moist  and  dry,  the  conditions  of  becoming;  while

others make odd and even, or again Love and Strife; and these differ from

each other in the way mentioned.

  Hence  their  principles  are  in  one  sense  the  same,  in  another  different;

different certainly, as indeed most people think, but the same inasmuch as

they are analogous; for all are taken from the same table of columns, some of

the  pairs  being  wider,  others  narrower  in  extent.  In  this  way  then  their

theories are both the same and different, some better, some worse; some, as I

have said, take as their contraries what is more knowable in the order of

explanation, others what is more familiar to sense. (The universal is more

knowable in the order of explanation, the particular in the order of sense: for

explanation has to do with the universal, sense with the particular.) ‘The great

and the small’, for example, belong to the former class, ‘the dense and the

rare’ to the latter.

It is clear then that our principles must be contraries.

<

div id="section6" class="section" title="6">


6


The next question is whether the principles are two or three or more in

number.

One they cannot be, for there cannot be one contrary. Nor can they be

innumerable, because, if so, Being will not be knowable: and in any one

genus there is only one contrariety, and substance is one genus: also a finite

number  is  sufficient,  and  a  finite  number,  such  as  the  principles  of

Empedocles, is better than an infinite multitude; for Empedocles professes to

obtain from his principles all that Anaxagoras obtains from his innumerable

principles. Lastly, some contraries are more primary than others, and somearise from others-for example sweet and bitter, white and black-whereas the

principles must always remain principles.

This  will  suffice  to  show  that  the  principles  are  neither  one  nor

innumerable.

  Granted, then, that they are a limited number, it is plausible to suppose

them more than two. For it is difficult to see how either density should be of

such a nature as to act in any way on rarity or rarity on density. The same is

true of any other pair of contraries; for Love does not gather Strife together

and make things out of it, nor does Strife make anything out of Love, but

both act on a third thing different from both. Some indeed assume more than

one such thing from which they construct the world of nature.

  Other  objections  to  the  view  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  assume  a  third

principle as a substratum may be added. (1) We do not find that the contraries

constitute the substance of any thing. But what is a first principle ought not to

be the predicate of any subject. If it were, there would be a principle of the

supposed principle: for the subject is a principle, and prior presumably to

what is predicated of it. Again (2) we hold that a substance is not contrary to

another substance. How then can substance be derived from what are not

substances? Or how can non-substances be prior to substance?

If then we accept both the former argument and this one, we must, to

preserve both, assume a third somewhat as the substratum of the contraries,

such as is spoken of by those who describe the All as one nature-water or fire

or what is intermediate between them. What is intermediate seems preferable;

for fire, earth, air, and water are already involved with pairs of contraries.

There  is,  therefore,  much  to  be  said  for  those  who  make  the  underlying

substance different from these four; of the rest, the next best choice is air, as

presenting sensible differences in a less degree than the others; and after air,

water. All, however, agree in this, that they differentiate their One by means

of the contraries, such as density and rarity and more and less, which may of

course be generalized, as has already been said into excess and defect. Indeed

this doctrine too (that the One and excess and defect are the principles of

things) would appear to be of old standing, though in different forms; for the

early thinkers made the two the active and the one the passive principle,

whereas some of the more recent maintain the reverse.

To suppose then that the elements are three in number would seem, from

these and similar considerations, a plausible view, as I said before. On the

other hand, the view that they are more than three in number would seem tobe untenable.

For the one substratum is sufficient to be acted on; but if we have four

contraries, there will be two contrarieties, and we shall have to suppose an

intermediate  nature  for  each  pair  separately.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the

contrarieties, being two, can generate from each other, the second contrariety

will be superfluous. Moreover, it is impossible that there should be more than

one primary contrariety. For substance is a single genus of being, so that the

principles can differ only as prior and posterior, not in genus; in a single

genus there is always a single contrariety, all the other contrarieties in it being

held to be reducible to one.

It is clear then that the number of elements is neither one nor more than

two or three; but whether two or three is, as I said, a question of considerable

difficulty.

<

div id="section7" class="section" title="7">


7


We will now give our own account, approaching the question first with

reference  to  becoming  in  its  widest  sense:  for  we  shall  be  following  the

natural order of inquiry if we speak first of common characteristics, and then

investigate the characteristics of special cases.

We say that one thing comes to be from another thing, and one sort of

thing from another sort of thing, both in the case of simple and of complex

things. I mean the following. We can say (1) ‘man becomes musical’, (2)

what is ‘not-musical becomes musical’, or (3), the ‘not-musical man becomes

a musical man’. Now what becomes in (1) and (2)-’man’ and ‘not musical’-I

call simple, and what each becomes-’musical’-simple also. But when (3) we

say the ‘not-musical man becomes a musical man’, both what becomes and

what it becomes are complex.

As regards one of these simple ‘things that become’ we say not only ‘this

becomes so-and-so’, but also ‘from being this, comes to be so-and-so’, as

‘from being not-musical comes to be musical’; as regards the other we do not

say this in all cases, as we do not say (1) ‘from being a man he came to be

musical’ but only ‘the man became musical’.

  When a ‘simple’ thing is said to become something, in one case (1) it

survives through the process, in the other (2) it does not. For man remains a