or we must argue from two syllogisms. In no other way than this, as was said

before, is it possible that the premisses should be really contrary.


16


To  beg  and  assume  the  original  question  is  a  species  of  failure  to

demonstrate the problem proposed; but this happens in many ways. A man

may not reason syllogistically at all, or he may argue from premisses which

are less known or equally unknown, or he may establish the antecedent by

means  of  its  consequents;  for  demonstration  proceeds  from  what  is  more

certain and is prior. Now begging the question is none of these: but since we

get to know some things naturally through themselves, and other things by

means  of  something  else  (the  first  principles  through  themselves,  what  is

subordinate to them through something else), whenever a man tries to prove

what is not self-evident by means of itself, then he begs the original question.

This may be done by assuming what is in question at once; it is also possible

to make a transition to other things which would naturally be proved through

the thesis proposed, and demonstrate it through them, e.g. if A should be

proved through B, and B through C, though it was natural that C should be

proved through A: for it turns out that those who reason thus are proving A

by means of itself. This is what those persons do who suppose that they are

constructing parallel straight lines: for they fail to see that they are assuming

facts which it is impossible to demonstrate unless the parallels exist. So it

turns out that those who reason thus merely say a particular thing is, if it is: in

this way everything will be self-evident. But that is impossible.

If then it is uncertain whether A belongs to C, and also whether A belongs

to B, and if one should assume that A does belong to B, it is not yet clear

whether  he  begs  the  original  question,  but  it  is  evident  that  he  is  not

demonstrating: for what is as uncertain as the question to be answered cannot

be a principle of a demonstration. If however B is so related to C that they are

identical, or if they are plainly convertible, or the one belongs to the other,

the original question is begged. For one might equally well prove that A

belongs to B through those terms if they are convertible. But if they are not

convertible, it is the fact that they are not that prevents such a demonstration,

not the method of demonstrating. But if one were to make the conversion,

then he would be doing what we have described and effecting a reciprocal

proof with three propositions.  Similarly if he should assume that B belongs to C, this being as uncertain

as the question whether A belongs to C, the question is not yet begged, but no

demonstration is made. If however A and B are identical either because they

are convertible or because A follows B, then the question is begged for the

same reason as before. For we have explained the meaning of begging the

question, viz. proving that which is not self-evident by means of itself.

If then begging the question is proving what is not self-evident by means

of itself, in other words failing to prove when the failure is due to the thesis to

be proved and the premiss through which it is proved being equally uncertain,

either because predicates which are identical belong to the same subject, or

because  the  same  predicate  belongs  to  subjects  which  are  identical,  the

question may be begged in the middle and third figures in both ways, though,

if  the  syllogism  is  affirmative,  only  in  the  third  and  first  figures.  If  the

syllogism is negative, the question is begged when identical predicates are

denied  of  the  same  subject;  and  both  premisses  do  not  beg  the  question

indifferently (in a similar way the question may be begged in the middle

figure),  because  the  terms  in  negative  syllogisms  are  not  convertible.  In

scientific demonstrations the question is begged when the terms are really

related  in  the  manner  described,  in  dialectical  arguments  when  they  are

according to common opinion so related.


17


The objection that ‘this is not the reason why the result is false’, which we

frequently make in argument, is made primarily in the case of a reductio ad

impossibile,  to  rebut  the  proposition  which  was  being  proved  by  the

reduction. For unless a man has contradicted this proposition he will not say,

‘False cause’, but urge that something false has been assumed in the earlier

parts of the argument; nor will he use the formula in the case of an ostensive

proof; for here what one denies is not assumed as a premiss. Further when

anything is refuted ostensively by the terms ABC, it cannot be objected that

the syllogism does not depend on the assumption laid down. For we use the

expression  ‘false  cause’,  when  the  syllogism  is  concluded  in  spite  of  the

refutation of this position; but that is not possible in ostensive proofs: since if

an assumption is refuted, a syllogism can no longer be drawn in reference to

it. It is clear then that the expression ‘false cause’ can only be used in the case

of a reductio ad impossibile, and when the original hypothesis is so related tothe impossible conclusion, that the conclusion results indifferently whether

the hypothesis is made or not. The most obvious case of the irrelevance of an

assumption to a conclusion which is false is when a syllogism drawn from

middle terms to an impossible conclusion is independent of the hypothesis, as

we have explained in the Topics. For to put that which is not the cause as the

cause, is just this: e.g. if a man, wishing to prove that the diagonal of the

square is incommensurate with the side, should try to prove Zeno’s theorem

that  motion  is  impossible,  and  so  establish  a  reductio  ad  impossibile:  for

Zeno’s false theorem has no connexion at all with the original assumption.

Another  case  is  where  the  impossible  conclusion  is  connected  with  the

hypothesis, but does not result from it. This may happen whether one traces

the connexion upwards or downwards, e.g. if it is laid down that A belongs to

B, B to C, and C to D, and it should be false that B belongs to D: for if we

eliminated A and assumed all the same that B belongs to C and C to D, the

false conclusion would not depend on the original hypothesis. Or again trace

the connexion upwards; e.g. suppose that A belongs to B, E to A and F to E,

it being false that F belongs to A. In this way too the impossible conclusion

would  result,  though  the  original  hypothesis  were  eliminated.  But  the

impossible conclusion ought to be connected with the original terms: in this

way it will depend on the hypothesis, e.g. when one traces the connexion

downwards,  the  impossible  conclusion  must  be  connected  with  that  term

which is predicate in the hypothesis: for if it is impossible that A should

belong  to  D,  the  false  conclusion  will  no  longer  result  after  A  has  been

eliminated. If one traces the connexion upwards, the impossible conclusion

must be connected with that term which is subject in the hypothesis: for if it

is  impossible  that  F  should  belong  to  B,  the  impossible  conclusion  will

disappear if B is eliminated. Similarly when the syllogisms are negative.

It is clear then that when the impossibility is not related to the original

terms, the false conclusion does not result on account of the assumption. Or

perhaps even so it may sometimes be independent. For if it were laid down

that A belongs not to B but to K, and that K belongs to C and C to D, the

impossible conclusion would still stand. Similarly if one takes the terms in an

ascending series. Consequently since the impossibility results whether the

first assumption is suppressed or not, it would appear to be independent of

that assumption. Or perhaps we ought not to understand the statement that the

false conclusion results independently of the assumption, in the sense that if

something else were supposed the impossibility would result; but rather wemean that when the first assumption is eliminated, the same impossibility

results through the remaining premisses; since it is not perhaps absurd that

the  same  false  result  should  follow  from  several  hypotheses,  e.g.  that

parallels meet, both on the assumption that the interior angle is greater than

the exterior and on the assumption that a triangle contains more than two

right angles.


18


A false argument depends on the first false statement in it. Every syllogism

is made out of two or more premisses. If then the false conclusion is drawn

from two premisses, one or both of them must be false: for (as we proved) a

false syllogism cannot be drawn from two premisses. But if the premisses are

more than two, e.g. if C is established through A and B, and these through D,

E, F, and G, one of these higher propositions must be false, and on this the

argument depends: for A and B are inferred by means of D, E, F, and G.

Therefore the conclusion and the error results from one of them.


19


In order to avoid having a syllogism drawn against us we must take care,

whenever an opponent asks us to admit the reason without the conclusions,

not to grant him the same term twice over in his premisses, since we know

that a syllogism cannot be drawn without a middle term, and that term which

is stated more than once is the middle. How we ought to watch the middle in

reference to each conclusion, is evident from our knowing what kind of thesis

is proved in each figure. This will not escape us since we know how we are

maintaining the argument.

That which we urge men to beware of in their admissions, they ought in

attack to try to conceal. This will be possible first, if, instead of drawing the

conclusions of preliminary syllogisms, they take the necessary premisses and

leave the conclusions in the dark; secondly if instead of inviting assent to

propositions which are closely connected they take as far as possible those

that are not connected by middle terms. For example suppose that A is to be

inferred to be true of F, B, C, D, and E being middle terms. One ought then to

ask whether A belongs to B, and next whether D belongs to E, instead ofasking whether B belongs to C; after that he may ask whether B belongs to C,

and so on. If the syllogism is drawn through one middle term, he ought to

begin with that: in this way he will most likely deceive his opponent.


20


  Since we know when a syllogism can be formed and how its terms must be

related, it is clear when refutation will be possible and when impossible. A

refutation  is  possible  whether  everything  is  conceded,  or  the  answers

alternate (one, I mean, being affirmative, the other negative). For as has been

shown a syllogism is possible whether the terms are related in affirmative

propositions  or  one  proposition  is  affirmative,  the  other  negative:

consequently, if what is laid down is contrary to the conclusion, a refutation

must  take  place:  for  a  refutation  is  a  syllogism  which  establishes  the

contradictory. But if nothing is conceded, a refutation is impossible: for no

syllogism is possible (as we saw) when all the terms are negative: therefore

no refutation is possible. For if a refutation were possible, a syllogism must

be  possible;  although  if  a  syllogism  is  possible  it  does  not  follow  that  a

refutation  is  possible.  Similarly  refutation  is  not  possible  if  nothing  is

conceded universally: since the fields of refutation and syllogism are defined

in the same way.


21


It sometimes happens that just as we are deceived in the arrangement of the

terms, so error may arise in our thought about them, e.g. if it is possible that

the same predicate should belong to more than one subject immediately, but

although knowing the one, a man may forget the other and think the opposite

true. Suppose that A belongs to B and to C in virtue of their nature, and that

B and C belong to all D in the same way. If then a man thinks that A belongs

to all B, and B to D, but A to no C, and C to all D, he will both know and not

know the same thing in respect of the same thing. Again if a man were to

make a mistake about the members of a single series; e.g. suppose A belongs

to B, B to C, and C to D, but some one thinks that A belongs to all B, but to

no C: he will both know that A belongs to D, and think that it does not. Does

he then maintain after this simply that what he knows, he does not think? Forhe knows in a way that A belongs to C through B, since the part is included

in the whole; so that what he knows in a way, this he maintains he does not

think at all: but that is impossible.

In the former case, where the middle term does not belong to the same

series, it is not possible to think both the premisses with reference to each of

the two middle terms: e.g. that A belongs to all B, but to no C, and both B

and  C  belong  to  all  D.  For  it  turns  out  that  the  first  premiss  of  the  one

syllogism is either wholly or partially contrary to the first premiss of the

other. For if he thinks that A belongs to everything to which B belongs, and

he  knows  that  B  belongs  to  D,  then  he  knows  that  A  belongs  to  D.

Consequently  if  again  he  thinks  that  A  belongs  to  nothing  to  which  C

belongs, he thinks that A does not belong to some of that to which B belongs;

but if he thinks that A belongs to everything to which B belongs, and again

thinks that A does not belong to some of that to which B belongs, these

beliefs are wholly or partially contrary. In this way then it is not possible to

think; but nothing prevents a man thinking one premiss of each syllogism of

both premisses of one of the two syllogisms: e.g. A belongs to all B, and B to

D, and again A belongs to no C. An error of this kind is similar to the error

into which we fall concerning particulars: e.g. if A belongs to all B, and B to

all  C,  A  will  belong  to  all  C.  If  then  a  man  knows  that  A  belongs  to

everything to which B belongs, he knows that A belongs to C. But nothing

prevents his being ignorant that C exists; e.g. let A stand for two right angles,

B for triangle, C for a particular diagram of a triangle. A man might think that

C did not exist, though he knew that every triangle contains two right angles;

consequently he will know and not know the same thing at the same time. For

the expression ‘to know that every triangle has its angles equal to two right

angles’ is ambiguous, meaning to have the knowledge either of the universal

or of the particulars. Thus then he knows that C contains two right angles

with  a  knowledge  of  the  universal,  but  not  with  a  knowledge  of  the

particulars; consequently his knowledge will not be contrary to his ignorance.

The argument in the Meno that learning is recollection may be criticized in a

similar way. For it never happens that a man starts with a foreknowledge of

the  particular,  but  along  with  the  process  of  being  led  to  see  the  general

principle he receives a knowledge of the particulars, by an act (as it were) of

recognition. For we know some things directly; e.g. that the angles are equal

to two right angles, if we know that the figure is a triangle. Similarly in all

other cases.By a knowledge of the universal then we see the particulars, but we do not

know them by the kind of knowledge which is proper to them; consequently

it is possible that we may make mistakes about them, but not that we should

have the knowledge and error that are contrary to one another: rather we have

the  knowledge  of  the  universal  but  make  a  mistake  in  apprehending  the

particular. Similarly in the cases stated above. The error in respect of the

middle term is not contrary to the knowledge obtained through the syllogism,

nor is the thought in respect of one middle term contrary to that in respect of

the other. Nothing prevents a man who knows both that A belongs to the

whole of B, and that B again belongs to C, thinking that A does not belong to

C, e.g. knowing that every mule is sterile and that this is a mule, and thinking

that this animal is with foal: for he does not know that A belongs to C, unless

he considers the two propositions together. So it is evident that if he knows

the one and does not know the other, he will fall into error. And this is the

relation of knowledge of the universal to knowledge of the particular. For we

know no sensible thing, once it has passed beyond the range of our senses,

even if we happen to have perceived it, except by means of the universal and

the possession of the knowledge which is proper to the particular, but without

the actual exercise of that knowledge. For to know is used in three senses: it

may mean either to have knowledge of the universal or to have knowledge

proper to the matter in hand or to exercise such knowledge: consequently

three  kinds  of  error  also  are  possible.  Nothing  then  prevents  a  man  both

knowing  and  being  mistaken  about  the  same  thing,  provided  that  his

knowledge and his error are not contrary. And this happens also to the man

whose  knowledge  is  limited  to  each  of  the  premisses  and  who  has  not

previously considered the particular question. For when he thinks that the

mule is with foal he has not the knowledge in the sense of its actual exercise,

nor  on  the  other  hand  has  his  thought  caused  an  error  contrary  to  his

knowledge: for the error contrary to the knowledge of the universal would be

a syllogism.

But he who thinks the essence of good is the essence of bad will think the

same thing to be the essence of good and the essence of bad. Let A stand for

the essence of good and B for the essence of bad, and again C for the essence

of good. Since then he thinks B and C identical, he will think that C is B, and

similarly that B is A, consequently that C is A. For just as we saw that if B is

true of all of which C is true, and A is true of all of which B is true, A is true

of C, similarly with the word ‘think’. Similarly also with the word ‘is’; for wesaw that if C is the same as B, and B as A, C is the same as A. Similarly

therefore with ‘opine’. Perhaps then this is necessary if a man will grant the

first  point.  But  presumably  that  is  false,  that  any  one  could  suppose  the

essence of good to be the essence of bad, save incidentally. For it is possible

to think this in many different ways. But we must consider this matter better.


22


  Whenever  the  extremes  are  convertible  it  is  necessary  that  the  middle

should be convertible with both. For if A belongs to C through B, then if A

and C are convertible and C belongs everything to which A belongs, B is

convertible with A, and B belongs to everything to which A belongs, through

C as middle, and C is convertible with B through A as middle. Similarly if

the conclusion is negative, e.g. if B belongs to C, but A does not belong to B,

neither  will  A  belong  to  C.  If  then  B  is  convertible  with  A,  C  will  be

convertible with A. Suppose B does not belong to A; neither then will C: for

ex  hypothesi  B  belonged  to  all  C.  And  if  C  is  convertible  with  B,  B  is

convertible also with A, for C is said of that of all of which B is said. And if

C is convertible in relation to A and to B, B also is convertible in relation to

A. For C belongs to that to which B belongs: but C does not belong to that to

which A belongs. And this alone starts from the conclusion; the preceding

moods do not do so as in the affirmative syllogism. Again if A and B are

convertible, and similarly C and D, and if A or C must belong to anything

whatever, then B and D will be such that one or other belongs to anything

whatever. For since B belongs to that to which A belongs, and D belongs to

that to which C belongs, and since A or C belongs to everything, but not

together, it is clear that B or D belongs to everything, but not together. For

example  if  that  which  is  uncreated  is  incorruptible  and  that  which  is

incorruptible  is  uncreated,  it  is  necessary  that  what  is  created  should  be

corruptible  and  what  is  corruptible  should  have  been  created.  For  two

syllogisms have been put together. Again if A or B belongs to everything and

if C or D belongs to everything, but they cannot belong together, then when

A and C are convertible B and D are convertible. For if B does not belong to

something to which D belongs, it is clear that A belongs to it. But if A then

C: for they are convertible. Therefore C and D belong together. But this is

impossible. When A belongs to the whole of B and to C and is affirmed of

nothing else, and B also belongs to all C, it is necessary that A and B shouldbe convertible: for since A is said of B and C only, and B is affirmed both of

itself and of C, it is clear that B will be said of everything of which A is said,

except A itself. Again when A and B belong to the whole of C, and C is

convertible with B, it is necessary that A should belong to all B: for since A

belongs to all C, and C to B by conversion, A will belong to all B.

When, of two opposites A and B, A is preferable to B, and similarly D is

preferable to C, then if A and C together are preferable to B and D together,

A must be preferable to D. For A is an object of desire to the same extent as

B is an object of aversion, since they are opposites: and C is similarly related

to D, since they also are opposites. If then A is an object of desire to the same

extent as D, B is an object of aversion to the same extent as C (since each is

to the same extent as each-the one an object of aversion, the other an object

of desire). Therefore both A and C together, and B and D together, will be

equally objects of desire or aversion. But since A and C are preferable to B

and D, A cannot be equally desirable with D; for then B along with D would

be equally desirable with A along with C. But if D is preferable to A, then B

must be less an object of aversion than C: for the less is opposed to the less.

But the greater good and lesser evil are preferable to the lesser good and

greater  evil:  the  whole  BD  then  is  preferable  to  the  whole  AC.  But  ex

hypothesi this is not so. A then is preferable to D, and C consequently is less

an object of aversion than B. If then every lover in virtue of his love would

prefer A, viz. that the beloved should be such as to grant a favour, and yet

should not grant it (for which C stands), to the beloved’s granting the favour

(represented by D) without being such as to grant it (represented by B), it is

clear that A (being of such a nature) is preferable to granting the favour. To

receive affection then is preferable in love to sexual intercourse. Love then is

more  dependent  on  friendship  than  on  intercourse.  And  if  it  is  most

dependent on receiving affection, then this is its end. Intercourse then either

is not an end at all or is an end relative to the further end, the receiving of

affection. And indeed the same is true of the other desires and arts.


23


It is clear then how the terms are related in conversion, and in respect of

being in a higher degree objects of aversion or of desire. We must now state

that not only dialectical and demonstrative syllogisms are formed by means

of the aforesaid figures, but also rhetorical syllogisms and in general anyform of persuasion, however it may be presented. For every belief comes

either through syllogism or from induction.

Now induction, or rather the syllogism which springs out of induction,

consists in establishing syllogistically a relation between one extreme and the

middle by means of the other extreme, e.g. if B is the middle term between A

and C, it consists in proving through C that A belongs to B. For this is the

manner in which we make inductions. For example let A stand for long-lived,

B for bileless, and C for the particular long-lived animals, e.g. man, horse,

mule. A then belongs to the whole of C: for whatever is bileless is long-lived.

But B also (’not possessing bile’) belongs to all C. If then C is convertible

with B, and the middle term is not wider in extension, it is necessary that A

should belong to B. For it has already been proved that if two things belong

to the same thing, and the extreme is convertible with one of them, then the

other predicate will belong to the predicate that is converted. But we must

apprehend C as made up of all the particulars. For induction proceeds through

an enumeration of all the cases.

  Such is the syllogism which establishes the first and immediate premiss:

for where there is a middle term the syllogism proceeds through the middle

term;  when  there  is  no  middle  term,  through  induction.  And  in  a  way

induction is opposed to syllogism: for the latter proves the major term to

belong to the third term by means of the middle, the former proves the major

to  belong  to  the  middle  by  means  of  the  third.  In  the  order  of  nature,

syllogism through the middle term is prior and better known, but syllogism

through induction is clearer to us.


24


We have an ‘example’ when the major term is proved to belong to the

middle by means of a term which resembles the third. It ought to be known

both that the middle belongs to the third term, and that the first belongs to

that which resembles the third. For example let A be evil, B making war

against  neighbours,  C  Athenians  against  Thebans,  D  Thebans  against

Phocians. If then we wish to prove that to fight with the Thebans is an evil,

we must assume that to fight against neighbours is an evil. Evidence of this is

obtained from similar cases, e.g. that the war against the Phocians was an evil

to the Thebans. Since then to fight against neighbours is an evil, and to fight

against the Thebans is to fight against neighbours, it is clear that to fightagainst the Thebans is an evil. Now it is clear that B belongs to C and to D

(for both are cases of making war upon one’s neighbours) and that A belongs

to D (for the war against the Phocians did not turn out well for the Thebans):

but that A belongs to B will be proved through D. Similarly if the belief in

the relation of the middle term to the extreme should be produced by several

similar cases. Clearly then to argue by example is neither like reasoning from

part to whole, nor like reasoning from whole to part, but rather reasoning

from part to part, when both particulars are subordinate to the same term, and

one of them is known. It differs from induction, because induction starting

from all the particular cases proves (as we saw) that the major term belongs

to the middle, and does not apply the syllogistic conclusion to the minor term,

whereas argument by example does make this application and does not draw

its proof from all the particular cases.


25


By reduction we mean an argument in which the first term clearly belongs

to the middle, but the relation of the middle to the last term is uncertain

though equally or more probable than the conclusion; or again an argument in

which the terms intermediate between the last term and the middle are few.

For  in  any  of  these  cases  it  turns  out  that  we  approach  more  nearly  to

knowledge. For example let A stand for what can be taught, B for knowledge,

C for justice. Now it is clear that knowledge can be taught: but it is uncertain

whether virtue is knowledge. If now the statement BC is equally or more

probable than AC, we have a reduction: for we are nearer to knowledge, since

we have taken a new term, being so far without knowledge that A belongs to

C. Or again suppose that the terms intermediate between B and C are few: for

thus too we are nearer knowledge. For example let D stand for squaring, E

for rectilinear figure, F for circle. If there were only one term intermediate

between E and F (viz. that the circle is made equal to a rectilinear figure by

the help of lunules), we should be near to knowledge. But when BC is not

more probable than AC, and the intermediate terms are not few, I do not call

this reduction: nor again when the statement BC is immediate: for such a

statement is knowledge.


26An objection is a premiss contrary to a premiss. It differs from a premiss,

because it may be particular, but a premiss either cannot be particular at all or

not in universal syllogisms. An objection is brought in two ways and through

two  figures;  in  two  ways  because  every  objection  is  either  universal  or

particular, by two figures because objections are brought in opposition to the

premiss, and opposites can be proved only in the first and third figures. If a

man  maintains  a  universal  affirmative,  we  reply  with  a  universal  or  a

particular negative; the former is proved from the first figure, the latter from

the  third.  For  example  let  stand  for  there  being  a  single  science,  B  for

contraries. If a man premises that contraries are subjects of a single science,

the  objection  may  be  either  that  opposites  are  never  subjects  of  a  single

science, and contraries are opposites, so that we get the first figure, or that the

knowable and the unknowable are not subjects of a single science: this proof

is in the third figure: for it is true of C (the knowable and the unknowable)

that they are contraries, and it is false that they are the subjects of a single

science.

  Similarly if the premiss objected to is negative. For if a man maintains that

contraries  are  not  subjects  of  a  single  science,  we  reply  either  that  all

opposites or that certain contraries, e.g. what is healthy and what is sickly, are

subjects of the same science: the former argument issues from the first, the

latter from the third figure.

In  general  if  a  man  urges  a  universal  objection  he  must  frame  his

contradiction  with  reference  to  the  universal  of  the  terms  taken  by  his

opponent, e.g. if a man maintains that contraries are not subjects of the same

science, his opponent must reply that there is a single science of all opposites.

Thus we must have the first figure: for the term which embraces the original

subject becomes the middle term.

If the objection is particular, the objector must frame his contradiction with

reference to a term relatively to which the subject of his opponent’s premiss

is universal, e.g. he will point out that the knowable and the unknowable are

not subjects of the same science: ‘contraries’ is universal relatively to these.

And we have the third figure: for the particular term assumed is middle, e.g.

the knowable and the unknowable. Premisses from which it is possible to

draw the contrary conclusion are what we start from when we try to make

objections. Consequently we bring objections in these figures only: for in

them only are opposite syllogisms possible, since the second figure cannot

produce an affirmative conclusion.  Besides, an objection in the middle figure would require a fuller argument,

e.g. if it should not be granted that A belongs to B, because C does not follow

B. This can be made clear only by other premisses. But an objection ought

not  to  turn  off  into  other  things,  but  have  its  new  premiss  quite  clear

immediately. For this reason also this is the only figure from which proof by

signs cannot be obtained.

We must consider later the other kinds of objection, namely the objection

from  contraries,  from  similars,  and  from  common  opinion,  and  inquire

whether a particular objection cannot be elicited from the first figure or a

negative objection from the second.


27


A probability and a sign are not identical, but a probability is a generally

approved proposition: what men know to happen or not to happen, to be or

not to be, for the most part thus and thus, is a probability, e.g. ‘the envious

hate’,  ‘the  beloved  show  affection’.  A  sign  means  a  demonstrative

proposition necessary or generally approved: for anything such that when it is

another thing is, or when it has come into being the other has come into being

before or after, is a sign of the other’s being or having come into being. Now

an enthymeme is a syllogism starting from probabilities or signs, and a sign

may be taken in three ways, corresponding to the position of the middle term

in the figures. For it may be taken as in the first figure or the second or the

third. For example the proof that a woman is with child because she has milk

is in the first figure: for to have milk is the middle term. Let A represent to be

with child, B to have milk, C woman. The proof that wise men are good,

since Pittacus is good, comes through the last figure. Let A stand for good, B

for wise men, C for Pittacus. It is true then to affirm both A and B of C: only

men do not say the latter, because they know it, though they state the former.

The proof that a woman is with child because she is pale is meant to come

through the middle figure: for since paleness follows women with child and

is a concomitant of this woman, people suppose it has been proved that she is

with child. Let A stand for paleness, B for being with child, C for woman.

Now if the one proposition is stated, we have only a sign, but if the other is

stated as well, a syllogism, e.g. ‘Pittacus is generous, since ambitious men are

generous and Pittacus is ambitious.’ Or again ‘Wise men are good, since

Pittacus is not only good but wise.’ In this way then syllogisms are formed,only that which proceeds through the first figure is irrefutable if it is true (for

it is universal), that which proceeds through the last figure is refutable even if

the conclusion is true, since the syllogism is not universal nor correlative to

the  matter  in  question:  for  though  Pittacus  is  good,  it  is  not  therefore

necessary that all other wise men should be good. But the syllogism which

proceeds through the middle figure is always refutable in any case: for a

syllogism can never be formed when the terms are related in this way: for

though a woman with child is pale, and this woman also is pale, it is not

necessary that she should be with child. Truth then may be found in signs

whatever their kind, but they have the differences we have stated.

We must either divide signs in the way stated, and among them designate

the middle term as the index (for people call that the index which makes us

know, and the middle term above all has this character), or else we must call

the arguments derived from the extremes signs, that derived from the middle

term  the  index:  for  that  which  is  proved  through  the  first  figure  is  most

generally accepted and most true.

It is possible to infer character from features, if it is granted that the body

and the soul are changed together by the natural affections: I say ‘natural’, for

though perhaps by learning music a man has made some change in his soul,

this is not one of those affections which are natural to us; rather I refer to

passions  and  desires  when  I  speak  of  natural  emotions.  If  then  this  were

granted and also that for each change there is a corresponding sign, and we

could state the affection and sign proper to each kind of animal, we shall be

able  to  infer  character  from  features.  For  if  there  is  an  affection  which

belongs properly to an individual kind, e.g. courage to lions, it is necessary

that there should be a sign of it: for ex hypothesi body and soul are affected

together. Suppose this sign is the possession of large extremities: this may

belong to other kinds also though not universally. For the sign is proper in the

sense stated, because the affection is proper to the whole kind, though not

proper to it alone, according to our usual manner of speaking. The same thing

then will be found in another kind, and man may be brave, and some other

kinds of animal as well. They will then have the sign: for ex hypothesi there

is one sign corresponding to each affection. If then this is so, and we can

collect  signs  of  this  sort  in  these  animals  which  have  only  one  affection

proper to them-but each affection has its sign, since it is necessary that it

should  have  a  single  sign-we  shall  then  be  able  to  infer  character  from

features. But if the kind as a whole has two properties, e.g. if the lion is bothbrave and generous, how shall we know which of the signs which are its

proper  concomitants  is  the  sign  of  a  particular  affection?  Perhaps  if  both

belong to some other kind though not to the whole of it, and if, in those kinds

in  which  each  is  found  though  not  in  the  whole  of  their  members,  some

members possess one of the affections and not the other: e.g. if a man is

brave but not generous, but possesses, of the two signs, large extremities, it is

clear that this is the sign of courage in the lion also. To judge character from

features, then, is possible in the first figure if the middle term is convertible

with the first extreme, but is wider than the third term and not convertible

with it: e.g. let A stand for courage, B for large extremities, and C for lion. B

then belongs to everything to which C belongs, but also to others. But A

belongs to everything to which B belongs, and to nothing besides, but is

convertible with B: otherwise, there would not be a single sign correlative

with each affection.                          Posterior Analytics, Book I


Translated by G. R. G. Mure


1


All instruction given or received by way of argument proceeds from pre-

existent knowledge. This becomes evident upon a survey of all the species of

such  instruction.  The  mathematical  sciences  and  all  other  speculative

disciplines are acquired in this way, and so are the two forms of dialectical

reasoning, syllogistic and inductive; for each of these latter make use of old

knowledge to impart new, the syllogism assuming an audience that accepts

its  premisses,  induction  exhibiting  the  universal  as  implicit  in  the  clearly

known particular. Again, the persuasion exerted by rhetorical arguments is in

principle the same, since they use either example, a kind of induction, or

enthymeme, a form of syllogism.

The  pre-existent  knowledge  required  is  of  two  kinds.  In  some  cases

admission  of  the  fact  must  be  assumed,  in  others  comprehension  of  the

meaning of the term used, and sometimes both assumptions are essential.

Thus, we assume that every predicate can be either truly affirmed or truly

denied of any subject, and that ‘triangle’ means so and so; as regards ‘unit’

we have to make the double assumption of the meaning of the word and the

existence of the thing. The reason is that these several objects are not equally

obvious to us. Recognition of a truth may in some cases contain as factors

both previous knowledge and also knowledge acquired simultaneously with

that  recognition-knowledge,  this  latter,  of  the  particulars  actually  falling

under the universal and therein already virtually known. For example, the

student knew beforehand that the angles of every triangle are equal to two

right angles; but it was only at the actual moment at which he was being led

on to recognize this as true in the instance before him that he came to know

‘this figure inscribed in the semicircle’ to be a triangle. For some things (viz.

the singulars finally reached which are not predicable of anything else as

subject) are only learnt in this way, i.e. there is here no recognition through a

middle  of  a  minor  term  as  subject  to  a  major.  Before  he  was  led  on  to

recognition or before he actually drew a conclusion, we should perhaps saythat in a manner he knew, in a manner not.

If he did not in an unqualified sense of the term know the existence of this

triangle, how could he know without qualification that its angles were equal

to two right angles? No: clearly he knows not without qualification but only

in the sense that he knows universally. If this distinction is not drawn, we are

faced with the dilemma in the Meno: either a man will learn nothing or what

he already knows; for we cannot accept the solution which some people offer.

A man is asked, ‘Do you, or do you not, know that every pair is even?’ He

says he does know it. The questioner then produces a particular pair, of the

existence, and so a fortiori of the evenness, of which he was unaware. The

solution which some people offer is to assert that they do not know that every

pair is even, but only that everything which they know to be a pair is even:

yet  what  they  know  to  be  even  is  that  of  which  they  have  demonstrated

evenness, i.e. what they made the subject of their premiss, viz. not merely

every triangle or number which they know to be such, but any and every

number or triangle without reservation. For no premiss is ever couched in the

form ‘every number which you know to be such’, or ‘every rectilinear figure

which you know to be such’: the predicate is always construed as applicable

to any and every instance of the thing. On the other hand, I imagine there is

nothing  to  prevent  a  man  in  one  sense  knowing  what  he  is  learning,  in

another not knowing it. The strange thing would be, not if in some sense he

knew what he was learning, but if he were to know it in that precise sense and

manner in which he was learning it.


2


We  suppose  ourselves  to  possess  unqualified  scientific  knowledge  of  a

thing, as opposed to knowing it in the accidental way in which the sophist

knows, when we think that we know the cause on which the fact depends, as

the cause of that fact and of no other, and, further, that the fact could not be

other  than  it  is.  Now  that  scientific  knowing  is  something  of  this  sort  is

evident-witness  both  those  who  falsely  claim  it  and  those  who  actually

possess it, since the former merely imagine themselves to be, while the latter

are also actually, in the condition described. Consequently the proper object

of unqualified scientific knowledge is something which cannot be other than

it is.

  There may be another manner of knowing as well-that will be discussedlater. What I now assert is that at all events we do know by demonstration.

By demonstration I mean a syllogism productive of scientific knowledge, a

syllogism, that is, the grasp of which is eo ipso such knowledge. Assuming

then  that  my  thesis  as  to  the  nature  of  scientific  knowing  is  correct,  the

premisses  of  demonstrated  knowledge  must  be  true,  primary,  immediate,

better known than and prior to the conclusion, which is further related to

them as effect to cause. Unless these conditions are satisfied, the basic truths

will not be ‘appropriate’ to the conclusion. Syllogism there may indeed be

without  these  conditions,  but  such  syllogism,  not  being  productive  of

scientific knowledge, will not be demonstration. The premisses must be true:

for that which is non-existent cannot be known-we cannot know, e.g. that the

diagonal of a square is commensurate with its side. The premisses must be

primary  and  indemonstrable;  otherwise  they  will  require  demonstration  in

order  to  be  known,  since  to  have  knowledge,  if  it  be  not  accidental

knowledge,  of  things  which  are  demonstrable,  means  precisely  to  have  a

demonstration of them. The premisses must be the causes of the conclusion,

better known than it, and prior to it; its causes, since we possess scientific

knowledge of a thing only when we know its cause; prior, in order to be

causes; antecedently known, this antecedent knowledge being not our mere

understanding of the meaning, but knowledge of the fact as well. Now ‘prior’

and ‘better known’ are ambiguous terms, for there is a difference between

what is prior and better known in the order of being and what is prior and

better known to man. I mean that objects nearer to sense are prior and better

known to man; objects without qualification prior and better known are those

further from sense. Now the most universal causes are furthest from sense

and particular causes are nearest to sense, and they are thus exactly opposed

to one another. In saying that the premisses of demonstrated knowledge must

be primary, I mean that they must be the ‘appropriate’ basic truths, for I

identify primary premiss and basic truth. A ‘basic truth’ in a demonstration is

an immediate proposition. An immediate proposition is one which has no

other proposition prior to it. A proposition is either part of an enunciation, i.e.

it  predicates  a  single  attribute  of  a  single  subject.  If  a  proposition  is

dialectical, it assumes either part indifferently; if it is demonstrative, it lays

down one part to the definite exclusion of the other because that part is true.

The term ‘enunciation’ denotes either part of a contradiction indifferently. A

contradiction is an opposition which of its own nature excludes a middle. The

part  of  a  contradiction  which  conjoins  a  predicate  with  a  subject  is  anaffirmation; the part disjoining them is a negation. I call an immediate basic

truth of syllogism a ‘thesis’ when, though it is not susceptible of proof by the

teacher, yet ignorance of it does not constitute a total bar to progress on the

part of the pupil: one which the pupil must know if he is to learn anything

whatever is an axiom. I call it an axiom because there are such truths and we

give them the name of axioms par excellence. If a thesis assumes one part or

the  other  of  an  enunciation,  i.e.  asserts  either  the  existence  or  the  non-

existence  of  a  subject,  it  is  a  hypothesis;  if  it  does  not  so  assert,  it  is  a

definition. Definition is a ‘thesis’ or a ‘laying something down’, since the

arithmetician lays it down that to be a unit is to be quantitatively indivisible;

but it is not a hypothesis, for to define what a unit is is not the same as to

affirm its existence.

Now since the required ground of our knowledge-i.e. of our conviction-of

a fact is the possession of such a syllogism as we call demonstration, and the

ground of the syllogism is the facts constituting its premisses, we must not

only know the primary premisses-some if not all of them-beforehand, but

know  them  better  than  the  conclusion:  for  the  cause  of  an  attribute’s

inherence in a subject always itself inheres in the subject more firmly than

that attribute; e.g. the cause of our loving anything is dearer to us than the

object  of  our  love.  So  since  the  primary  premisses  are  the  cause  of  our

knowledge-i.e. of our conviction-it follows that we know them better-that is,

are more convinced of them-than their consequences, precisely because of

our knowledge of the latter is the effect of our knowledge of the premisses.

Now a man cannot believe in anything more than in the things he knows,

unless he has either actual knowledge of it or something better than actual

knowledge. But we are faced with this paradox if a student whose belief rests

on demonstration has not prior knowledge; a man must believe in some, if

not in all, of the basic truths more than in the conclusion. Moreover, if a man

sets  out  to  acquire  the  scientific  knowledge  that  comes  through

demonstration, he must not only have a better knowledge of the basic truths

and  a  firmer  conviction  of  them  than  of  the  connexion  which  is  being

demonstrated: more than this, nothing must be more certain or better known

to  him  than  these  basic  truths  in  their  character  as  contradicting  the

fundamental premisses which lead to the opposed and erroneous conclusion.

For indeed the conviction of pure science must be unshakable.


3  Some hold that, owing to the necessity of knowing the primary premisses,

there is no scientific knowledge. Others think there is, but that all truths are

demonstrable. Neither doctrine is either true or a necessary deduction from

the premisses. The first school, assuming that there is no way of knowing

other than by demonstration, maintain that an infinite regress is involved, on

the ground that if behind the prior stands no primary, we could not know the

posterior through the prior (wherein they are right, for one cannot traverse an

infinite series): if on the other hand-they say-the series terminates and there

are  primary  premisses,  yet  these  are  unknowable  because  incapable  of

demonstration, which according to them is the only form of knowledge. And

since  thus  one  cannot  know  the  primary  premisses,  knowledge  of  the

conclusions which follow from them is not pure scientific knowledge nor

properly knowing at all, but rests on the mere supposition that the premisses

are true. The other party agree with them as regards knowing, holding that it

is only possible by demonstration, but they see no difficulty in holding that

all truths are demonstrated, on the ground that demonstration may be circular

and reciprocal.

Our  own  doctrine  is  that  not  all  knowledge  is  demonstrative:  on  the

contrary,  knowledge  of  the  immediate  premisses  is  independent  of

demonstration. (The necessity of this is obvious; for since we must know the

prior premisses from which the demonstration is drawn, and since the regress

must end in immediate truths, those truths must be indemonstrable.) Such,

then,  is  our  doctrine,  and  in  addition  we  maintain  that  besides  scientific

knowledge there is its originative source which enables us to recognize the

definitions.

Now demonstration must be based on premisses prior to and better known

than the conclusion; and the same things cannot simultaneously be both prior

and posterior to one another: so circular demonstration is clearly not possible

in  the  unqualified  sense  of  ‘demonstration’,  but  only  possible  if

‘demonstration’ be extended to include that other method of argument which

rests  on  a  distinction  between  truths  prior  to  us  and  truths  without

qualification prior, i.e. the method by which induction produces knowledge.

But if we accept this extension of its meaning, our definition of unqualified

knowledge will prove faulty; for there seem to be two kinds of it. Perhaps,

however, the second form of demonstration, that which proceeds from truths

better known to us, is not demonstration in the unqualified sense of the term.

The  advocates  of  circular  demonstration  are  not  only  faced  with  thedifficulty we have just stated: in addition their theory reduces to the mere

statement that if a thing exists, then it does exist-an easy way of proving

anything. That this is so can be clearly shown by taking three terms, for to

constitute the circle it makes no difference whether many terms or few or

even only two are taken. Thus by direct proof, if A is, B must be; if B is, C

must be; therefore if A is, C must be. Since then-by the circular proof-if A is,

B must be, and if B is, A must be, A may be substituted for C above. Then ‘if

B is, A must be’=’if B is, C must be’, which above gave the conclusion ‘if A

is, C must be’: but C and A have been identified. Consequently the upholders

of circular demonstration are in the position of saying that if A is, A must be-

a  simple  way  of  proving  anything.  Moreover,  even  such  circular

demonstration is impossible except in the case of attributes that imply one

another, viz. ‘peculiar’ properties.

Now, it has been shown that the positing of one thing-be it one term or one

premiss-never involves a necessary consequent: two premisses constitute the

first and smallest foundation for drawing a conclusion at all and therefore a

fortiori for the demonstrative syllogism of science. If, then, A is implied in B

and C, and B and C are reciprocally implied in one another and in A, it is

possible, as has been shown in my writings on the syllogism, to prove all the

assumptions  on  which  the  original  conclusion  rested,  by  circular

demonstration in the first figure. But it has also been shown that in the other

figures either no conclusion is possible, or at least none which proves both

the original premisses. Propositions the terms of which are not convertible

cannot be circularly demonstrated at all, and since convertible terms occur

rarely in actual demonstrations, it is clearly frivolous and impossible to say

that  demonstration  is  reciprocal  and  that  therefore  everything  can  be

demonstrated.


4


  Since the object of pure scientific knowledge cannot be other than it is, the

truth  obtained  by  demonstrative  knowledge  will  be  necessary.  And  since

demonstrative knowledge is only present when we have a demonstration, it

follows that demonstration is an inference from necessary premisses. So we

must  consider  what  are  the  premisses  of  demonstration-i.e.  what  is  their

character: and as a preliminary, let us define what we mean by an attribute

‘true  in  every  instance  of  its  subject’,  an  ‘essential’  attribute,  and  a‘commensurate and universal’ attribute. I call ‘true in every instance’ what is

truly predicable of all instances-not of one to the exclusion of others-and at

all times, not at this or that time only; e.g. if animal is truly predicable of

every instance of man, then if it be true to say ‘this is a man’, ‘this is an

animal’ is also true, and if the one be true now the other is true now. A

corresponding  account  holds  if  point  is  in  every  instance  predicable  as

contained in line. There is evidence for this in the fact that the objection we

raise against a proposition put to us as true in every instance is either an

instance in which, or an occasion on which, it is not true. Essential attributes

are (1) such as belong to their subject as elements in its essential nature (e.g.

line thus belongs to triangle, point to line; for the very being or ‘substance’ of

triangle and line is composed of these elements, which are contained in the

formulae  defining  triangle  and  line):  (2)  such  that,  while  they  belong  to

certain  subjects,  the  subjects  to  which  they  belong  are  contained  in  the

attribute’s own defining formula. Thus straight and curved belong to line, odd

and even, prime and compound, square and oblong, to number; and also the

formula defining any one of these attributes contains its subject-e.g. line or

number as the case may be.

  Extending this classification to all other attributes, I distinguish those that

answer  the  above  description  as  belonging  essentially  to  their  respective

subjects;  whereas  attributes  related  in  neither  of  these  two  ways  to  their

subjects  I  call  accidents  or  ‘coincidents’;  e.g.  musical  or  white  is  a

‘coincident’ of animal.

  Further (a) that is essential which is not predicated of a subject other than

itself:  e.g.  ‘the  walking  [thing]’  walks  and  is  white  in  virtue  of  being

something else besides; whereas substance, in the sense of whatever signifies

a ‘this somewhat’, is not what it is in virtue of being something else besides.

Things, then, not predicated of a subject I call essential; things predicated of a

subject I call accidental or ‘coincidental’.

In another sense again (b) a thing consequentially connected with anything

is essential; one not so connected is ‘coincidental’. An example of the latter is

‘While he was walking it lightened’: the lightning was not due to his walking;

it  was,  we  should  say,  a  coincidence.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  a

consequential connexion, the predication is essential; e.g. if a beast dies when

its throat is being cut, then its death is also essentially connected with the

cutting, because the cutting was the cause of death, not death a ‘coincident’

of the cutting.So far then as concerns the sphere of connexions scientifically known in

the unqualified sense of that term, all attributes which (within that sphere) are

essential either in the sense that their subjects are contained in them, or in the

sense  that  they  are  contained  in  their  subjects,  are  necessary  as  well  as

consequentially connected with their subjects. For it is impossible for them

not to inhere in their subjects either simply or in the qualified sense that one

or other of a pair of opposites must inhere in the subject; e.g. in line must be

either straightness or curvature, in number either oddness or evenness. For

within a single identical genus the contrary of a given attribute is either its

privative or its contradictory; e.g. within number what is not odd is even,

inasmuch as within this sphere even is a necessary consequent of not-odd. So,

since any given predicate must be either affirmed or denied of any subject,

essential attributes must inhere in their subjects of necessity.

  Thus, then, we have established the distinction between the attribute which

is ‘true in every instance’ and the ‘essential’ attribute.

I  term  ‘commensurately  universal’  an  attribute  which  belongs  to  every

instance of its subject, and to every instance essentially and as such; from

which it clearly follows that all commensurate universals inhere necessarily

in their subjects. The essential attribute, and the attribute that belongs to its

subject  as  such,  are  identical.  E.g.  point  and  straight  belong  to  line

essentially, for they belong to line as such; and triangle as such has two right

angles, for it is essentially equal to two right angles.

An attribute belongs commensurately and universally to a subject when it

can be shown to belong to any random instance of that subject and when the

subject is the first thing to which it can be shown to belong. Thus, e.g. (1) the

equality of its angles to two right angles is not a commensurately universal

attribute of figure. For though it is possible to show that a figure has its

angles equal to two right angles, this attribute cannot be demonstrated of any

figure selected at haphazard, nor in demonstrating does one take a figure at

random-a square is a figure but its angles are not equal to two right angles.

On the other hand, any isosceles triangle has its angles equal to two right

angles, yet isosceles triangle is not the primary subject of this attribute but

triangle is prior. So whatever can be shown to have its angles equal to two

right angles, or to possess any other attribute, in any random instance of itself

and  primarily-that  is  the  first  subject  to  which  the  predicate  in  question

belongs  commensurately  and  universally,  and  the  demonstration,  in  the

essential sense, of any predicate is the proof of it as belonging to this firstsubject commensurately and universally: while the proof of it as belonging to

the other subjects to which it attaches is demonstration only in a secondary

and  unessential  sense.  Nor  again  (2)  is  equality  to  two  right  angles  a

commensurately universal attribute of isosceles; it is of wider application.


5


We  must  not  fail  to  observe  that  we  often  fall  into  error  because  our

conclusion is not in fact primary and commensurately universal in the sense

in which we think we prove it so. We make this mistake (1) when the subject

is an individual or individuals above which there is no universal to be found:

(2)  when  the  subjects  belong  to  different  species  and  there  is  a  higher

universal, but it has no name: (3) when the subject which the demonstrator

takes  as  a  whole  is  really  only  a  part  of  a  larger  whole;  for  then  the

demonstration will be true of the individual instances within the part and will

hold in every instance of it, yet the demonstration will not be true of this

subject  primarily  and  commensurately  and  universally.  When  a

demonstration  is  true  of  a  subject  primarily  and  commensurately  and

universally,  that  is  to  be  taken  to  mean  that  it  is  true  of  a  given  subject

primarily and as such. Case (3) may be thus exemplified. If a proof were

given that perpendiculars to the same line are parallel, it might be supposed

that lines thus perpendicular were the proper subject of the demonstration

because being parallel is true of every instance of them. But it is not so, for

the  parallelism  depends  not  on  these  angles  being  equal  to  one  another

because each is a right angle, but simply on their being equal to one another.

An example of (1) would be as follows: if isosceles were the only triangle, it

would be thought to have its angles equal to two right angles qua isosceles.

An instance of (2) would be the law that proportionals alternate. Alternation

used to be demonstrated separately of numbers, lines, solids, and durations,

though  it  could  have  been  proved  of  them  all  by  a  single  demonstration.

Because there was no single name to denote that in which numbers, lengths,

durations, and solids are identical, and because they differed specifically from

one another, this property was proved of each of them separately. To-day,

however, the proof is commensurately universal, for they do not possess this

attribute qua lines or qua numbers, but qua manifesting this generic character

which they are postulated as possessing universally. Hence, even if one prove

of each kind of triangle that its angles are equal to two right angles, whetherby means of the same or different proofs; still, as long as one treats separately

equilateral,  scalene,  and  isosceles,  one  does  not  yet  know,  except

sophistically, that triangle has its angles equal to two right angles, nor does

one yet know that triangle has this property commensurately and universally,

even if there is no other species of triangle but these. For one does not know

that triangle as such has this property, nor even that ‘all’ triangles have it-

unless ‘all’ means ‘each taken singly’: if ‘all’ means ‘as a whole class’, then,

though there be none in which one does not recognize this property, one does

not know it of ‘all triangles’.

When, then, does our knowledge fail of commensurate universality, and

when it is unqualified knowledge? If triangle be identical in essence with

equilateral, i.e. with each or all equilaterals, then clearly we have unqualified

knowledge:  if  on  the  other  hand  it  be  not,  and  the  attribute  belongs  to

equilateral  qua  triangle;  then  our  knowledge  fails  of  commensurate

universality. ‘But’, it will be asked, ‘does this attribute belong to the subject

of which it has been demonstrated qua triangle or qua isosceles? What is the

point  at  which  the  subject.  to  which  it  belongs  is  primary?  (i.e.  to  what

subject  can  it  be  demonstrated  as  belonging  commensurately  and

universally?)’ Clearly this point is the first term in which it is found to inhere

as  the  elimination  of  inferior  differentiae  proceeds.  Thus  the  angles  of  a

brazen isosceles triangle are equal to two right angles: but eliminate brazen

and isosceles and the attribute remains. ‘But’-you may say-’eliminate figure

or limit, and the attribute vanishes.’ True, but figure and limit are not the first

differentiae whose elimination destroys the attribute. ‘Then what is the first?’

If it is triangle, it will be in virtue of triangle that the attribute belongs to all

the other subjects of which it is predicable, and triangle is the subject to

which it can be demonstrated as belonging commensurately and universally.


6


  Demonstrative  knowledge  must  rest  on  necessary  basic  truths;  for  the

object  of  scientific  knowledge  cannot  be  other  than  it  is.  Now  attributes

attaching essentially to their subjects attach necessarily to them: for essential

attributes  are  either  elements  in  the  essential  nature  of  their  subjects,  or

contain their subjects as elements in their own essential nature. (The pairs of

opposites which the latter class includes are necessary because one member

or the other necessarily inheres.) It follows from this that premisses of thedemonstrative syllogism must be connexions essential in the sense explained:

for all attributes must inhere essentially or else be accidental, and accidental

attributes are not necessary to their subjects.

We must either state the case thus, or else premise that the conclusion of

demonstration  is  necessary  and  that  a  demonstrated  conclusion  cannot  be

other than it is, and then infer that the conclusion must be developed from

necessary premisses. For though you may reason from true premisses without

demonstrating,  yet  if  your  premisses  are  necessary  you  will  assuredly

demonstrate-in  such  necessity  you  have  at  once  a  distinctive  character  of

demonstration. That demonstration proceeds from necessary premisses is also

indicated  by  the  fact  that  the  objection  we  raise  against  a  professed

demonstration is that a premiss of it is not a necessary truth-whether we think

it  altogether  devoid  of  necessity,  or  at  any  rate  so  far  as  our  opponent’s

previous argument goes. This shows how naive it is to suppose one’s basic

truths rightly chosen if one starts with a proposition which is (1) popularly

accepted and (2) true, such as the sophists’ assumption that to know is the

same as to possess knowledge. For (1) popular acceptance or rejection is no

criterion of a basic truth, which can only be the primary law of the genus

constituting the subject matter of the demonstration; and (2) not all truth is

‘appropriate’.

A further proof that the conclusion must be the development of necessary

premisses is as follows. Where demonstration is possible, one who can give

no account which includes the cause has no scientific knowledge. If, then, we

suppose a syllogism in which, though A necessarily inheres in C, yet B, the

middle term of the demonstration, is not necessarily connected with A and C,

then the man who argues thus has no reasoned knowledge of the conclusion,

since  this  conclusion  does  not  owe  its  necessity  to  the  middle  term;  for

though the conclusion is necessary, the mediating link is a contingent fact. Or

again, if a man is without knowledge now, though he still retains the steps of

the argument, though there is no change in himself or in the fact and no lapse

of memory on his part; then neither had he knowledge previously. But the

mediating link, not being necessary, may have perished in the interval; and if

so, though there be no change in him nor in the fact, and though he will still

retain the steps of the argument, yet he has not knowledge, and therefore had

not knowledge before. Even if the link has not actually perished but is liable

to perish, this situation is possible and might occur. But such a condition

cannot be knowledge.  When the conclusion is necessary, the middle through which it was proved

may yet quite easily be non-necessary. You can in fact infer the necessary

even from a non-necessary premiss, just as you can infer the true from the not

true. On the other hand, when the middle is necessary the conclusion must be

necessary; just as true premisses always give a true conclusion. Thus, if A is

necessarily predicated of B and B of C, then A is necessarily predicated of C.

But when the conclusion is nonnecessary the middle cannot be necessary

either. Thus: let A be predicated non-necessarily of C but necessarily of B,

and  let  B  be  a  necessary  predicate  of  C;  then  A  too  will  be  a  necessary

predicate of C, which by hypothesis it is not.

To  sum  up,  then:  demonstrative  knowledge  must  be  knowledge  of  a

necessary nexus, and therefore must clearly be obtained through a necessary

middle term; otherwise its possessor will know neither the cause nor the fact

that his conclusion is a necessary connexion. Either he will mistake the non-

necessary  for  the  necessary  and  believe  the  necessity  of  the  conclusion

without knowing it, or else he will not even believe it-in which case he will

be equally ignorant, whether he actually infers the mere fact through middle

terms or the reasoned fact and from immediate premisses.

Of accidents that are not essential according to our definition of essential

there is no demonstrative knowledge; for since an accident, in the sense in

which I here speak of it, may also not inhere, it is impossible to prove its

inherence as a necessary conclusion. A difficulty, however, might be raised

as to why in dialectic, if the conclusion is not a necessary connexion, such

and such determinate premisses should be proposed in order to deal with such

and  such  determinate  problems.  Would  not  the  result  be  the  same  if  one

asked any questions whatever and then merely stated one’s conclusion? The

solution is that determinate questions have to be put, not because the replies

to them affirm facts which necessitate facts affirmed by the conclusion, but

because these answers are propositions which if the answerer affirm, he must

affirm the conclusion and affirm it with truth if they are true.

  Since it is just those attributes within every genus which are essential and

possessed by their respective subjects as such that are necessary it is clear

that both the conclusions and the premisses of demonstrations which produce

scientific  knowledge  are  essential.  For  accidents  are  not  necessary:  and,

further,  since  accidents  are  not  necessary  one  does  not  necessarily  have

reasoned knowledge of a conclusion drawn from them (this is so even if the

accidental premisses are invariable but not essential, as in proofs throughsigns; for though the conclusion be actually essential, one will not know it as

essential  nor  know  its  reason);  but  to  have  reasoned  knowledge  of  a

conclusion is to know it through its cause. We may conclude that the middle

must be consequentially connected with the minor, and the major with the

middle.


7


It follows that we cannot in demonstrating pass from one genus to another.

We cannot, for instance, prove geometrical truths by arithmetic. For there are

three  elements  in  demonstration:  (1)  what  is  proved,  the  conclusion-an

attribute inhering essentially in a genus; (2) the axioms, i.e. axioms which are

premisses  of  demonstration;  (3)  the  subject-genus  whose  attributes,  i.e.

essential properties, are revealed by the demonstration. The axioms which are

premisses of demonstration may be identical in two or more sciences: but in

the case of two different genera such as arithmetic and geometry you cannot

apply arithmetical demonstration to the properties of magnitudes unless the

magnitudes in question are numbers. How in certain cases transference is

possible I will explain later.

  Arithmetical demonstration and the other sciences likewise possess, each

of them, their own genera; so that if the demonstration is to pass from one

sphere to another, the genus must be either absolutely or to some extent the

same. If this is not so, transference is clearly impossible, because the extreme

and the middle terms must be drawn from the same genus: otherwise, as

predicated, they will not be essential and will thus be accidents. That is why

it cannot be proved by geometry that opposites fall under one science, nor

even that the product of two cubes is a cube. Nor can the theorem of any one

science be demonstrated by means of another science, unless these theorems

are related as subordinate to superior (e.g. as optical theorems to geometry or

harmonic theorems to arithmetic). Geometry again cannot prove of lines any

property which they do not possess qua lines, i.e. in virtue of the fundamental

truths of their peculiar genus: it cannot show, for example, that the straight

line  is  the  most  beautiful  of  lines  or  the  contrary  of  the  circle;  for  these

qualities do not belong to lines in virtue of their peculiar genus, but through

some property which it shares with other genera.


8It is also clear that if the premisses from which the syllogism proceeds are

commensurately  universal,  the  conclusion  of  such  i.e.  in  the  unqualified

sense-must also be eternal. Therefore no attribute can be demonstrated nor

known by strictly scientific knowledge to inhere in perishable things. The

proof  can  only  be  accidental,  because  the  attribute’s  connexion  with  its

perishable  subject  is  not  commensurately  universal  but  temporary  and

special. If such a demonstration is made, one premiss must be perishable and

not commensurately universal (perishable because only if it is perishable will

the  conclusion  be  perishable;  not  commensurately  universal,  because  the

predicate  will  be  predicable  of  some  instances  of  the  subject  and  not  of

others); so that the conclusion can only be that a fact is true at the moment-

not commensurately and universally. The same is true of definitions, since a

definition is either a primary premiss or a conclusion of a demonstration, or

else  only  differs  from  a  demonstration  in  the  order  of  its  terms.

Demonstration and science of merely frequent occurrences-e.g. of eclipse as

happening to the moon-are, as such, clearly eternal: whereas so far as they are

not  eternal  they  are  not  fully  commensurate.  Other  subjects  too  have

properties attaching to them in the same way as eclipse attaches to the moon.


9


It is clear that if the conclusion is to show an attribute inhering as such,

nothing  can  be  demonstrated  except  from  its  ‘appropriate’  basic  truths.

Consequently  a  proof  even  from  true,  indemonstrable,  and  immediate

premisses  does  not  constitute  knowledge.  Such  proofs  are  like  Bryson’s

method of squaring the circle; for they operate by taking as their middle a

common character-a character, therefore, which the subject may share with

another-and consequently they apply equally to subjects different in kind.

They therefore afford knowledge of an attribute only as inhering accidentally,

not as belonging to its subject as such: otherwise they would not have been

applicable to another genus.

Our knowledge of any attribute’s connexion with a subject is accidental

unless we know that connexion through the middle term in virtue of which it

inheres, and as an inference from basic premisses essential and ‘appropriate’

to the subject-unless we know, e.g. the property of possessing angles equal to

two right angles as belonging to that subject in which it inheres essentially,

and  as  inferred  from  basic  premisses  essential  and  ‘appropriate’  to  thatsubject: so that if that middle term also belongs essentially to the minor, the

middle must belong to the same kind as the major and minor terms. The only

exceptions to this rule are such cases as theorems in harmonics which are

demonstrable by arithmetic. Such theorems are proved by the same middle

terms as arithmetical properties, but with a qualification-the fact falls under a

separate  science  (for  the  subject  genus  is  separate),  but  the  reasoned  fact

concerns  the  superior  science,  to  which  the  attributes  essentially  belong.

Thus,  even  these  apparent  exceptions  show  that  no  attribute  is  strictly

demonstrable except from its ‘appropriate’ basic truths, which, however, in

the case of these sciences have the requisite identity of character.

It is no less evident that the peculiar basic truths of each inhering attribute

are indemonstrable; for basic truths from which they might be deduced would

be basic truths of all that is, and the science to which they belonged would

possess  universal  sovereignty.  This  is  so  because  he  knows  better  whose

knowledge is deduced from higher causes, for his knowledge is from prior

premisses when it derives from causes themselves uncaused: hence, if he

knows better than others or best of all, his knowledge would be science in a

higher  or  the  highest  degree.  But,  as  things  are,  demonstration  is  not

transferable to another genus, with such exceptions as we have mentioned of

the application of geometrical demonstrations to theorems in mechanics or

optics, or of arithmetical demonstrations to those of harmonics.

It is hard to be sure whether one knows or not; for it is hard to be sure

whether one’s knowledge is based on the basic truths appropriate to each

attribute-the  differentia  of  true  knowledge.  We  think  we  have  scientific

knowledge if we have reasoned from true and primary premisses. But that is

not  so:  the  conclusion  must  be  homogeneous  with  the  basic  facts  of  the

science.


10


I call the basic truths of every genus those clements in it the existence of

which  cannot  be  proved.  As  regards  both  these  primary  truths  and  the

attributes dependent on them the meaning of the name is assumed. The fact

of their existence as regards the primary truths must be assumed; but it has to

be proved of the remainder, the attributes. Thus we assume the meaning alike

of unity, straight, and triangular; but while as regards unity and magnitude we

assume also the fact of their existence, in the case of the remainder proof isrequired.

Of the basic truths used in the demonstrative sciences some are peculiar to

each  science,  and  some  are  common,  but  common  only  in  the  sense  of

analogous,  being  of  use  only  in  so  far  as  they  fall  within  the  genus

constituting the province of the science in question.

  Peculiar truths are, e.g. the definitions of line and straight; common truths

are such as ‘take equals from equals and equals remain’. Only so much of

these common truths is required as falls within the genus in question: for a

truth of this kind will have the same force even if not used generally but

applied by the geometer only to magnitudes, or by the arithmetician only to

numbers. Also peculiar to a science are the subjects the existence as well as

the  meaning  of  which  it  assumes,  and  the  essential  attributes  of  which  it

investigates, e.g. in arithmetic units, in geometry points and lines. Both the

existence and the meaning of the subjects are assumed by these sciences; but

of  their  essential  attributes  only  the  meaning  is  assumed.  For  example

arithmetic assumes the meaning of odd and even, square and cube, geometry

that of incommensurable, or of deflection or verging of lines, whereas the

existence of these attributes is demonstrated by means of the axioms and

from previous conclusions as premisses. Astronomy too proceeds in the same

way.  For  indeed  every  demonstrative  science  has  three  elements:  (1)  that

which it posits, the subject genus whose essential attributes it examines; (2)

the so-called axioms, which are primary premisses of its demonstration; (3)

the attributes, the meaning of which it assumes. Yet some sciences may very

well pass over some of these elements; e.g. we might not expressly posit the

existence  of  the  genus  if  its  existence  were  obvious  (for  instance,  the

existence of hot and cold is more evident than that of number); or we might

omit  to  assume  expressly  the  meaning  of  the  attributes  if  it  were  well

understood. In the way the meaning of axioms, such as ‘Take equals from

equals  and  equals  remain’,  is  well  known  and  so  not  expressly  assumed.

Nevertheless in the nature of the case the essential elements of demonstration

are three: the subject, the attributes, and the basic premisses.

That which expresses necessary self-grounded fact, and which we must

necessarily believe, is distinct both from the hypotheses of a science and from

illegitimate  postulate-I  say  ‘must  believe’,  because  all  syllogism,  and

therefore a fortiori demonstration, is addressed not to the spoken word, but to

the discourse within the soul, and though we can always raise objections to

the  spoken  word,  to  the  inward  discourse  we  cannot  always  object.  Thatwhich is capable of proof but assumed by the teacher without proof is, if the

pupil  believes  and  accepts  it,  hypothesis,  though  only  in  a  limited  sense

hypothesis-that is, relatively to the pupil; if the pupil has no opinion or a

contrary  opinion  on  the  matter,  the  same  assumption  is  an  illegitimate

postulate.  Therein  lies  the  distinction  between  hypothesis  and  illegitimate

postulate: the latter is the contrary of the pupil’s opinion, demonstrable, but

assumed and used without demonstration.

The  definition-viz.  those  which  are  not  expressed  as  statements  that

anything is or is not-are not hypotheses: but it is in the premisses of a science

that its hypotheses are contained. Definitions require only to be understood,

and this is not hypothesis-unless it be contended that the pupil’s hearing is

also  an  hypothesis  required  by  the  teacher.  Hypotheses,  on  the  contrary,

postulate facts on the being of which depends the being of the fact inferred.

Nor are the geometer’s hypotheses false, as some have held, urging that one

must not employ falsehood and that the geometer is uttering falsehood in

stating that the line which he draws is a foot long or straight, when it is

actually neither. The truth is that the geometer does not draw any conclusion

from the being of the particular line of which he speaks, but from what his

diagrams  symbolize.  A  further  distinction  is  that  all  hypotheses  and

illegitimate postulates are either universal or particular, whereas a definition

is neither.


11


So demonstration does not necessarily imply the being of Forms nor a One

beside  a  Many,  but  it  does  necessarily  imply  the  possibility  of  truly

predicating one of many; since without this possibility we cannot save the

universal, and if the universal goes, the middle term goes witb. it, and so

demonstration becomes impossible. We conclude, then, that there must be a

single identical term unequivocally predicable of a number of individuals.

The law that it is impossible to affirm and deny simultaneously the same

predicate of the same subject is not expressly posited by any demonstration

except when the conclusion also has to be expressed in that form; in which

case the proof lays down as its major premiss that the major is truly affirmed

of the middle but falsely denied. It makes no difference, however, if we add

to the middle, or again to the minor term, the corresponding negative. For

grant a minor term of which it is true to predicate man-even if it be also trueto predicate not-man of it—still grant simply that man is animal and not not-

animal, and the conclusion follows: for it will still be true to say that Callias

—even if it be also true to say that not-Callias—is animal and not not-animal.

The reason is that the major term is predicable not only of the middle, but of

something other than the middle as well, being of wider application; so that

the conclusion is not affected even if the middle is extended to cover the

original middle term and also what is not the original middle term.

The law that every predicate can be either truly affirmed or truly denied of

every  subject  is  posited  by  such  demonstration  as  uses  reductio  ad

impossibile, and then not always universally, but so far as it is requisite;

within the limits, that is, of the genus-the genus, I mean (as I have already

explained), to which the man of science applies his demonstrations. In virtue

of the common elements of demonstration-I mean the common axioms which

are used as premisses of demonstration, not the subjects nor the attributes

demonstrated as belonging to them-all the sciences have communion with

one another, and in communion with them all is dialectic and any science

which might attempt a universal proof of axioms such as the law of excluded

middle,  the  law  that  the  subtraction  of  equals  from  equals  leaves  equal

remainders,  or  other  axioms  of  the  same  kind.  Dialectic  has  no  definite

sphere  of  this  kind,  not  being  confined  to  a  single  genus.  Otherwise  its

method would not be interrogative; for the interrogative method is barred to

the demonstrator, who cannot use the opposite facts to prove the same nexus.

This was shown in my work on the syllogism.


12


If a syllogistic question is equivalent to a proposition embodying one of

the  two  sides  of  a  contradiction,  and  if  each  science  has  its  peculiar

propositions from which its peculiar conclusion is developed, then there is

such a thing as a distinctively scientific question, and it is the interrogative

form  of  the  premisses  from  which  the  ‘appropriate’  conclusion  of  each

science is developed. Hence it is clear that not every question will be relevant

to geometry, nor to medicine, nor to any other science: only those questions

will be geometrical which form premisses for the proof of the theorems of

geometry or of any other science, such as optics, which uses the same basic

truths as geometry. Of the other sciences the like is true. Of these questions

the geometer is bound to give his account, using the basic truths of geometryin  conjunction  with  his  previous  conclusions;  of  the  basic  truths  the

geometer, as such, is not bound to give any account. The like is true of the

other sciences. There is a limit, then, to the questions which we may put to

each man of science; nor is each man of science bound to answer all inquiries

on each several subject, but only such as fall within the defined field of his

own  science.  If,  then,  in  controversy  with  a  geometer  qua  geometer  the

disputant confines himself to geometry and proves anything from geometrical

premisses, he is clearly to be applauded; if he goes outside these he will be at

fault, and obviously cannot even refute the geometer except accidentally. One

should therefore not discuss geometry among those who are not geometers,

for in such a company an unsound argument will pass unnoticed. This is

correspondingly true in the other sciences.

  Since there are ‘geometrical’ questions, does it follow that there are also

distinctively  ‘ungeometrical’  questions?  Further,  in  each  special  science-

geometry for instance-what kind of error is it that may vitiate questions, and

yet not exclude them from that science? Again, is the erroneous conclusion

one constructed from premisses opposite to the true premisses, or is it formal

fallacy though drawn from geometrical premisses? Or, perhaps, the erroneous

conclusion is due to the drawing of premisses from another science; e.g. in a

geometrical  controversy  a  musical  question  is  distinctively  ungeometrical,

whereas  the  notion  that  parallels  meet  is  in  one  sense  geometrical,  being

ungeometrical in a different fashion: the reason being that ‘ungeometrical’,

like ‘unrhythmical’, is equivocal, meaning in the one case not geometry at all,

in the other bad geometry? It is this error, i.e. error based on premisses of this

kind-’of’ the science but false-that is the contrary of science. In mathematics

the formal fallacy is not so common, because it is the middle term in which

the ambiguity lies, since the major is predicated of the whole of the middle

and the middle of the whole of the minor (the predicate of course never has

the prefix ‘all’); and in mathematics one can, so to speak, see these middle

terms with an intellectual vision, while in dialectic the ambiguity may escape

detection. E.g. ‘Is every circle a figure?’ A diagram shows that this is so, but

the minor premiss ‘Are epics circles?’ is shown by the diagram to be false.

If  a  proof  has  an  inductive  minor  premiss,  one  should  not  bring  an

‘objection’ against it. For since every premiss must be applicable to a number

of cases (otherwise it will not be true in every instance, which, since the

syllogism proceeds from universals, it must be), then assuredly the same is

true of an ‘objection’; since premisses and ‘objections’ are so far the samethat anything which can be validly advanced as an ‘objection’ must be such

that it could take the form of a premiss, either demonstrative or dialectical.

On the other hand, arguments formally illogical do sometimes occur through

taking as middles mere attributes of the major and minor terms. An instance

of this is Caeneus’ proof that fire increases in geometrical proportion: ‘Fire’,

he argues, ‘increases rapidly, and so does geometrical proportion’. There is

no  syllogism  so,  but  there  is  a  syllogism  if  the  most  rapidly  increasing

proportion  is  geometrical  and  the  most  rapidly  increasing  proportion  is

attributable to fire in its motion. Sometimes, no doubt, it is impossible to

reason  from  premisses  predicating  mere  attributes:  but  sometimes  it  is

possible, though the possibility is overlooked. If false premisses could never

give  true  conclusions  ‘resolution’  would  be  easy,  for  premisses  and

conclusion would in that case inevitably reciprocate. I might then argue thus:

let A be an existing fact; let the existence of A imply such and such facts

actually known to me to exist, which we may call B. I can now, since they

reciprocate, infer A from B.

  Reciprocation  of  premisses  and  conclusion  is  more  frequent  in

mathematics, because mathematics takes definitions, but never an accident,

for  its  premisses-a  second  characteristic  distinguishing  mathematical

reasoning from dialectical disputations.

A science expands not by the interposition of fresh middle terms, but by

the apposition of fresh extreme terms. E.g. A is predicated of B, B of C, C of

D, and so indefinitely. Or the expansion may be lateral: e.g. one major A,

may  be  proved  of  two  minors,  C  and  E.  Thus  let  A  represent  number-a

number or number taken indeterminately; B determinate odd number; C any

particular odd number. We can then predicate A of C. Next let D represent

determinate even number, and E even number. Then A is predicable of E.


13


  Knowledge of the fact differs from knowledge of the reasoned fact. To

begin with, they differ within the same science and in two ways: (1) when the

premisses of the syllogism are not immediate (for then the proximate cause is

not contained in them-a necessary condition of knowledge of the reasoned

fact): (2) when the premisses are immediate, but instead of the cause the

better  known  of  the  two  reciprocals  is  taken  as  the  middle;  for  of  two

reciprocally predicable terms the one which is not the cause may quite easilybe the better known and so become the middle term of the demonstration.

Thus (2) (a) you might prove as follows that the planets are near because they

do not twinkle: let C be the planets, B not twinkling, A proximity. Then B is

predicable of C; for the planets do not twinkle. But A is also predicable of B,

since that which does not twinkle is near—we must take this truth as having

been reached by induction or sense-perception. Therefore A is a necessary

predicate of C; so that we have demonstrated that the planets are near. This

syllogism, then, proves not the reasoned fact but only the fact; since they are

not  near  because  they  do  not  twinkle,  but,  because  they  are  near,  do  not

twinkle. The major and middle of the proof, however, may be reversed, and

then  the  demonstration  will  be  of  the  reasoned  fact.  Thus:  let  C  be  the

planets, B proximity, A not twinkling. Then B is an attribute of C, and A-not

twinkling-of B. Consequently A is predicable of C, and the syllogism proves

the  reasoned  fact,  since  its  middle  term  is  the  proximate  cause.  Another

example  is  the  inference  that  the  moon  is  spherical  from  its  manner  of

waxing. Thus: since that which so waxes is spherical, and since the moon so

waxes, clearly the moon is spherical. Put in this form, the syllogism turns out

to be proof of the fact, but if the middle and major be reversed it is proof of

the  reasoned  fact;  since  the  moon  is  not  spherical  because  it  waxes  in  a

certain manner, but waxes in such a manner because it is spherical. (Let C be

the moon, B spherical, and A waxing.) Again (b), in cases where the cause

and the effect are not reciprocal and the effect is the better known, the fact is

demonstrated but not the reasoned fact. This also occurs (1) when the middle

falls outside the major and minor, for here too the strict cause is not given,

and so the demonstration is of the fact, not of the reasoned fact. For example,

the question ‘Why does not a wall breathe?’ might be answered, ‘Because it

is not an animal’; but that answer would not give the strict cause, because if

not being an animal causes the absence of respiration, then being an animal

should be the cause of respiration, according to the rule that if the negation of

causes the non-inherence of y, the affirmation of x causes the inherence of y;

e.g. if the disproportion of the hot and cold elements is the cause of ill health,

their proportion is the cause of health; and conversely, if the assertion of x

causes the inherence of y, the negation of x must cause y’s non-inherence.

But in the case given this consequence does not result; for not every animal

breathes. A syllogism with this kind of cause takes place in the second figure.

Thus: let A be animal, B respiration, C wall. Then A is predicable of all B

(for all that breathes is animal), but of no C; and consequently B is predicableof no C; that is, the wall does not breathe. Such causes are like far-fetched

explanations, which precisely consist in making the cause too remote, as in

Anacharsis’  account  of  why  the  Scythians  have  no  flute-players;  namely

because they have no vines.

  Thus, then, do the syllogism of the fact and the syllogism of the reasoned

fact differ within one science and according to the position of the middle

terms. But there is another way too in which the fact and the reasoned fact

differ,  and  that  is  when  they  are  investigated  respectively  by  different

sciences.  This  occurs  in  the  case  of  problems  related  to  one  another  as

subordinate  and  superior,  as  when  optical  problems  are  subordinated  to

geometry,  mechanical  problems  to  stereometry,  harmonic  problems  to

arithmetic, the data of observation to astronomy. (Some of these sciences

bear  almost  the  same  name;  e.g.  mathematical  and  nautical  astronomy,

mathematical  and  acoustical  harmonics.)  Here  it  is  the  business  of  the

empirical  observers  to  know  the  fact,  of  the  mathematicians  to  know  the

reasoned fact; for the latter are in possession of the demonstrations giving the

causes, and are often ignorant of the fact: just as we have often a clear insight

into a universal, but through lack of observation are ignorant of some of its

particular instances. These connexions have a perceptible existence though

they  are  manifestations  of  forms.  For  the  mathematical  sciences  concern

forms: they do not demonstrate properties of a substratum, since, even though

the  geometrical  subjects  are  predicable  as  properties  of  a  perceptible

substratum, it is not as thus predicable that the mathematician demonstrates

properties of them. As optics is related to geometry, so another science is

related to optics, namely the theory of the rainbow. Here knowledge of the

fact  is  within  the  province  of  the  natural  philosopher,  knowledge  of  the

reasoned  fact  within  that  of  the  optician,  either  qua  optician  or  qua

mathematical optician. Many sciences not standing in this mutual relation

enter  into  it  at  points;  e.g.  medicine  and  geometry:  it  is  the  physician’s

business to know that circular wounds heal more slowly, the geometer’s to

know the reason why.


14


Of all the figures the most scientific is the first. Thus, it is the vehicle of

the  demonstrations  of  all  the  mathematical  sciences,  such  as  arithmetic,

geometry,  and  optics,  and  practically  all  of  all  sciences  that  investigatecauses:  for  the  syllogism  of  the  reasoned  fact  is  either  exclusively  or

generally speaking and in most cases in this figure-a second proof that this

figure is the most scientific; for grasp of a reasoned conclusion is the primary

condition of knowledge. Thirdly, the first is the only figure which enables us

to  pursue  knowledge  of  the  essence  of  a  thing.  In  the  second  figure  no

affirmative conclusion is possible, and knowledge of a thing’s essence must

be affirmative; while in the third figure the conclusion can be affirmative, but

cannot be universal, and essence must have a universal character: e.g. man is

not two-footed animal in any qualified sense, but universally. Finally, the

first figure has no need of the others, while it is by means of the first that the

other two figures are developed, and have their intervals closepacked until

immediate premisses are reached.

  Clearly, therefore, the first figure is the primary condition of knowledge.


15


Just as an attribute A may (as we saw) be atomically connected with a

subject B, so its disconnexion may be atomic. I call ‘atomic’ connexions or

disconnexions  which  involve  no  intermediate  term;  since  in  that  case  the

connexion or disconnexion will not be mediated by something other than the

terms themselves. It follows that if either A or B, or both A and B, have a

genus, their disconnexion cannot be primary. Thus: let C be the genus of A.

Then, if C is not the genus of B-for A may well have a genus which is not the

genus of B-there will be a syllogism proving A’s disconnexion from B thus:


all A is C,

no B is C,

  therefore no B is A.


 

Or if it is B which has a genus D, we have


all B is D,

no D is A,

  therefore no B is A, by syllogism;


 and the proof will be similar if both A and B have a genus. That the genus

of A need not be the genus of B and vice versa, is shown by the existence of

mutually exclusive coordinate series of predication. If no term in the series

ACD… is predicable of any term in the series BEF… ,and if G-a term in the

former series-is the genus of A, clearly G will not be the genus of B; since, if

it were, the series would not be mutually exclusive. So also if B has a genus,

it will not be the genus of A. If, on the other hand, neither A nor B has a

genus and A does not inhere in B, this disconnexion must be atomic. If there

be a middle term, one or other of them is bound to have a genus, for the

syllogism will be either in the first or the second figure. If it is in the first, B

will have a genus-for the premiss containing it must be affirmative: if in the

second, either A or B indifferently, since syllogism is possible if either is

contained in a negative premiss, but not if both premisses are negative.

  Hence  it  is  clear  that  one  thing  may  be  atomically  disconnected  from

another, and we have stated when and how this is possible.


16


  Ignorance-defined not as the negation of knowledge but as a positive state

of mind-is error produced by inference.

(1)  Let  us  first  consider  propositions  asserting  a  predicate’s  immediate

connexion with or disconnexion from a subject. Here, it is true, positive error

may  befall  one  in  alternative  ways;  for  it  may  arise  where  one  directly

believes  a  connexion  or  disconnexion  as  well  as  where  one’s  belief  is

acquired by inference. The error, however, that consists in a direct belief is

without  complication;  but  the  error  resulting  from  inference-which  here

concerns us-takes many forms. Thus, let A be atomically disconnected from

all B: then the conclusion inferred through a middle term C, that all B is A,

will be a case of error produced by syllogism. Now, two cases are possible.

Either (a) both premisses, or (b) one premiss only, may be false. (a) If neither

A is an attribute of any C nor C of any B, whereas the contrary was posited in

both cases, both premisses will be false. (C may quite well be so related to A

and B that C is neither subordinate to A nor a universal attribute of B: for B,

since A was said to be primarily disconnected from B, cannot have a genus,

and A need not necessarily be a universal attribute of all things. Consequently

both premisses may be false.) On the other hand, (b) one of the premisses

may be true, though not either indifferently but only the major A-C since, Bhaving no genus, the premiss C-B will always be false, while A-C may be

true. This is the case if, for example, A is related atomically to both C and B;

because when the same term is related atomically to more terms than one,

neither of those terms will belong to the other. It is, of course, equally the

case if A-C is not atomic.

  Error of attribution, then, occurs through these causes and in this form

only-for we found that no syllogism of universal attribution was possible in

any figure but the first. On the other hand, an error of non-attribution may

occur either in the first or in the second figure. Let us therefore first explain

the various forms it takes in the first figure and the character of the premisses

in each case.

(c)  It  may  occur  when  both  premisses  are  false;  e.g.  supposing  A

atomically connected with both C and B, if it be then assumed that no C is

and all B is C, both premisses are false.

(d)  It  is  also  possible  when  one  is  false.  This  may  be  either  premiss

indifferently.  A-C  may  be  true,  C-B  false-A-C  true  because  A  is  not  an

attribute of all things, C-B false because C, which never has the attribute A,

cannot be an attribute of B; for if C-B were true, the premiss A-C would no

longer be true, and besides if both premisses were true, the conclusion would

be true. Or again, C-B may be true and A-C false; e.g. if both C and A

contain B as genera, one of them must be subordinate to the other, so that if

the premiss takes the form No C is A, it will be false. This makes it clear that

whether either or both premisses are false, the conclusion will equally be

false.

In the second figure the premisses cannot both be wholly false; for if all B

is A, no middle term can be with truth universally affirmed of one extreme

and universally denied of the other: but premisses in which the middle is

affirmed of one extreme and denied of the other are the necessary condition if

one is to get a valid inference at all. Therefore if, taken in this way, they are

wholly false, their contraries conversely should be wholly true. But this is

impossible. On the other hand, there is nothing to prevent both premisses

being partially false; e.g. if actually some A is C and some B is C, then if it is

premised that all A is C and no B is C, both premisses are false, yet partially,

not wholly, false. The same is true if the major is made negative instead of

the minor. Or one premiss may be wholly false, and it may be either of them.

Thus, supposing that actually an attribute of all A must also be an attribute of

all B, then if C is yet taken to be a universal attribute of all but universallynon-attributable to B, C-A will be true but C-B false. Again, actually that

which is an attribute of no B will not be an attribute of all A either; for if it be

an attribute of all A, it will also be an attribute of all B, which is contrary to

supposition; but if C be nevertheless assumed to be a universal attribute of A,

but an attribute of no B, then the premiss C-B is true but the major is false.

The case is similar if the major is made the negative premiss. For in fact what

is an attribute of no A will not be an attribute of any B either; and if it be yet

assumed that C is universally non-attributable to A, but a universal attribute

of B, the premiss C-A is true but the minor wholly false. Again, in fact it is

false to assume that that which is an attribute of all B is an attribute of no A,

for if it be an attribute of all B, it must be an attribute of some A. If then C is

nevertheless assumed to be an attribute of all B but of no A, C-B will be true

but C-A false.

It is thus clear that in the case of atomic propositions erroneous inference

will be possible not only when both premisses are false but also when only

one is false.


17


In the case of attributes not atomically connected with or disconnected

from their subjects, (a) (i) as long as the false conclusion is inferred through

the ‘appropriate’ middle, only the major and not both premisses can be false.

By  ‘appropriate  middle’  I  mean  the  middle  term  through  which  the

contradictory-i.e. the true-conclusion is inferrible. Thus, let A be attributable

to B through a middle term C: then, since to produce a conclusion the premiss

C-B must be taken affirmatively, it is clear that this premiss must always be

true, for its quality is not changed. But the major A-C is false, for it is by a

change in the quality of A-C that the conclusion becomes its contradictory-

i.e.  true.  Similarly  (ii)  if  the  middle  is  taken  from  another  series  of

predication; e.g. suppose D to be not only contained within A as a part within

its whole but also predicable of all B. Then the premiss D-B must remain

unchanged, but the quality of A-D must be changed; so that D-B is always

true, A-D always false. Such error is practically identical with that which is

inferred  through  the  ‘appropriate’  middle.  On  the  other  hand,  (b)  if  the

conclusion  is  not  inferred  through  the  ‘appropriate’  middle-(i)  when  the

middle is subordinate to A but is predicable of no B, both premisses must be

false, because if there is to be a conclusion both must be posited as assertingthe contrary of what is actually the fact, and so posited both become false:

e.g. suppose that actually all D is A but no B is D; then if these premisses are

changed in quality, a conclusion will follow and both of the new premisses

will be false. When, however, (ii) the middle D is not subordinate to A, A-D

will be true, D-B false-A-D true because A was not subordinate to D, D-B

false because if it had been true, the conclusion too would have been true; but

it is ex hypothesi false.

  When  the  erroneous  inference  is  in  the  second  figure,  both  premisses

cannot be entirely false; since if B is subordinate to A, there can be no middle

predicable  of  all  of  one  extreme  and  of  none  of  the  other,  as  was  stated

before. One premiss, however, may be false, and it may be either of them.

Thus, if C is actually an attribute of both A and B, but is assumed to be an

attribute of A only and not of B, C-A will be true, C-B false: or again if C be

assumed to be attributable to B but to no A, C-B will be true, C-A false.

We have stated when and through what kinds of premisses error will result

in  cases  where  the  erroneous  conclusion  is  negative.  If  the  conclusion  is

affirmative, (a) (i) it may be inferred through the ‘appropriate’ middle term.

In this case both premisses cannot be false since, as we said before, C-B must

remain unchanged if there is to be a conclusion, and consequently A-C, the

quality of which is changed, will always be false. This is equally true if (ii)

the middle is taken from another series of predication, as was stated to be the

case also with regard to negative error; for D-B must remain unchanged,

while the quality of A-D must be converted, and the type of error is the same

as before.

(b) The middle may be inappropriate. Then (i) if D is subordinate to A, A-

D will be true, but D-B false; since A may quite well be predicable of several

terms no one of which can be subordinated to another. If, however, (ii) D is

not subordinate to A, obviously A-D, since it is affirmed, will always be

false, while D-B may be either true or false; for A may very well be an

attribute of no D, whereas all B is D, e.g. no science is animal, all music is

science. Equally well A may be an attribute of no D, and D of no B. It

emerges, then, that if the middle term is not subordinate to the major, not

only both premisses but either singly may be false.

  Thus we have made it clear how many varieties of erroneous inference are

liable to happen and through what kinds of premisses they occur, in the case

both of immediate and of demonstrable truths.18


It is also clear that the loss of any one of the senses entails the loss of a

corresponding  portion  of  knowledge,  and  that,  since  we  learn  either  by

induction  or  by  demonstration,  this  knowledge  cannot  be  acquired.  Thus

demonstration develops from universals, induction from particulars; but since

it is possible to familiarize the pupil with even the so-called mathematical

abstractions  only  through  induction-i.e.  only  because  each  subject  genus

possesses,  in  virtue  of  a  determinate  mathematical  character,  certain

properties which can be treated as separate even though they do not exist in

isolation-it is consequently impossible to come to grasp universals except

through induction. But induction is impossible for those who have not sense-

perception. For it is sense-perception alone which is adequate for grasping

the  particulars:  they  cannot  be  objects  of  scientific  knowledge,  because

neither can universals give us knowledge of them without induction, nor can

we get it through induction without sense-perception.


19


  Every syllogism is effected by means of three terms. One kind of syllogism

serves to prove that A inheres in C by showing that A inheres in B and B in

C; the other is negative and one of its premisses asserts one term of another,

while the other denies one term of another. It is clear, then, that these are the

fundamentals and so-called hypotheses of syllogism. Assume them as they

have been stated, and proof is bound to follow-proof that A inheres in C

through B, and again that A inheres in B through some other middle term,

and similarly that B inheres in C. If our reasoning aims at gaining credence

and so is merely dialectical, it is obvious that we have only to see that our

inference is based on premisses as credible as possible: so that if a middle

term between A and B is credible though not real, one can reason through it

and complete a dialectical syllogism. If, however, one is aiming at truth, one

must be guided by the real connexions of subjects and attributes. Thus: since

there are attributes which are predicated of a subject essentially or naturally

and not coincidentally-not, that is, in the sense in which we say ‘That white

(thing) is a man’, which is not the same mode of predication as when we say

‘The man is white’: the man is white not because he is something else but

because he is man, but the white is man because ‘being white’ coincides with‘humanity’  within  one  substratum-therefore  there  are  terms  such  as  are

naturally  subjects  of  predicates.  Suppose,  then,  C  such  a  term  not  itself

attributable to anything else as to a subject, but the proximate subject of the

attribute  B—i.e.  so  that  B-C  is  immediate;  suppose  further  E  related

immediately to F, and F to B. The first question is, must this series terminate,

or can it proceed to infinity? The second question is as follows: Suppose

nothing is essentially predicated of A, but A is predicated primarily of H and

of no intermediate prior term, and suppose H similarly related to G and G to

B; then must this series also terminate, or can it too proceed to infinity? There

is this much difference between the questions: the first is, is it possible to

start  from  that  which  is  not  itself  attributable  to  anything  else  but  is  the

subject  of  attributes,  and  ascend  to  infinity?  The  second  is  the  problem

whether one can start from that which is a predicate but not itself a subject of

predicates, and descend to infinity? A third question is, if the extreme terms

are  fixed,  can  there  be  an  infinity  of  middles?  I  mean  this:  suppose  for

example that A inheres in C and B is intermediate between them, but between

B and A there are other middles, and between these again fresh middles; can

these proceed to infinity or can they not? This is the equivalent of inquiring,

do demonstrations proceed to infinity, i.e. is everything demonstrable? Or do

ultimate subject and primary attribute limit one another?

I hold that the same questions arise with regard to negative conclusions

and premisses: viz. if A is attributable to no B, then either this predication

will be primary, or there will be an intermediate term prior to B to which a is

not attributable-G, let us say, which is attributable to all B-and there may still

be  another  term  H  prior  to  G,  which  is  attributable  to  all  G.  The  same

questions arise, I say, because in these cases too either the series of prior

terms to which a is not attributable is infinite or it terminates.

One cannot ask the same questions in the case of reciprocating terms, since

when  subject  and  predicate  are  convertible  there  is  neither  primary  nor

ultimate subject, seeing that all the reciprocals qua subjects stand in the same

relation to one another, whether we say that the subject has an infinity of

attributes or that both subjects and attributes-and we raised the question in

both  cases-are  infinite  in  number.  These  questions  then  cannot  be  asked-

unless,  indeed,  the  terms  can  reciprocate  by  two  different  modes,  by

accidental predication in one relation and natural predication in the other.


20Now, it is clear that if the predications terminate in both the upward and

the downward direction (by ‘upward’ I mean the ascent to the more universal,

by ‘downward’ the descent to the more particular), the middle terms cannot

be infinite in number. For suppose that A is predicated of F, and that the

intermediates-call  them  BB’B”…  -are  infinite,  then  clearly  you  might

descend from and find one term predicated of another ad infinitum, since you

have an infinity of terms between you and F; and equally, if you ascend from

F,  there  are  infinite  terms  between  you  and  A.  It  follows  that  if  these

processes are impossible there cannot be an infinity of intermediates between

A and F. Nor is it of any effect to urge that some terms of the series AB… F

are contiguous so as to exclude intermediates, while others cannot be taken

into the argument at all: whichever terms of the series B… I take, the number

of intermediates in the direction either of A or of F must be finite or infinite:

where the infinite series starts, whether from the first term or from a later one,

is of no moment, for the succeeding terms in any case are infinite in number.


21


  Further,  if  in  affirmative  demonstration  the  series  terminates  in  both

directions,  clearly  it  will  terminate  too  in  negative  demonstration.  Let  us

assume  that  we  cannot  proceed  to  infinity  either  by  ascending  from  the

ultimate  term  (by  ‘ultimate  term’  I  mean  a  term  such  as  was,  not  itself

attributable to a subject but itself the subject of attributes), or by descending

towards an ultimate from the primary term (by ‘primary term’ I mean a term

predicable of a subject but not itself a subject). If this assumption is justified,

the  series  will  also  terminate  in  the  case  of  negation.  For  a  negative

conclusion can be proved in all three figures. In the first figure it is proved

thus:  no  B  is  A,  all  C  is  B.  In  packing  the  interval  B-C  we  must  reach

immediate propositions—as is always the case with the minor premiss—since

B-C is affirmative. As regards the other premiss it is plain that if the major

term is denied of a term D prior to B, D will have to be predicable of all B,

and if the major is denied of yet another term prior to D, this term must be

predicable of all D. Consequently, since the ascending series is finite, the

descent will also terminate and there will be a subject of which A is primarily

non-predicable. In the second figure the syllogism is, all A is B, no C is

B,..no C is A. If proof of this is required, plainly it may be shown either in

the first figure as above, in the second as here, or in the third. The first figurehas  been  discussed,  and  we  will  proceed  to  display  the  second,  proof  by

which will be as follows: all B is D, no C is D… , since it is required that B

should be a subject of which a predicate is affirmed. Next, since D is to be

proved not to belong to C, then D has a further predicate which is denied of

C. Therefore, since the succession of predicates affirmed of an ever higher

universal terminates, the succession of predicates denied terminates too.

The third figure shows it as follows: all B is A, some B is not C. Therefore

some A is not C. This premiss, i.e. C-B, will be proved either in the same

figure or in one of the two figures discussed above. In the first and second

figures  the  series  terminates.  If  we  use  the  third  figure,  we  shall  take  as

premisses, all E is B, some E is not C, and this premiss again will be proved

by  a  similar  prosyllogism.  But  since  it  is  assumed  that  the  series  of

descending subjects also terminates, plainly the series of more universal non-

predicables will terminate also. Even supposing that the proof is not confined

to one method, but employs them all and is now in the first figure, now in the

second or third-even so the regress will terminate, for the methods are finite

in number, and if finite things are combined in a finite number of ways, the

result must be finite.

  Thus  it  is  plain  that  the  regress  of  middles  terminates  in  the  case  of

negative  demonstration,  if  it  does  so  also  in  the  case  of  affirmative

demonstration. That in fact the regress terminates in both these cases may be

made clear by the following dialectical considerations.


22


In  the  case  of  predicates  constituting  the  essential  nature  of  a  thing,  it

clearly terminates, seeing that if definition is possible, or in other words, if

essential  form  is  knowable,  and  an  infinite  series  cannot  be  traversed,

predicates constituting a thing’s essential nature must be finite in number.

But as regards predicates generally we have the following prefatory remarks

to make. (1) We can affirm without falsehood ‘the white (thing) is walking’,

and that big (thing) is a log’; or again, ‘the log is big’, and ‘the man walks’.

But the affirmation differs in the two cases. When I affirm ‘the white is a

log’, I mean that something which happens to be white is a log-not that white

is the substratum in which log inheres, for it was not qua white or qua a

species of white that the white (thing) came to be a log, and the white (thing)

is  consequently  not  a  log  except  incidentally.  On  the  other  hand,  when  Iaffirm ‘the log is white’, I do not mean that something else, which happens

also to be a log, is white (as I should if I said ‘the musician is white,’ which

would mean ‘the man who happens also to be a musician is white’); on the

contrary, log is here the substratum-the substratum which actually came to be

white, and did so qua wood or qua a species of wood and qua nothing else.

If  we  must  lay  down  a  rule,  let  us  entitle  the  latter  kind  of  statement

predication, and the former not predication at all, or not strict but accidental

predication.  ‘White’  and  ‘log’  will  thus  serve  as  types  respectively  of

predicate and subject.

We shall assume, then, that the predicate is invariably predicated strictly

and not accidentally of the subject, for on such predication demonstrations

depend for their force. It follows from this that when a single attribute is

predicated of a single subject, the predicate must affirm of the subject either

some  element  constituting  its  essential  nature,  or  that  it  is  in  some  way

qualified, quantified, essentially related, active, passive, placed, or dated.

(2) Predicates which signify substance signify that the subject is identical

with the predicate or with a species of the predicate. Predicates not signifying

substance which are predicated of a subject not identical with themselves or

with a species of themselves are accidental or coincidental; e.g. white is a

coincident of man, seeing that man is not identical with white or a species of

white, but rather with animal, since man is identical with a species of animal.

These predicates which do not signify substance must be predicates of some

other subject, and nothing can be white which is not also other than white.

The Forms we can dispense with, for they are mere sound without sense; and

even if there are such things, they are not relevant to our discussion, since

demonstrations are concerned with predicates such as we have defined.

(3) If A is a quality of B, B cannot be a quality of A-a quality of a quality.

Therefore A and B cannot be predicated reciprocally of one another in strict

predication: they can be affirmed without falsehood of one another, but not

genuinely predicated of each other. For one alternative is that they should be

substantially predicated of one another, i.e. B would become the genus or

differentia of A-the predicate now become subject. But it has been shown that

in  these  substantial  predications  neither  the  ascending  predicates  nor  the

descending subjects form an infinite series; e.g. neither the series, man is

biped, biped is animal, &c., nor the series predicating animal of man, man of

Callias, Callias of a further. subject as an element of its essential nature, is

infinite. For all such substance is definable, and an infinite series cannot betraversed  in  thought:  consequently  neither  the  ascent  nor  the  descent  is

infinite,  since  a  substance  whose  predicates  were  infinite  would  not  be

definable. Hence they will not be predicated each as the genus of the other;

for this would equate a genus with one of its own species. Nor (the other

alternative) can a quale be reciprocally predicated of a quale, nor any term

belonging to an adjectival category of another such term, except by accidental

predication;  for  all  such  predicates  are  coincidents  and  are  predicated  of

substances.  On  the  other  hand-in  proof  of  the  impossibility  of  an  infinite

ascending series-every predication displays the subject as somehow qualified

or quantified or as characterized under one of the other adjectival categories,

or  else  is  an  element  in  its  substantial  nature:  these  latter  are  limited  in

number, and the number of the widest kinds under which predications fall is

also  limited,  for  every  predication  must  exhibit  its  subject  as  somehow

qualified, quantified, essentially related, acting or suffering, or in some place

or at some time.

I  assume  first  that  predication  implies  a  single  subject  and  a  single

attribute,  and  secondly  that  predicates  which  are  not  substantial  are  not

predicated of one another. We assume this because such predicates are all

coincidents, and though some are essential coincidents, others of a different

type, yet we maintain that all of them alike are predicated of some substratum

and  that  a  coincident  is  never  a  substratum-since  we  do  not  class  as  a

coincident  anything  which  does  not  owe  its  designation  to  its  being

something other than itself, but always hold that any coincident is predicated

of some substratum other than itself, and that another group of coincidents

may have a different substratum. Subject to these assumptions then, neither

the  ascending  nor  the  descending  series  of  predication  in  which  a  single

attribute is predicated of a single subject is infinite. For the subjects of which

coincidents are predicated are as many as the constitutive elements of each

individual  substance,  and  these  we  have  seen  are  not  infinite  in  number,

while in the ascending series are contained those constitutive elements with

their coincidents-both of which are finite. We conclude that there is a given

subject (D) of which some attribute (C) is primarily predicable; that there

must be an attribute (B) primarily predicable of the first attribute, and that the

series must end with a term (A) not predicable of any term prior to the last

subject of which it was predicated (B), and of which no term prior to it is

predicable.

The argument we have given is one of the so-called proofs; an alternativeproof  follows.  Predicates  so  related  to  their  subjects  that  there  are  other

predicates prior to them predicable of those subjects are demonstrable; but of

demonstrable propositions one cannot have something better than knowledge,

nor can one know them without demonstration. Secondly, if a consequent is

only known through an antecedent (viz. premisses prior to it) and we neither

know this antecedent nor have something better than knowledge of it, then

we shall not have scientific knowledge of the consequent. Therefore, if it is

possible through demonstration to know anything without qualification and

not  merely  as  dependent  on  the  acceptance  of  certain  premisses-i.e.

hypothetically-the  series  of  intermediate  predications  must  terminate.  If  it

does not terminate, and beyond any predicate taken as higher than another

there  remains  another  still  higher,  then  every  predicate  is  demonstrable.

Consequently, since these demonstrable predicates are infinite in number and

therefore cannot be traversed, we shall not know them by demonstration. If,

therefore, we have not something better than knowledge of them, we cannot

through  demonstration  have  unqualified  but  only  hypothetical  science  of

anything.

As dialectical proofs of our contention these may carry conviction, but an

analytic process will show more briefly that neither the ascent nor the descent

of predication can be infinite in the demonstrative sciences which are the

object of our investigation. Demonstration proves the inherence of essential

attributes in things. Now attributes may be essential for two reasons: either

because they are elements in the essential nature of their subjects, or because

their subjects are elements in their essential nature. An example of the latter

is odd as an attribute of number-though it is number’s attribute, yet number

itself is an element in the definition of odd; of the former, multiplicity or the

indivisible, which are elements in the definition of number. In neither kind of

attribution  can  the  terms  be  infinite.  They  are  not  infinite  where  each  is

related to the term below it as odd is to number, for this would mean the

inherence in odd of another attribute of odd in whose nature odd was an

essential element: but then number will be an ultimate subject of the whole

infinite chain of attributes, and be an element in the definition of each of

them. Hence, since an infinity of attributes such as contain their subject in

their definition cannot inhere in a single thing, the ascending series is equally

finite. Note, moreover, that all such attributes must so inhere in the ultimate

subject-e.g.  its  attributes  in  number  and  number  in  them-as  to  be

commensurate with the subject and not of wider extent. Attributes which areessential elements in the nature of their subjects are equally finite: otherwise

definition  would  be  impossible.  Hence,  if  all  the  attributes  predicated  are

essential and these cannot be infinite, the ascending series will terminate, and

consequently the descending series too.

If this is so, it follows that the intermediates between any two terms are

also always limited in number. An immediately obvious consequence of this

is that demonstrations necessarily involve basic truths, and that the contention

of some-referred to at the outset-that all truths are demonstrable is mistaken.

For if there are basic truths, (a) not all truths are demonstrable, and (b) an

infinite regress is impossible; since if either (a) or (b) were not a fact, it

would  mean  that  no  interval  was  immediate  and  indivisible,  but  that  all

intervals were divisible. This is true because a conclusion is demonstrated by

the interposition, not the apposition, of a fresh term. If such interposition

could continue to infinity there might be an infinite number of terms between

any two terms; but this is impossible if both the ascending and descending

series of predication terminate; and of this fact, which before was shown

dialectically, analytic proof has now been given.


23


It is an evident corollary of these conclusions that if the same attribute A

inheres  in  two  terms  C  and  D  predicable  either  not  at  all,  or  not  of  all

instances, of one another, it does not always belong to them in virtue of a

common middle term. Isosceles and scalene possess the attribute of having

their angles equal to two right angles in virtue of a common middle; for they

possess it in so far as they are both a certain kind of figure, and not in so far

as they differ from one another. But this is not always the case: for, were it

so, if we take B as the common middle in virtue of which A inheres in C and

D, clearly B would inhere in C and D through a second common middle, and

this in turn would inhere in C and D through a third, so that between two

terms an infinity of intermediates would fall-an impossibility. Thus it need

not  always  be  in  virtue  of  a  common  middle  term  that  a  single  attribute

inheres in several subjects, since there must be immediate intervals. Yet if the

attribute to be proved common to two subjects is to be one of their essential

attributes, the middle terms involved must be within one subject genus and be

derived from the same group of immediate premisses; for we have seen that

processes of proof cannot pass from one genus to another.It is also clear that when A inheres in B, this can be demonstrated if there

is  a  middle  term.  Further,  the  ‘elements’  of  such  a  conclusion  are  the

premisses containing the middle in question, and they are identical in number

with the middle terms, seeing that the immediate propositions-or at least such

immediate propositions as are universal-are the ‘elements’. If, on the other

hand, there is no middle term, demonstration ceases to be possible: we are on

the way to the basic truths. Similarly if A does not inhere in B, this can be

demonstrated if there is a middle term or a term prior to B in which A does

not inhere: otherwise there is no demonstration and a basic truth is reached.

There are, moreover, as many ‘elements’ of the demonstrated conclusion as

there are middle terms, since it is propositions containing these middle terms

that are the basic premisses on which the demonstration rests; and as there are

some  indemonstrable  basic  truths  asserting  that  ‘this  is  that’  or  that  ‘this

inheres in that’, so there are others denying that ‘this is that’ or that ‘this

inheres  in  that’-in  fact  some  basic  truths  will  affirm  and  some  will  deny

being.

  When  we  are  to  prove  a  conclusion,  we  must  take  a  primary  essential

predicate-suppose  it  C-of  the  subject  B,  and  then  suppose  A  similarly

predicable of C. If we proceed in this manner, no proposition or attribute

which  falls  beyond  A  is  admitted  in  the  proof:  the  interval  is  constantly

condensed until subject and predicate become indivisible, i.e. one. We have

our unit when the premiss becomes immediate, since the immediate premiss

alone is a single premiss in the unqualified sense of ‘single’. And as in other

spheres the basic element is simple but not identical in all-in a system of

weight it is the mina, in music the quarter-tone, and so on—so in syllogism

the unit is an immediate premiss, and in the knowledge that demonstration

gives it is an intuition. In syllogisms, then, which prove the inherence of an

attribute,  nothing  falls  outside  the  major  term.  In  the  case  of  negative

syllogisms on the other hand, (1) in the first figure nothing falls outside the

major term whose inherence is in question; e.g. to prove through a middle C

that A does not inhere in B the premisses required are, all B is C, no C is A.

Then if it has to be proved that no C is A, a middle must be found between

and C; and this procedure will never vary.

(2) If we have to show that E is not D by means of the premisses, all D is

C; no E, or not all E, is C; then the middle will never fall beyond E, and E is

the subject of which D is to be denied in the conclusion.

(3) In the third figure the middle will never fall beyond the limits of thesubject and the attribute denied of it.


24


  Since  demonstrations  may  be  either  commensurately  universal  or

particular, and either affirmative or negative; the question arises, which form

is the better? And the same question may be put in regard to so-called ‘direct’

demonstration  and  reductio  ad  impossibile.  Let  us  first  examine  the

commensurately  universal  and  the  particular  forms,  and  when  we  have

cleared  up  this  problem  proceed  to  discuss  ‘direct’  demonstration  and

reductio ad impossibile.

The following considerations might lead some minds to prefer particular

demonstration.

(1) The superior demonstration is the demonstration which gives us greater

knowledge  (for  this  is  the  ideal  of  demonstration),  and  we  have  greater

knowledge of a particular individual when we know it in itself than when we

know it through something else; e.g. we know Coriscus the musician better

when we know that Coriscus is musical than when we know only that man is

musical, and a like argument holds in all other cases. But commensurately

universal demonstration, instead of proving that the subject itself actually is

x,  proves  only  that  something  else  is  x—e.g.  in  attempting  to  prove  that

isosceles is x, it proves not that isosceles but only that triangle is x—whereas

particular  demonstration  proves  that  the  subject  itself  is  x.  The

demonstration, then, that a subject, as such, possesses an attribute is superior.

If this is so, and if the particular rather than the commensurately universal

forms demonstrates, particular demonstration is superior.

(2) The universal has not a separate being over against groups of singulars.

Demonstration  nevertheless  creates  the  opinion  that  its  function  is

conditioned by something like this-some separate entity belonging to the real

world;  that,  for  instance,  of  triangle  or  of  figure  or  number,  over  against

particular triangles, figures, and numbers. But demonstration which touches

the  real  and  will  not  mislead  is  superior  to  that  which  moves  among

unrealities and is delusory. Now commensurately universal demonstration is

of  the  latter  kind:  if  we  engage  in  it  we  find  ourselves  reasoning  after  a

fashion  well  illustrated  by  the  argument  that  the  proportionate  is  what

answers to the definition of some entity which is neither line, number, solid,

nor plane, but a proportionate apart from all these. Since, then, such a proof ischaracteristically commensurate and universal, and less touches reality than

does particular demonstration, and creates a false opinion, it will follow that

commensurate and universal is inferior to particular demonstration.

We  may  retort  thus.  (1)  The  first  argument  applies  no  more  to

commensurate and universal than to particular demonstration. If equality to

two  right  angles  is  attributable  to  its  subject  not  qua  isosceles  but  qua

triangle,  he  who  knows  that  isosceles  possesses  that  attribute  knows  the

subject as qua itself possessing the attribute, to a less degree than he who

knows  that  triangle  has  that  attribute.  To  sum  up  the  whole  matter:  if  a

subject is proved to possess qua triangle an attribute which it does not in fact

possess qua triangle, that is not demonstration: but if it does possess it qua

triangle the rule applies that the greater knowledge is his who knows the

subject as possessing its attribute qua that in virtue of which it actually does

possess it. Since, then, triangle is the wider term, and there is one identical

definition of triangle-i.e. the term is not equivocal-and since equality to two

right  angles  belongs  to  all  triangles,  it  is  isosceles  qua  triangle  and  not

triangle qua isosceles which has its angles so related. It follows that he who

knows a connexion universally has greater knowledge of it as it in fact is than

he who knows the particular; and the inference is that commensurate and

universal is superior to particular demonstration.

(2) If there is a single identical definition i.e. if the commensurate universal

is unequivocal-then the universal will possess being not less but more than

some  of  the  particulars,  inasmuch  as  it  is  universals  which  comprise  the

imperishable, particulars that tend to perish.

(3)  Because  the  universal  has  a  single  meaning,  we  are  not  therefore

compelled to suppose that in these examples it has being as a substance apart

from its particulars-any more than we need make a similar supposition in the

other  cases  of  unequivocal  universal  predication,  viz.  where  the  predicate

signifies not substance but quality, essential relatedness, or action. If such a

supposition is entertained, the blame rests not with the demonstration but

with the hearer.

(4) Demonstration is syllogism that proves the cause, i.e. the reasoned fact,

and  it  is  rather  the  commensurate  universal  than  the  particular  which  is

causative (as may be shown thus: that which possesses an attribute through

its  own  essential  nature  is  itself  the  cause  of  the  inherence,  and  the

commensurate universal is primary; hence the commensurate universal is the

cause). Consequently commensurately universal demonstration is superior asmore especially proving the cause, that is the reasoned fact.

(5) Our search for the reason ceases, and we think that we know, when the

coming to be or existence of the fact before us is not due to the coming to be

or existence of some other fact, for the last step of a search thus conducted is

eo ipso the end and limit of the problem. Thus: ‘Why did he come?’ ‘To get

the money-wherewith to pay a debt-that he might thereby do what was right.’

When in this regress we can no longer find an efficient or final cause, we

regard the last step of it as the end of the coming-or being or coming to be-

and we regard ourselves as then only having full knowledge of the reason

why he came.

If, then, all causes and reasons are alike in this respect, and if this is the

means  to  full  knowledge  in  the  case  of  final  causes  such  as  we  have

exemplified, it follows that in the case of the other causes also full knowledge

is attained when an attribute no longer inheres because of something else.

Thus,  when  we  learn  that  exterior  angles  are  equal  to  four  right  angles

because they are the exterior angles of an isosceles, there still remains the

question ‘Why has isosceles this attribute?’ and its answer ‘Because it is a

triangle, and a triangle has it because a triangle is a rectilinear figure.’ If

rectilinear figure possesses the property for no further reason, at this point we

have  full  knowledge-but  at  this  point  our  knowledge  has  become

commensurately  universal,  and  so  we  conclude  that  commensurately

universal demonstration is superior.

(6) The more demonstration becomes particular the more it sinks into an

indeterminate manifold, while universal demonstration tends to the simple

and determinate. But objects so far as they are an indeterminate manifold are

unintelligible, so far as they are determinate, intelligible: they are therefore

intelligible rather in so far as they are universal than in so far as they are

particular. From this it follows that universals are more demonstrable: but

since  relative  and  correlative  increase  concomitantly,  of  the  more

demonstrable there will be fuller demonstration. Hence the commensurate

and universal form, being more truly demonstration, is the superior.

(7) Demonstration which teaches two things is preferable to demonstration

which  teaches  only  one.  He  who  possesses  commensurately  universal

demonstration knows the particular as well, but he who possesses particular

demonstration  does  not  know  the  universal.  So  that  this  is  an  additional

reason for preferring commensurately universal demonstration. And there is

yet this further argument:(8) Proof becomes more and more proof of the commensurate universal as

its middle term approaches nearer to the basic truth, and nothing is so near as

the immediate premiss which is itself the basic truth. If, then, proof from the

basic truth is more accurate than proof not so derived, demonstration which

depends more closely on it is more accurate than demonstration which is less

closely  dependent.  But  commensurately  universal  demonstration  is

characterized by this closer dependence, and is therefore superior. Thus, if A

had to be proved to inhere in D, and the middles were B and C, B being the

higher  term  would  render  the  demonstration  which  it  mediated  the  more

universal.

  Some of these arguments, however, are dialectical. The clearest indication

of the precedence of commensurately universal demonstration is as follows:

if of two propositions, a prior and a posterior, we have a grasp of the prior,

we have a kind of knowledge-a potential grasp-of the posterior as well. For

example, if one knows that the angles of all triangles are equal to two right

angles, one knows in a sense-potentially-that the isosceles’ angles also are

equal to two right angles, even if one does not know that the isosceles is a

triangle; but to grasp this posterior proposition is by no means to know the

commensurate  universal  either  potentially  or  actually.  Moreover,

commensurately universal demonstration is through and through intelligible;

particular demonstration issues in sense-perception.


25


The  preceding  arguments  constitute  our  defence  of  the  superiority  of

commensurately  universal  to  particular  demonstration.  That  affirmative

demonstration excels negative may be shown as follows.

(1) We may assume the superiority ceteris paribus of the demonstration

which  derives  from  fewer  postulates  or  hypotheses-in  short  from  fewer

premisses; for, given that all these are equally well known, where they are

fewer knowledge will be more speedily acquired, and that is a desideratum.

The  argument  implied  in  our  contention  that  demonstration  from  fewer

assumptions  is  superior  may  be  set  out  in  universal  form  as  follows.

Assuming  that  in  both  cases  alike  the  middle  terms  are  known,  and  that

middles which are prior are better known than such as are posterior, we may

suppose two demonstrations of the inherence of A in E, the one proving it

through the middles B, C and D, the other through F and G. Then A-D isknown to the same degree as A-E (in the second proof), but A-D is better

known than and prior to A-E (in the first proof); since A-E is proved through

A-D, and the ground is more certain than the conclusion.

  Hence demonstration by fewer premisses is ceteris paribus superior. Now

both affirmative and negative demonstration operate through three terms and

two premisses, but whereas the former assumes only that something is, the

latter assumes both that something is and that something else is not, and thus

operating through more kinds of premiss is inferior.

(2) It has been proved that no conclusion follows if both premisses are

negative, but that one must be negative, the other affirmative. So we are

compelled to lay down the following additional rule: as the demonstration

expands, the affirmative premisses must increase in number, but there cannot

be more than one negative premiss in each complete proof. Thus, suppose no

B is A, and all C is B. Then if both the premisses are to be again expanded, a

middle  must  be  interposed.  Let  us  interpose  D  between  A  and  B,  and  E

between B and C. Then clearly E is affirmatively related to B and C, while D

is affirmatively related to B but negatively to A; for all B is D, but there must

be no D which is A. Thus there proves to be a single negative premiss, A-D.

In the further prosyllogisms too it is the same, because in the terms of an

affirmative  syllogism  the  middle  is  always  related  affirmatively  to  both

extremes; in a negative syllogism it must be negatively related only to one of

them, and so this negation comes to be a single negative premiss, the other

premisses being affirmative. If, then, that through which a truth is proved is a

better known and more certain truth, and if the negative proposition is proved

through the affirmative and not vice versa, affirmative demonstration, being

prior and better known and more certain, will be superior.

(3) The basic truth of demonstrative syllogism is the universal immediate

premiss, and the universal premiss asserts in affirmative demonstration and in

negative denies: and the affirmative proposition is prior to and better known

than the negative (since affirmation explains denial and is prior to denial, just

as being is prior to not-being). It follows that the basic premiss of affirmative

demonstration  is  superior  to  that  of  negative  demonstration,  and  the

demonstration which uses superior basic premisses is superior.

(4) Affirmative demonstration is more of the nature of a basic form of

proof, because it is a sine qua non of negative demonstration.


26  Since  affirmative  demonstration  is  superior  to  negative,  it  is  clearly

superior also to reductio ad impossibile. We must first make certain what is

the difference between negative demonstration and reductio ad impossibile.

Let us suppose that no B is A, and that all C is B: the conclusion necessarily

follows that no C is A. If these premisses are assumed, therefore, the negative

demonstration that no C is A is direct. Reductio ad impossibile, on the other

hand, proceeds as follows. Supposing we are to prove that does not inhere in

B, we have to assume that it does inhere, and further that B inheres in C, with

the resulting inference that A inheres in C. This we have to suppose a known

and admitted impossibility; and we then infer that A cannot inhere in B. Thus

if the inherence of B in C is not questioned, A’s inherence in B is impossible.

The order of the terms is the same in both proofs: they differ according to

which of the negative propositions is the better known, the one denying A of

B or the one denying A of C. When the falsity of the conclusion is the better

known,  we  use  reductio  ad  impossible;  when  the  major  premiss  of  the

syllogism is the more obvious, we use direct demonstration. All the same the

proposition denying A of B is, in the order of being, prior to that denying A

of C; for premisses are prior to the conclusion which follows from them, and

‘no  C  is  A’  is  the  conclusion,  ‘no  B  is  A’  one  of  its  premisses.  For  the

destructive result of reductio ad impossibile is not a proper conclusion, nor

are  its  antecedents  proper  premisses.  On  the  contrary:  the  constituents  of

syllogism are premisses related to one another as whole to part or part to

whole,  whereas  the  premisses  A-C  and  A-B  are  not  thus  related  to  one

another. Now the superior demonstration is that which proceeds from better

known and prior premisses, and while both these forms depend for credence

on the not-being of something, yet the source of the one is prior to that of the

other. Therefore negative demonstration will have an unqualified superiority

to reductio ad impossibile, and affirmative demonstration, being superior to

negative, will consequently be superior also to reductio ad impossibile.


27


The science which is knowledge at once of the fact and of the reasoned

fact, not of the fact by itself without the reasoned fact, is the more exact and

the prior science.

A  science  such  as  arithmetic,  which  is  not  a  science  of  properties  qua

inhering  in  a  substratum,  is  more  exact  than  and  prior  to  a  science  likeharmonics, which is a science of pr,operties inhering in a substratum; and

similarly  a  science  like  arithmetic,  which  is  constituted  of  fewer  basic

elements, is more exact than and prior to geometry, which requires additional

elements. What I mean by ‘additional elements’ is this: a unit is substance

without position, while a point is substance with position; the latter contains

an additional element.


28


A  single  science  is  one  whose  domain  is  a  single  genus,  viz.  all  the

subjects constituted out of the primary entities of the genus-i.e. the parts of

this total subject-and their essential properties.

One science differs from another when their basic truths have neither a

common source nor are derived those of the one science from those the other.

This is verified when we reach the indemonstrable premisses of a science, for

they must be within one genus with its conclusions: and this again is verified

if the conclusions proved by means of them fall within one genus-i.e. are

homogeneous.


29


One can have several demonstrations of the same connexion not only by

taking from the same series of predication middles which are other than the

immediately cohering term e.g. by taking C, D, and F severally to prove A-B

—but also by taking a middle from another series. Thus let A be change, D

alteration of a property, B feeling pleasure, and G relaxation. We can then

without falsehood predicate D of B and A of D, for he who is pleased suffers

alteration of a property, and that which alters a property changes. Again, we

can predicate A of G without falsehood, and G of B; for to feel pleasure is to

relax, and to relax is to change. So the conclusion can be drawn through

middles which are different, i.e. not in the same series-yet not so that neither

of these middles is predicable of the other, for they must both be attributable

to some one subject.

A further point worth investigating is how many ways of proving the same

conclusion can be obtained by varying the figure,30


  There  is  no  knowledge  by  demonstration  of  chance  conjunctions;  for

chance conjunctions exist neither by necessity nor as general connexions but

comprise  what  comes  to  be  as  something  distinct  from  these.  Now

demonstration  is  concerned  only  with  one  or  other  of  these  two;  for  all

reasoning  proceeds  from  necessary  or  general  premisses,  the  conclusion

being necessary if the premisses are necessary and general if the premisses

are  general.  Consequently,  if  chance  conjunctions  are  neither  general  nor

necessary, they are not demonstrable.


31


  Scientific knowledge is not possible through the act of perception. Even if

perception as a faculty is of ‘the such’ and not merely of a ‘this somewhat’,

yet one must at any rate actually perceive a ‘this somewhat’, and at a definite

present place and time: but that which is commensurately universal and true

in all cases one cannot perceive, since it is not ‘this’ and it is not ‘now’; if it

were, it would not be commensurately universal-the term we apply to what is

always  and  everywhere.  Seeing,  therefore,  that  demonstrations  are

commensurately universal and universals imperceptible, we clearly cannot

obtain scientific knowledge by the act of perception: nay, it is obvious that

even if it were possible to perceive that a triangle has its angles equal to two

right angles, we should still be looking for a demonstration-we should not (as

some say) possess knowledge of it; for perception must be of a particular,

whereas scientific knowledge involves the recognition of the commensurate

universal. So if we were on the moon, and saw the earth shutting out the

sun’s light, we should not know the cause of the eclipse: we should perceive

the present fact of the eclipse, but not the reasoned fact at all, since the act of

perception is not of the commensurate universal. I do not, of course, deny

that  by  watching  the  frequent  recurrence  of  this  event  we  might,  after

tracking  the  commensurate  universal,  possess  a  demonstration,  for  the

commensurate universal is elicited from the several groups of singulars.

The commensurate universal is precious because it makes clear the cause;

so  that  in  the  case  of  facts  like  these  which  have  a  cause  other  than

themselves universal knowledge is more precious than sense-perceptions and

than  intuition.  (As  regards  primary  truths  there  is  of  course  a  differentaccount to be given.) Hence it is clear that knowledge of things demonstrable

cannot be acquired by perception, unless the term perception is applied to the

possession  of  scientific  knowledge  through  demonstration.  Nevertheless

certain points do arise with regard to connexions to be proved which are

referred for their explanation to a failure in sense-perception: there are cases

when an act of vision would terminate our inquiry, not because in seeing we

should be knowing, but because we should have elicited the universal from

seeing; if, for example, we saw the pores in the glass and the light passing

through, the reason of the kindling would be clear to us because we should at

the  same  time  see  it  in  each  instance  and  intuit  that  it  must  be  so  in  all

instances.


32


All syllogisms cannot have the same basic truths. This may be shown first

of all by the following dialectical considerations. (1) Some syllogisms are

true  and  some  false:  for  though  a  true  inference  is  possible  from  false

premisses,  yet  this  occurs  once  only-I  mean  if  A  for  instance,  is  truly

predicable of C, but B, the middle, is false, both A-B and B-C being false;

nevertheless, if middles are taken to prove these premisses, they will be false

because every conclusion which is a falsehood has false premisses, while true

conclusions have true premisses, and false and true differ in kind. Then again,

(2) falsehoods are not all derived from a single identical set of principles:

there  are  falsehoods  which  are  the  contraries  of  one  another  and  cannot

coexist, e.g. ‘justice is injustice’, and ‘justice is cowardice’; ‘man is horse’,

and  ‘man  is  ox’;  ‘the  equal  is  greater’,  and  ‘the  equal  is  less.’  From

established principles we may argue the case as follows, confining-ourselves

therefore to true conclusions. Not even all these are inferred from the same

basic truths; many of them in fact have basic truths which differ generically

and  are  not  transferable;  units,  for  instance,  which  are  without  position,

cannot take the place of points, which have position. The transferred terms

could only fit in as middle terms or as major or minor terms, or else have

some of the other terms between them, others outside them.

Nor can any of the common axioms-such, I mean, as the law of excluded

middle-serve as premisses for the proof of all conclusions. For the kinds of

being are different, and some attributes attach to quanta and some to qualia

only;  and  proof  is  achieved  by  means  of  the  common  axioms  taken  inconjunction with these several kinds and their attributes.

  Again,  it  is  not  true  that  the  basic  truths  are  much  fewer  than  the

conclusions,  for  the  basic  truths  are  the  premisses,  and  the  premisses  are

formed by the apposition of a fresh extreme term or the interposition of a

fresh middle. Moreover, the number of conclusions is indefinite, though the

number  of  middle  terms  is  finite;  and  lastly  some  of  the  basic  truths  are

necessary, others variable.

  Looking at it in this way we see that, since the number of conclusions is

indefinite, the basic truths cannot be identical or limited in number. If, on the

other hand, identity is used in another sense, and it is said, e.g. ‘these and no

other  are  the  fundamental  truths  of  geometry,  these  the  fundamentals  of

calculation, these again of medicine’; would the statement mean anything

except that the sciences have basic truths? To call them identical because they

are self-identical is absurd, since everything can be identified with everything

in that sense of identity. Nor again can the contention that all conclusions

have the same basic truths mean that from the mass of all possible premisses

any conclusion may be drawn. That would be exceedingly naive, for it is not

the case in the clearly evident mathematical sciences, nor is it possible in

analysis, since it is the immediate premisses which are the basic truths, and a

fresh conclusion is only formed by the addition of a new immediate premiss:

but if it be admitted that it is these primary immediate premisses which are

basic truths, each subject-genus will provide one basic truth. If, however, it is

not argued that from the mass of all possible premisses any conclusion may

be proved, nor yet admitted that basic truths differ so as to be generically

different for each science, it remains to consider the possibility that, while the

basic truths of all knowledge are within one genus, special premisses are

required to prove special conclusions. But that this cannot be the case has

been shown by our proof that the basic truths of things generically different

themselves differ generically. For fundamental truths are of two kinds, those

which are premisses of demonstration and the subject-genus; and though the

former  are  common,  the  latter-number,  for  instance,  and  magnitude-are

peculiar.


33


  Scientific knowledge and its object differ from opinion and the object of

opinion  in  that  scientific  knowledge  is  commensurately  universal  andproceeds by necessary connexions, and that which is necessary cannot be

otherwise. So though there are things which are true and real and yet can be

otherwise,  scientific  knowledge  clearly  does  not  concern  them:  if  it  did,

things which can be otherwise would be incapable of being otherwise. Nor

are  they  any  concern  of  rational  intuition-by  rational  intuition  I  mean  an

originative source of scientific knowledge-nor of indemonstrable knowledge,

which is the grasping of the immediate premiss. Since then rational intuition,

science, and opinion, and what is revealed by these terms, are the only things

that can be ‘true’, it follows that it is opinion that is concerned with that

which may be true or false, and can be otherwise: opinion in fact is the grasp

of a premiss which is immediate but not necessary. This view also fits the

observed facts, for opinion is unstable, and so is the kind of being we have

described as its object. Besides, when a man thinks a truth incapable of being

otherwise he always thinks that he knows it, never that he opines it. He thinks

that he opines when he thinks that a connexion, though actually so, may quite

easily be otherwise; for he believes that such is the proper object of opinion,

while the necessary is the object of knowledge.

In what sense, then, can the same thing be the object of both opinion and

knowledge? And if any one chooses to maintain that all that he knows he can

also opine, why should not opinion be knowledge? For he that knows and he

that opines will follow the same train of thought through the same middle

terms until the immediate premisses are reached; because it is possible to

opine not only the fact but also the reasoned fact, and the reason is the middle

term; so that, since the former knows, he that opines also has knowledge.

The truth perhaps is that if a man grasp truths that cannot be other than

they  are,  in  the  way  in  which  he  grasps  the  definitions  through  which

demonstrations take place, he will have not opinion but knowledge: if on the

other hand he apprehends these attributes as inhering in their subjects, but not

in virtue of the subjects’ substance and essential nature possesses opinion and

not  genuine  knowledge;  and  his  opinion,  if  obtained  through  immediate

premisses, will be both of the fact and of the reasoned fact; if not so obtained,

of the fact alone. The object of opinion and knowledge is not quite identical;

it is only in a sense identical, just as the object of true and false opinion is in a

sense identical. The sense in which some maintain that true and false opinion

can have the same object leads them to embrace many strange doctrines,

particularly the doctrine that what a man opines falsely he does not opine at

all. There are really many senses of ‘identical’, and in one sense the object oftrue and false opinion can be the same, in another it cannot. Thus, to have a

true  opinion  that  the  diagonal  is  commensurate  with  the  side  would  be

absurd: but because the diagonal with which they are both concerned is the

same, the two opinions have objects so far the same: on the other hand, as

regards their essential definable nature these objects differ. The identity of the

objects of knowledge and opinion is similar. Knowledge is the apprehension

of, e.g. the attribute ‘animal’ as incapable of being otherwise, opinion the

apprehension of ‘animal’ as capable of being otherwise-e.g. the apprehension

that animal is an element in the essential nature of man is knowledge; the

apprehension of animal as predicable of man but not as an element in man’s

essential nature is opinion: man is the subject in both judgements, but the

mode of inherence differs.

This  also  shows  that  one  cannot  opine  and  know  the  same  thing

simultaneously; for then one would apprehend the same thing as both capable

and incapable of being otherwise-an impossibility. Knowledge and opinion of

the same thing can co-exist in two different people in the sense we have

explained, but not simultaneously in the same person. That would involve a

man’s simultaneously apprehending, e.g. (1) that man is essentially animal-

i.e. cannot be other than animal-and (2) that man is not essentially animal,

that is, we may assume, may be other than animal.

  Further consideration of modes of thinking and their distribution under the

heads  of  discursive  thought,  intuition,  science,  art,  practical  wisdom,  and

metaphysical  thinking,  belongs  rather  partly  to  natural  science,  partly  to

moral philosophy.


34


  Quick wit is a faculty of hitting upon the middle term instantaneously. It

would be exemplified by a man who saw that the moon has her bright side

always turned towards the sun, and quickly grasped the cause of this, namely

that she borrows her light from him; or observed somebody in conversation

with a man of wealth and divined that he was borrowing money, or that the

friendship  of  these  people  sprang  from  a  common  enmity.  In  all  these

instances he has seen the major and minor terms and then grasped the causes,

the middle terms.

Let A represent ‘bright side turned sunward’, B ‘lighted from the sun’, C

the moon. Then B, ‘lighted from the sun’ is predicable of C, the moon, andA, ‘having her bright side towards the source of her light’, is predicable of B.

So A is predicable of C through B.                        Posterior Analytics, Book II


Translated by G. R. G. Mure


<

div id="book2" class="book">


1


The kinds of question we ask are as many as the kinds of things which we

know. They are in fact four:-(1) whether the connexion of an attribute with a

thing is a fact, (2) what is the reason of the connexion, (3) whether a thing

exists, (4) What is the nature of the thing. Thus, when our question concerns

a complex of thing and attribute and we ask whether the thing is thus or

otherwise qualified-whether, e.g. the sun suffers eclipse or not-then we are

asking  as  to  the  fact  of  a  connexion.  That  our  inquiry  ceases  with  the

discovery that the sun does suffer eclipse is an indication of this; and if we

know from the start that the sun suffers eclipse, we do not inquire whether it

does so or not. On the other hand, when we know the fact we ask the reason;

as, for example, when we know that the sun is being eclipsed and that an

earthquake is in progress, it is the reason of eclipse or earthquake into which

we inquire.

  Where a complex is concerned, then, those are the two questions we ask;

but for some objects of inquiry we have a different kind of question to ask,

such as whether there is or is not a centaur or a God. (By ‘is or is not’ I mean

‘is or is not, without further qualification’; as opposed to ‘is or is not [e.g.]

white’.) On the other hand, when we have ascertained the thing’s existence,

we inquire as to its nature, asking, for instance, ‘what, then, is God?’ or ‘what

is man?’.


2


These, then, are the four kinds of question we ask, and it is in the answers

to these questions that our knowledge consists.

Now  when  we  ask  whether  a  connexion  is  a  fact,  or  whether  a  thingwithout qualification is, we are really asking whether the connexion or the

thing has a ‘middle’; and when we have ascertained either that the connexion

is a fact or that the thing is-i.e. ascertained either the partial or the unqualified

being of the thing-and are proceeding to ask the reason of the connexion or

the nature of the thing, then we are asking what the ‘middle’ is.

  (By distinguishing the fact of the connexion and the existence of the thing

as respectively the partial and the unqualified being of the thing, I mean that

if we ask ‘does the moon suffer eclipse?’, or  ‘does the moon wax?’, the

question concerns a part of the thing’s being; for what we are asking in such

questions is whether a thing is this or that, i.e. has or has not this or that

attribute: whereas, if we ask whether the moon or night exists, the question

concerns the unqualified being of a thing.)

We conclude that in all our inquiries we are asking either whether there is a

‘middle’ or what the ‘middle’ is: for the ‘middle’ here is precisely the cause,

and it is the cause that we seek in all our inquiries. Thus, ‘Does the moon

suffer eclipse?’ means ‘Is there or is there not a cause producing eclipse of

the  moon?’,  and  when  we  have  learnt  that  there  is,  our  next  question  is,

‘What, then, is this cause? for the cause through which a thing is-not is this or

that, i.e. has this or that attribute, but without qualification is-and the cause

through which it is-not is without qualification, but is this or that as having

some essential attribute or some accident-are both alike the middle’. By that

which is without qualification I mean the subject, e.g. moon or earth or sun or

triangle; by that which a subject is (in the partial sense) I mean a property,

e.g. eclipse, equality or inequality, interposition or non-interposition. For in

all these examples it is clear that the nature of the thing and the reason of the

fact  are  identical:  the  question  ‘What  is  eclipse?’  and  its  answer  ‘The

privation of the moon’s light by the interposition of the earth’ are identical

with the question ‘What is the reason of eclipse?’ or ‘Why does the moon

suffer eclipse?’ and the reply ‘Because of the failure of light through the

earth’s  shutting  it  out’.  Again,  for  ‘What  is  a  concord?  A  commensurate

numerical ratio of a high and a low note’, we may substitute ‘What ratio

makes  a  high  and  a  low  note  concordant?  Their  relation  according  to  a

commensurate numerical ratio.’ ‘Are the high and the low note concordant?’

is equivalent to ‘Is their ratio commensurate?’; and when we find that it is

commensurate, we ask ‘What, then, is their ratio?’.

  Cases in which the ‘middle’ is sensible show that the object of our inquiry

is always the ‘middle’: we inquire, because we have not perceived it, whetherthere is or is not a ‘middle’ causing, e.g. an eclipse. On the other hand, if we

were on the moon we should not be inquiring either as to the fact or the

reason, but both fact and reason would be obvious simultaneously. For the act

of perception would have enabled us to know the universal too; since, the

present fact of an eclipse being evident, perception would then at the same

time give us the present fact of the earth’s screening the sun’s light, and from

this would arise the universal.

  Thus, as we maintain, to know a thing’s nature is to know the reason why

it is; and this is equally true of things in so far as they are said without

qualification to he as opposed to being possessed of some attribute, and in so

far as they are said to be possessed of some attribute such as equal to right

angles, or greater or less.


3


It is clear, then, that all questions are a search for a ‘middle’. Let us now

state how essential nature is revealed and in what way it can be reduced to

demonstration; what definition is, and what things are definable. And let us

first discuss certain difficulties which these questions raise, beginning what

we have to say with a point most intimately connected with our immediately

preceding remarks, namely the doubt that might be felt as to whether or not it

is possible to know the same thing in the same relation, both by definition

and by demonstration. It might, I mean, be urged that definition is held to

concern  essential  nature  and  is  in  every  case  universal  and  affirmative;

whereas, on the other hand, some conclusions are negative and some are not

universal; e.g. all in the second figure are negative, none in the third are

universal. And again, not even all affirmative conclusions in the first figure

are definable, e.g. ‘every triangle has its angles equal to two right angles’. An

argument proving this difference between demonstration and definition is that

to have scientific knowledge of the demonstrable is identical with possessing

a demonstration of it: hence if demonstration of such conclusions as these is

possible, there clearly cannot also be definition of them. If there could, one

might  know  such  a  conclusion  also  in  virtue  of  its  definition  without

possessing the demonstration of it; for there is nothing to stop our having the

one without the other.

  Induction too will sufficiently convince us of this difference; for never yet

by defining anything-essential attribute or accident-did we get knowledge ofit. Again, if to define is to acquire knowledge of a substance, at any rate such

attributes are not substances.

It is evident, then, that not everything demonstrable can be defined. What

then? Can everything definable be demonstrated, or not? There is one of our

previous arguments which covers this too. Of a single thing qua single there

is  a  single  scientific  knowledge.  Hence,  since  to  know  the  demonstrable

scientifically is to possess the demonstration of it, an impossible consequence

will follow:-possession of its definition without its demonstration will give

knowledge of the demonstrable.

  Moreover, the basic premisses of demonstrations are definitions, and it has

already been shown that these will be found indemonstrable; either the basic

premisses will be demonstrable and will depend on prior premisses, and the

regress  will  be  endless;  or  the  primary  truths  will  be  indemonstrable

definitions.

But if the definable and the demonstrable are not wholly the same, may

they yet be partially the same? Or is that impossible, because there can be no

demonstration of the definable? There can be none, because definition is of

the essential nature or being of something, and all demonstrations evidently

posit  and  assume  the  essential  nature-mathematical  demonstrations,  for

example, the nature of unity and the odd, and all the other sciences likewise.

Moreover, every demonstration proves a predicate of a subject as attaching or

as not attaching to it, but in definition one thing is not predicated of another;

we do not, e.g. predicate animal of biped nor biped of animal, nor yet figure

of plane-plane not being figure nor figure plane. Again, to prove essential

nature is not the same as to prove the fact of a connexion. Now definition

reveals essential nature, demonstration reveals that a given attribute attaches

or does not attach to a given subject; but different things require different

demonstrations-unless the one demonstration is related to the other as part to

whole. I add this because if all triangles have been proved to possess angles

equal to two right angles, then this attribute has been proved to attach to

isosceles; for isosceles is a part of which all triangles constitute the whole.

But in the case before us the fact and the essential nature are not so related to

one another, since the one is not a part of the other.

So  it  emerges  that  not  all  the  definable  is  demonstrable  nor  all  the

demonstrable definable; and we may draw the general conclusion that there is

no identical object of which it is possible to possess both a definition and a

demonstration.  It  follows  obviously  that  definition  and  demonstration  areneither  identical  nor  contained  either  within  the  other:  if  they  were,  their

objects would be related either as identical or as whole and part.


4


So much, then, for the first stage of our problem. The next step is to raise

the question whether syllogism-i.e. demonstration-of the definable nature is

possible or, as our recent argument assumed, impossible.

We  might  argue  it  impossible  on  the  following  grounds:-(a)  syllogism

proves an attribute of a subject through the middle term; on the other hand (b)

its definable nature is both ‘peculiar’ to a subject and predicated of it as

belonging to its essence. But in that case (1) the subject, its definition, and the

middle term connecting them must be reciprocally predicable of one another;

for if A is to C, obviously A is ‘peculiar’ to B and B to C-in fact all three

terms are ‘peculiar’ to one another: and further (2) if A inheres in the essence

of all B and B is predicated universally of all C as belonging to C’s essence,

A also must be predicated of C as belonging to its essence.

If  one  does  not  take  this  relation  as  thus  duplicated-if,  that  is,  A  is

predicated as being of the essence of B, but B is not of the essence of the

subjects of which it is predicated-A will not necessarily be predicated of C as

belonging  to  its  essence.  So  both  premisses  will  predicate  essence,  and

consequently B also will be predicated of C as its essence. Since, therefore,

both premisses do predicate essence-i.e. definable form-C’s definable form

will appear in the middle term before the conclusion is drawn.

We may generalize by supposing that it is possible to prove the essential

nature of man. Let C be man, A man’s essential nature—two-footed animal,

or aught else it may be. Then, if we are to syllogize, A must be predicated of

all  B.  But  this  premiss  will  be  mediated  by  a  fresh  definition,  which

consequently will also be the essential nature of man. Therefore the argument

assumes what it has to prove, since B too is the essential nature of man. It is,

however, the case in which there are only the two premisses-i.e. in which the

premisses are primary and immediate-which we ought to investigate, because

it best illustrates the point under discussion.

  Thus they who prove the essential nature of soul or man or anything else

through  reciprocating  terms  beg  the  question.  It  would  be  begging  the

question, for example, to contend that the soul is that which causes its own

life, and that what causes its own life is a self-moving number; for one wouldhave to postulate that the soul is a self-moving number in the sense of being

identical with it. For if A is predicable as a mere consequent of B and B of C,

A will not on that account be the definable form of C: A will merely be what

it was true to say of C. Even if A is predicated of all B inasmuch as B is

identical  with  a  species  of  A,  still  it  will  not  follow:  being  an  animal  is

predicated of being a man-since it is true that in all instances to be human is

to be animal, just as it is also true that every man is an animal-but not as

identical with being man.

We conclude, then, that unless one takes both the premisses as predicating

essence, one cannot infer that A is the definable form and essence of C: but if

one does so take them, in assuming B one will have assumed, before drawing

the conclusion, what the definable form of C is; so that there has been no

inference, for one has begged the question.


5


  Nor, as was said in my formal logic, is the method of division a process of

inference at all, since at no point does the characterization of the subject

follow  necessarily  from  the  premising  of  certain  other  facts:  division

demonstrates as little as does induction. For in a genuine demonstration the

conclusion must not be put as a question nor depend on a concession, but

must follow necessarily from its premisses, even if the respondent deny it.

The definer asks ‘Is man animal or inanimate?’ and then assumes-he has not

inferred-that  man  is  animal.  Next,  when  presented  with  an  exhaustive

division  of  animal  into  terrestrial  and  aquatic,  he  assumes  that  man  is

terrestrial. Moreover, that man is the complete formula, terrestrial-animal,

does not follow necessarily from the premisses: this too is an assumption, and

equally an assumption whether the division comprises many differentiae or

few. (Indeed as this method of division is used by those who proceed by it,

even truths that can be inferred actually fail to appear as such.) For why

should not the whole of this formula be true of man, and yet not exhibit his

essential nature or definable form? Again, what guarantee is there against an

unessential addition, or against the omission of the final or of an intermediate

determinant of the substantial being?

The  champion  of  division  might  here  urge  that  though  these  lapses  do

occur, yet we can solve that difficulty if all the attributes we assume are

constituents of the definable form, and if, postulating the genus, we produceby division the requisite uninterrupted sequence of terms, and omit nothing;

and  that  indeed  we  cannot  fail  to  fulfil  these  conditions  if  what  is  to  be

divided falls whole into the division at each stage, and none of it is omitted;

and that this-the dividendum-must without further question be (ultimately)

incapable of fresh specific division. Nevertheless, we reply, division does not

involve inference; if it gives knowledge, it gives it in another way. Nor is

there any absurdity in this: induction, perhaps, is not demonstration any more

than is division, et it does make evident some truth. Yet to state a definition

reached by division is not to state a conclusion: as, when conclusions are

drawn without their appropriate middles, the alleged necessity by which the

inference follows from the premisses is open to a question as to the reason for

it, so definitions reached by division invite the same question.

  Thus to the question ‘What is the essential nature of man?’ the divider

replies ‘Animal, mortal, footed, biped, wingless’; and when at each step he is

asked ‘Why?’, he will say, and, as he thinks, proves by division, that all

animal is mortal or immortal: but such a formula taken in its entirety is not

definition; so that even if division does demonstrate its formula, definition at

any rate does not turn out to be a conclusion of inference.


6


  Can  we  nevertheless  actually  demonstrate  what  a  thing  essentially  and

substantially is, but hypothetically, i.e. by premising (1) that its definable

form is constituted by the ‘peculiar’ attributes of its essential nature; (2) that

such  and  such  are  the  only  attributes  of  its  essential  nature,  and  that  the

complete synthesis of them is peculiar to the thing; and thus-since in this

synthesis consists the being of the thing-obtaining our conclusion? Or is the

truth that, since proof must be through the middle term, the definable form is

once more assumed in this minor premiss too?

  Further, just as in syllogizing we do not premise what syllogistic inference

is (since the premisses from which we conclude must be related as whole and

part), so the definable form must not fall within the syllogism but remain

outside the premisses posited. It is only against a doubt as to its having been a

syllogistic inference at all that we have to defend our argument as conforming

to the definition of syllogism. It is only when some one doubts whether the

conclusion  proved  is  the  definable  form  that  we  have  to  defend  it  as

conforming to the definition of definable form which we assumed. Hencesyllogistic inference must be possible even without the express statement of

what syllogism is or what definable form is.

The following type of hypothetical proof also begs the question. If evil is

definable as the divisible, and the definition of a thing’s contrary-if it has one

the contrary of the thing’s definition; then, if good is the contrary of evil and

the indivisible of the divisible, we conclude that to be good is essentially to

be indivisible. The question is begged because definable form is assumed as a

premiss, and as a premiss which is to prove definable form. ‘But not the same

definable form’, you may object. That I admit, for in demonstrations also we

premise that ‘this’ is predicable of ‘that’; but in this premiss the term we

assert of the minor is neither the major itself nor a term identical in definition,

or convertible, with the major.

  Again, both proof by division and the syllogism just described are open to

the  question  why  man  should  be  animal-biped-terrestrial  and  not  merely

animal  and  terrestrial,  since  what  they  premise  does  not  ensure  that  the

predicates shall constitute a genuine unity and not merely belong to a single

subject as do musical and grammatical when predicated of the same man.


7


How then by definition shall we prove substance or essential nature? We

cannot show it as a fresh fact necessarily following from the assumption of

premisses  admitted  to  be  facts-the  method  of  demonstration:  we  may  not

proceed as by induction to establish a universal on the evidence of groups of

particulars which offer no exception, because induction proves not what the

essential  nature  of  a  thing  is  but  that  it  has  or  has  not  some  attribute.

Therefore, since presumably one cannot prove essential nature by an appeal

to  sense  perception  or  by  pointing  with  the  finger,  what  other  method

remains?

To put it another way: how shall we by definition prove essential nature?

He who knows what human-or any other-nature is, must know also that man

exists; for no one knows the nature of what does not exist-one can know the

meaning of the phrase or name ‘goat-stag’ but not what the essential nature of

a goat-stag is. But further, if definition can prove what is the essential nature

of a thing, can it also prove that it exists? And how will it prove them both by

the same process, since definition exhibits one single thing and demonstration

another single thing, and what human nature is and the fact that man existsare not the same thing? Then too we hold that it is by demonstration that the

being of everything must be proved-unless indeed to be were its essence; and,

since being is not a genus, it is not the essence of anything. Hence the being

of  anything  as  fact  is  matter  for  demonstration;  and  this  is  the  actual

procedure of the sciences, for the geometer assumes the meaning of the word

triangle, but that it is possessed of some attribute he proves. What is it, then,

that we shall prove in defining essential nature? Triangle? In that case a man

will know by definition what a thing’s nature is without knowing whether it

exists. But that is impossible.

  Moreover it is clear, if we consider the methods of defining actually in use,

that definition does not prove that the thing defined exists: since even if there

does actually exist something which is equidistant from a centre, yet why

should the thing named in the definition exist? Why, in other words, should

this  be  the  formula  defining  circle?  One  might  equally  well  call  it  the

definition  of  mountain  copper.  For  definitions  do  not  carry  a  further

guarantee that the thing defined can exist or that it is what they claim to

define: one can always ask why.

  Since, therefore, to define is to prove either a thing’s essential nature or the

meaning of its name, we may conclude that definition, if it in no sense proves

essential nature, is a set of words signifying precisely what a name signifies.

But that were a strange consequence; for (1) both what is not substance and

what does not exist at all would be definable, since even non-existents can be

signified by a name: (2) all sets of words or sentences would be definitions,

since any kind of sentence could be given a name; so that we should all be

talking  in  definitions,  and  even  the  Iliad  would  be  a  definition:  (3)  no

demonstration can prove that any particular name means any particular thing:

neither, therefore, do definitions, in addition to revealing the meaning of a

name, also reveal that the name has this meaning. It appears then from these

considerations  that  neither  definition  and  syllogism  nor  their  objects  are

identical,  and  further  that  definition  neither  demonstrates  nor  proves

anything, and that knowledge of essential nature is not to be obtained either

by definition or by demonstration.


8


We must now start afresh and consider which of these conclusions are

sound and which are not, and what is the nature of definition, and whetheressential nature is in any sense demonstrable and definable or in none.

Now to know its essential nature is, as we said, the same as to know the

cause of a thing’s existence, and the proof of this depends on the fact that a

thing must have a cause. Moreover, this cause is either identical with the

essential nature of the thing or distinct from it; and if its cause is distinct from

it, the essential nature of the thing is either demonstrable or indemonstrable.

Consequently, if the cause is distinct from the thing’s essential nature and

demonstration  is  possible,  the  cause  must  be  the  middle  term,  and,  the

conclusion proved being universal and affirmative, the proof is in the first

figure. So the method just examined of proving it through another essential

nature would be one way of proving essential nature, because a conclusion

containing essential nature must be inferred through a middle which is an

essential  nature  just  as  a  ‘peculiar’  property  must  be  inferred  through  a

middle which is a ‘peculiar’ property; so that of the two definable natures of a

single thing this method will prove one and not the other.

Now it was said before that this method could not amount to demonstration

of essential nature-it is actually a dialectical proof of it-so let us begin again

and explain by what method it can be demonstrated. When we are aware of a

fact we seek its reason, and though sometimes the fact and the reason dawn

on us simultaneously, yet we cannot apprehend the reason a moment sooner

than the fact; and clearly in just the same way we cannot apprehend a thing’s

definable  form  without  apprehending  that  it  exists,  since  while  we  are

ignorant whether it exists we cannot know its essential nature. Moreover we

are aware whether a thing exists or not sometimes through apprehending an

element in its character, and sometimes accidentally, as, for example, when

we are aware of thunder as a noise in the clouds, of eclipse as a privation of

light, or of man as some species of animal, or of the soul as a self-moving

thing. As often as we have accidental knowledge that the thing exists, we

must  be  in  a  wholly  negative  state  as  regards  awareness  of  its  essential

nature; for we have not got genuine knowledge even of its existence, and to

search for a thing’s essential nature when we are unaware that it exists is to

search for nothing. On the other hand, whenever we apprehend an element in

the thing’s character there is less difficulty. Thus it follows that the degree of

our knowledge of a thing’s essential nature is determined by the sense in

which we are aware that it exists. Let us then take the following as our first

instance  of  being  aware  of  an  element  in  the  essential  nature.  Let  A  be

eclipse, C the moon, B the earth’s acting as a screen. Now to ask whether themoon is eclipsed or not is to ask whether or not B has occurred. But that is

precisely the same as asking whether A has a defining condition; and if this

condition actually exists, we assert that A also actually exists. Or again we

may ask which side of a contradiction the defining condition necessitates:

does it make the angles of a triangle equal or not equal to two right angles?

When we have found the answer, if the premisses are immediate, we know

fact and reason together; if they are not immediate, we know the fact without

the reason, as in the following example: let C be the moon, A eclipse, B the

fact that the moon fails to produce shadows though she is full and though no

visible body intervenes between us and her. Then if B, failure to produce

shadows in spite of the absence of an intervening body, is attributable A to C,

and eclipse, is attributable to B, it is clear that the moon is eclipsed, but the

reason why is not yet clear, and we know that eclipse exists, but we do not

know what its essential nature is. But when it is clear that A is attributable to

C and we proceed to ask the reason of this fact, we are inquiring what is the

nature of B: is it the earth’s acting as a screen, or the moon’s rotation or her

extinction? But B is the definition of the other term, viz. in these examples, of

the major term A; for eclipse is constituted by the earth acting as a screen.

Thus, (1) ‘What is thunder?’ ‘The quenching of fire in cloud’, and (2) ‘Why

does it thunder?’ ‘Because fire is quenched in the cloud’, are equivalent. Let

C be cloud, A thunder, B the quenching of fire. Then B is attributable to C,

cloud, since fire is quenched in it; and A, noise, is attributable to B; and B is

assuredly the definition of the major term A. If there be a further mediating

cause of B, it will be one of the remaining partial definitions of A.

We  have  stated  then  how  essential  nature  is  discovered  and  becomes

known, and we see that, while there is no syllogism-i.e. no demonstrative

syllogism-of essential nature, yet it is through syllogism, viz. demonstrative

syllogism, that essential nature is exhibited. So we conclude that neither can

the essential nature of anything which has a cause distinct from itself be

known without demonstration, nor can it be demonstrated; and this is what

we contended in our preliminary discussions.


9


Now while some things have a cause distinct from themselves, others have

not. Hence it is evident that there are essential natures which are immediate,

that is are basic premisses; and of these not only that they are but also whatthey are must be assumed or revealed in some other way. This too is the

actual procedure of the arithmetician, who assumes both the nature and the

existence of unit. On the other hand, it is possible (in the manner explained)

to exhibit through demonstration the essential nature of things which have a

‘middle’, i.e. a cause of their substantial being other than that being itself; but

we do not thereby demonstrate it.


10


  Since definition is said to be the statement of a thing’s nature, obviously

one kind of definition will be a statement of the meaning of the name, or of

an equivalent nominal formula. A definition in this sense tells you, e.g. the

meaning of the phrase ‘triangular character’. When we are aware that triangle

exists, we inquire the reason why it exists. But it is difficult thus to learn the

definition of things the existence of which we do not genuinely know-the

cause  of  this  difficulty  being,  as  we  said  before,  that  we  only  know

accidentally whether or not the thing exists. Moreover, a statement may be a

unity  in  either  of  two  ways,  by  conjunction,  like  the  Iliad,  or  because  it

exhibits a single predicate as inhering not accidentally in a single subject.

That then is one way of defining definition. Another kind of definition is a

formula exhibiting the cause of a thing’s existence. Thus the former signifies

without  proving,  but  the  latter  will  clearly  be  a  quasi-demonstration  of

essential nature, differing from demonstration in the arrangement of its terms.

For there is a difference between stating why it thunders, and stating what is

the essential nature of thunder; since the first statement will be ‘Because fire

is quenched in the clouds’, while the statement of what the nature of thunder

is will be ‘The noise of fire being quenched in the clouds’. Thus the same

statement takes a different form: in one form it is continuous demonstration,

in the other definition. Again, thunder can be defined as noise in the clouds,

which is the conclusion of the demonstration embodying essential nature. On

the other hand the definition of immediates is an indemonstrable positing of

essential nature.

We  conclude  then  that  definition  is  (a)  an  indemonstrable  statement  of

essential  nature,  or  (b)  a  syllogism  of  essential  nature  differing  from

demonstration in grammatical form, or (c) the conclusion of a demonstration

giving essential nature.

Our discussion has therefore made plain (1) in what sense and of whatthings the essential nature is demonstrable, and in what sense and of what

things it is not; (2) what are the various meanings of the term definition, and

in what sense and of what things it proves the essential nature, and in what

sense and of what things it does not; (3) what is the relation of definition to

demonstration,  and  how  far  the  same  thing  is  both  definable  and

demonstrable and how far it is not.


11


We think we have scientific knowledge when we know the cause, and

there  are  four  causes:  (1)  the  definable  form,  (2)  an  antecedent  which

necessitates a consequent, (3) the efficient cause, (4) the final cause. Hence

each of these can be the middle term of a proof, for (a) though the inference

from antecedent to necessary consequent does not hold if only one premiss is

assumed-two is the minimum-still when there are two it holds on condition

that they have a single common middle term. So it is from the assumption of

this single middle term that the conclusion follows necessarily. The following

example will also show this. Why is the angle in a semicircle a right angle?-

or from what assumption does it follow that it is a right angle? Thus, let A be

right angle, B the half of two right angles, C the angle in a semicircle. Then B

is the cause in virtue of which A, right angle, is attributable to C, the angle in

a semicircle, since B=A and the other, viz. C,=B, for C is half of two right

angles. Therefore it is the assumption of B, the half of two right angles, from

which it follows that A is attributable to C, i.e. that the angle in a semicircle

is a right angle. Moreover, B is identical with (b) the defining form of A,

since  it  is  what  A’s  definition  signifies.  Moreover,  the  formal  cause  has

already been shown to be the middle. (c) ‘Why did the Athenians become

involved in the Persian war?’ means ‘What cause originated the waging of

war against the Athenians?’ and the answer is, ‘Because they raided Sardis

with the Eretrians’, since this originated the war. Let A be war, B unprovoked

raiding,  C  the  Athenians.  Then  B,  unprovoked  raiding,  is  true  of  C,  the

Athenians, and A is true of B, since men make war on the unjust aggressor.

So A, having war waged upon them, is true of B, the initial aggressors, and B

is true of C, the Athenians, who were the aggressors. Hence here too the

cause-in this case the efficient cause-is the middle term. (d) This is no less

true where the cause is the final cause. E.g. why does one take a walk after

supper?  For  the  sake  of  one’s  health.  Why  does  a  house  exist?  For  thepreservation of one’s goods. The end in view is in the one case health, in the

other  preservation.  To  ask  the  reason  why  one  must  walk  after  supper  is

precisely to ask to what end one must do it. Let C be walking after supper, B

the non-regurgitation of food, A health. Then let walking after supper possess

the property of preventing food from rising to the orifice of the stomach, and

let this condition be healthy; since it seems that B, the non-regurgitation of

food, is attributable to C, taking a walk, and that A, health, is attributable to

B. What, then, is the cause through which A, the final cause, inheres in C? It

is B, the non-regurgitation of food; but B is a kind of definition of A, for A

will be explained by it. Why is B the cause of A’s belonging to C? Because to

be  in  a  condition  such  as  B  is  to  be  in  health.  The  definitions  must  be

transposed, and then the detail will become clearer. Incidentally, here the

order of coming to be is the reverse of what it is in proof through the efficient

cause: in the efficient order the middle term must come to be first, whereas in

the teleological order the minor, C, must first take place, and the end in view

comes last in time.

The  same  thing  may  exist  for  an  end  and  be  necessitated  as  well.  For

example, light shines through a lantern (1) because that which consists of

relatively small particles necessarily passes through pores larger than those

particles-assuming  that  light  does  issue  by  penetrationand  (2)  for  an  end,

namely to save us from stumbling. If then, a thing can exist through two

causes, can it come to be through two causes-as for instance if thunder be a

hiss  and  a  roar  necessarily  produced  by  the  quenching  of  fire,  and  also

designed, as the Pythagoreans say, for a threat to terrify those that lie in

Tartarus?  Indeed,  there  are  very  many  such  cases,  mostly  among  the

processes and products of the natural world; for nature, in different senses of

the term ‘nature’, produces now for an end, now by necessity.

  Necessity too is of two kinds. It may work in accordance with a thing’s

natural tendency, or by constraint and in opposition to it; as, for instance, by

necessity a stone is borne both upwards and downwards, but not by the same

necessity.

Of the products of man’s intelligence some are never due to chance or

necessity but always to an end, as for example a house or a statue; others,

such as health or safety, may result from chance as well.

It is mostly in cases where the issue is indeterminate (though only where

the  production  does  not  originate  in  chance,  and  the  end  is  consequently

good), that a result is due to an end, and this is true alike in nature or in art.By chance, on the other hand, nothing comes to be for an end.


12


The effect may be still coming to be, or its occurrence may be past or

future, yet the cause will be the same as when it is actually existent-for it is

the middle which is the cause-except that if the effect actually exists the

cause is actually existent, if it is coming to be so is the cause, if its occurrence

is past the cause is past, if future the cause is future. For example, the moon

was eclipsed because the earth intervened, is becoming eclipsed because the

earth is in process of intervening, will be eclipsed because the earth will

intervene, is eclipsed because the earth intervenes.

To take a second example: assuming that the definition of ice is solidified

water, let C be water, A solidified, B the middle, which is the cause, namely

total failure of heat. Then B is attributed to C, and A, solidification, to B: ice

when B is occurring, has formed when B has occurred, and will form when B

shall occur.

This sort of cause, then, and its effect come to be simultaneously when

they are in process of becoming, and exist simultaneously when they actually

exist; and the same holds good when they are past and when they are future.

But what of cases where they are not simultaneous? Can causes and effects

different from one another form, as they seem to us to form, a continuous

succession, a past effect resulting from a past cause different from itself, a

future effect from a future cause different from it, and an effect which is

coming-to-be from a cause different from and prior to it? Now on this theory

it  is  from  the  posterior  event  that  we  reason  (and  this  though  these  later

events actually have their source of origin in previous events—a fact which

shows that also when the effect is coming-to-be we still reason from the

posterior event), and from the event we cannot reason (we cannot argue that

because  an  event  A  has  occurred,  therefore  an  event  B  has  occurred

subsequently  to  A  but  still  in  the  past-and  the  same  holds  good  if  the

occurrence is future)-cannot reason because, be the time interval definite or

indefinite, it will never be possible to infer that because it is true to say that A

occurred, therefore it is true to say that B, the subsequent event, occurred; for

in the interval between the events, though A has already occurred, the latter

statement will be false. And the same argument applies also to future events;

i.e. one cannot infer from an event which occurred in the past that a futureevent will occur. The reason of this is that the middle must be homogeneous,

past when the extremes are past, future when they are future, coming to be

when they are coming-to-be, actually existent when they are actually existent;

and there cannot be a middle term homogeneous with extremes respectively

past  and  future.  And  it  is  a  further  difficulty  in  this  theory  that  the  time

interval can be neither indefinite nor definite, since during it the inference

will be false. We have also to inquire what it is that holds events together so

that the coming-to-be now occurring in actual things follows upon a past

event. It is evident, we may suggest, that a past event and a present process

cannot be ‘contiguous’, for not even two past events can be ‘contiguous’. For

past  events  are  limits  and  atomic;  so  just  as  points  are  not  ‘contiguous’

neither are past events, since both are indivisible. For the same reason a past

event  and  a  present  process  cannot  be  ‘contiguous’,  for  the  process  is

divisible, the event indivisible. Thus the relation of present process to past

event is analogous to that of line to point, since a process contains an infinity

of  past  events.  These  questions,  however,  must  receive  a  more  explicit

treatment in our general theory of change.

The  following  must  suffice  as  an  account  of  the  manner  in  which  the

middle would be identical with the cause on the supposition that coming-to-

be is a series of consecutive events: for in the terms of such a series too the

middle and major terms must form an immediate premiss; e.g. we argue that,

since  C  has  occurred,  therefore  A  occurred:  and  C’s  occurrence  was

posterior, A’s prior; but C is the source of the inference because it is nearer to

the present moment, and the starting-point of time is the present. We next

argue that, since D has occurred, therefore C occurred. Then we conclude

that, since D has occurred, therefore A must have occurred; and the cause is

C, for since D has occurred C must have occurred, and since C has occurred

A must previously have occurred.

If  we  get  our  middle  term  in  this  way,  will  the  series  terminate  in  an

immediate premiss, or since, as we said, no two events are ‘contiguous’, will

a fresh middle term always intervene because there is an infinity of middles?

No: though no two events are ‘contiguous’, yet we must start from a premiss

consisting of a middle and the present event as major. The like is true of

future events too, since if it is true to say that D will exist, it must be a prior

truth to say that A will exist, and the cause of this conclusion is C; for if D

will exist, C will exist prior to D, and if C will exist, A will exist prior to it.

And here too the same infinite divisibility might be urged, since future eventsare  not  ‘contiguous’.  But  here  too  an  immediate  basic  premiss  must  be

assumed. And in the world of fact this is so: if a house has been built, then

blocks  must  have  been  quarried  and  shaped.  The  reason  is  that  a  house

having  been  built  necessitates  a  foundation  having  been  laid,  and  if  a

foundation has been laid blocks must have been shaped beforehand. Again, if

a house will be built, blocks will similarly be shaped beforehand; and proof is

through the middle in the same way, for the foundation will exist before the

house.

Now we observe in Nature a certain kind of circular process of coming-to-

be; and this is possible only if the middle and extreme terms are reciprocal,

since conversion is conditioned by reciprocity in the terms of the proof. This-

the convertibility of conclusions and premisses-has been proved in our early

chapters, and the circular process is an instance of this. In actual fact it is

exemplified  thus:  when  the  earth  had  been  moistened  an  exhalation  was

bound to rise, and when an exhalation had risen cloud was bound to form,

and from the formation of cloud rain necessarily resulted and by the fall of

rain the earth was necessarily moistened: but this was the starting-point, so

that a circle is completed; for posit any one of the terms and another follows

from it, and from that another, and from that again the first.

  Some occurrences are universal (for they are, or come-to-be what they are,

always and in ever case); others again are not always what they are but only

as a general rule: for instance, not every man can grow a beard, but it is the

general rule. In the case of such connexions the middle term too must be a

general rule. For if A is predicated universally of B and B of C, A too must

be  predicated  always  and  in  every  instance  of  C,  since  to  hold  in  every

instance and always is of the nature of the universal. But we have assumed a

connexion which is a general rule; consequently the middle term B must also

be a general rule. So connexions which embody a general rule-i.e. which

exist or come to be as a general rule-will also derive from immediate basic

premisses.


13


We have already explained how essential nature is set out in the terms of a

demonstration,  and  the  sense  in  which  it  is  or  is  not  demonstrable  or

definable;  so  let  us  now  discuss  the  method  to  be  adopted  in  tracing  the

elements predicated as constituting the definable form.Now of the attributes which inhere always in each several thing there are

some  which  are  wider  in  extent  than  it  but  not  wider  than  its  genus  (by

attributes of wider extent mean all such as are universal attributes of each

several subject, but in their application are not confined to that subject). while

an attribute may inhere in every triad, yet also in a subject not a triad-as being

inheres in triad but also in subjects not numbers at all-odd on the other hand

is an attribute inhering in every triad and of wider application (inhering as it

does also in pentad), but which does not extend beyond the genus of triad; for

pentad is a number, but nothing outside number is odd. It is such attributes

which we have to select, up to the exact point at which they are severally of

wider extent than the subject but collectively coextensive with it; for this

synthesis  must  be  the  substance  of  the  thing.  For  example  every  triad

possesses the attributes number, odd, and prime in both senses, i.e. not only

as possessing no divisors, but also as not being a sum of numbers. This, then,

is precisely what triad is, viz. a number, odd, and prime in the former and

also the latter sense of the term: for these attributes taken severally apply, the

first two to all odd numbers, the last to the dyad also as well as to the triad,

but, taken collectively, to no other subject. Now since we have shown above’

that attributes predicated as belonging to the essential nature are necessary

and that universals are necessary, and since the attributes which we select as

inhering in triad, or in any other subject whose attributes we select in this

way, are predicated as belonging to its essential nature, triad will thus possess

these attributes necessarily. Further, that the synthesis of them constitutes the

substance of triad is shown by the following argument. If it is not identical

with  the  being  of  triad,  it  must  be  related  to  triad  as  a  genus  named  or

nameless.  It  will  then  be  of  wider  extent  than  triad-assuming  that  wider

potential extent is the character of a genus. If on the other hand this synthesis

is applicable to no subject other than the individual triads, it will be identical

with the being of triad, because we make the further assumption that the

substance of each subject is the predication of elements in its essential nature

down to the last differentia characterizing the individuals. It follows that any

other synthesis thus exhibited will likewise be identical with the being of the

subject.

The author of a hand-book on a subject that is a generic whole should

divide the genus into its first infimae species-number e.g. into triad and dyad-

and  then  endeavour  to  seize  their  definitions  by  the  method  we  have

described-the definition, for example, of straight line or circle or right angle.After that, having established what the category is to which the subaltern

genus  belongs-quantity  or  quality,  for  instance-he  should  examine  the

properties ‘peculiar’ to the species, working through the proximate common

differentiae.  He  should  proceed  thus  because  the  attributes  of  the  genera

compounded of the infimae species will be clearly given by the definitions of

the  species;  since  the  basic  element  of  them  all  is  the  definition,  i.e.  the

simple  infirma  species,  and  the  attributes  inhere  essentially  in  the  simple

infimae species, in the genera only in virtue of these.

  Divisions according to differentiae are a useful accessory to this method.

What  force  they  have  as  proofs  we  did,  indeed,  explain  above,  but  that

merely towards collecting the essential nature they may be of use we will

proceed to show. They might, indeed, seem to be of no use at all, but rather to

assume everything at the start and to be no better than an initial assumption

made  without  division.  But,  in  fact,  the  order  in  which  the  attributes  are

predicated does make a difference—it matters whether we say animal-tame-

biped,  or  biped-animal-tame.  For  if  every  definable  thing  consists  of  two

elements  and  ‘animal-tame’  forms  a  unity,  and  again  out  of  this  and  the

further differentia man (or whatever else is the unity under construction) is

constituted, then the elements we assume have necessarily been reached by

division.  Again,  division  is  the  only  possible  method  of  avoiding  the

omission of any element of the essential nature. Thus, if the primary genus is

assumed and we then take one of the lower divisions, the dividendum will not

fall whole into this division: e.g. it is not all animal which is either whole-

winged or split-winged but all winged animal, for it is winged animal to

which this differentiation belongs. The primary differentiation of animal is

that  within  which  all  animal  falls.  The  like  is  true  of  every  other  genus,

whether  outside  animal  or  a  subaltern  genus  of  animal;  e.g.  the  primary

differentiation of bird is that within which falls every bird, of fish that within

which falls every fish. So, if we proceed in this way, we can be sure that

nothing  has  been  omitted:  by  any  other  method  one  is  bound  to  omit

something without knowing it.

To define and divide one need not know the whole of existence. Yet some

hold it impossible to know the differentiae distinguishing each thing from

every single other thing without knowing every single other thing; and one

cannot, they say, know each thing without knowing its differentiae, since

everything is identical with that from which it does not differ, and other than

that  from  which  it  differs.  Now  first  of  all  this  is  a  fallacy:  not  everydifferentia  precludes  identity,  since  many  differentiae  inhere  in  things

specifically identical, though not in the substance of these nor essentially.

Secondly, when one has taken one’s differing pair of opposites and assumed

that the two sides exhaust the genus, and that the subject one seeks to define

is present in one or other of them, and one has further verified its presence in

one of them; then it does not matter whether or not one knows all the other

subjects of which the differentiae are also predicated. For it is obvious that

when by this process one reaches subjects incapable of further differentiation

one will possess the formula defining the substance. Moreover, to postulate

that the division exhausts the genus is not illegitimate if the opposites exclude

a middle; since if it is the differentia of that genus, anything contained in the

genus must lie on one of the two sides.

In establishing a definition by division one should keep three objects in

view:  (1)  the  admission  only  of  elements  in  the  definable  form,  (2)  the

arrangement of these in the right order, (3) the omission of no such elements.

The first is feasible because one can establish genus and differentia through

the topic of the genus, just as one can conclude the inherence of an accident

through the topic of the accident. The right order will be achieved if the right

term is assumed as primary, and this will be ensured if the term selected is

predicable of all the others but not all they of it; since there must be one such

term. Having assumed this we at once proceed in the same way with the

lower terms; for our second term will be the first of the remainder, our third

the first of those which follow the second in a ‘contiguous’ series, since when

the higher term is excluded, that term of the remainder which is ‘contiguous’

to  it  will  be  primary,  and  so  on.  Our  procedure  makes  it  clear  that  no

elements  in  the  definable  form  have  been  omitted:  we  have  taken  the

differentia that comes first in the order of division, pointing out that animal,

e.g. is divisible exhaustively into A and B, and that the subject accepts one of

the two as its predicate. Next we have taken the differentia of the whole thus

reached, and shown that the whole we finally reach is not further divisible-i.e.

that as soon as we have taken the last differentia to form the concrete totality,

this totality admits of no division into species. For it is clear that there is no

superfluous addition, since all these terms we have selected are elements in

the definable form; and nothing lacking, since any omission would have to be

a genus or a differentia. Now the primary term is a genus, and this term taken

in conjunction with its differentiae is a genus: moreover the differentiae are

all included, because there is now no further differentia; if there were, thefinal concrete would admit of division into species, which, we said, is not the

case.

To resume our account of the right method of investigation: We must start

by  observing  a  set  of  similar-i.e.  specifically  identical-individuals,  and

consider what element they have in common. We must then apply the same

process to another set of individuals which belong to one species and are

generically but not specifically identical with the former set. When we have

established  what  the  common  element  is  in  all  members  of  this  second

species, and likewise in members of further species, we should again consider

whether the results established possess any identity, and persevere until we

reach a single formula, since this will be the definition of the thing. But if we

reach not one formula but two or more, evidently the definiendum cannot be

one thing but must be more than one. I may illustrate my meaning as follows.

If we were inquiring what the essential nature of pride is, we should examine

instances  of  proud  men  we  know  of  to  see  what,  as  such,  they  have  in

common; e.g. if Alcibiades was proud, or Achilles and Ajax were proud, we

should find on inquiring what they all had in common, that it was intolerance

of insult; it was this which drove Alcibiades to war, Achilles wrath, and Ajax

to suicide. We should next examine other cases, Lysander, for example, or

Socrates, and then if these have in common indifference alike to good and ill

fortune,  I  take  these  two  results  and  inquire  what  common  element  have

equanimity amid the vicissitudes of life and impatience of dishonour. If they

have none, there will be two genera of pride. Besides, every definition is

always universal and commensurate: the physician does not prescribe what is

healthy for a single eye, but for all eyes or for a determinate species of eye. It

is also easier by this method to define the single species than the universal,

and  that  is  why  our  procedure  should  be  from  the  several  species  to  the

universal  genera-this  for  the  further  reason  too  that  equivocation  is  less

readily  detected  in  genera  than  in  infimae  species.  Indeed,  perspicuity  is

essential in definitions, just as inferential movement is the minimum required

in demonstrations; and we shall attain perspicuity if we can collect separately

the definition of each species through the group of singulars which we have

established e.g. the definition of similarity not unqualified but restricted to

colours and to figures; the definition of acuteness, but only of sound-and so

proceed to the common universal with a careful avoidance of equivocation.

We  may  add  that  if  dialectical  disputation  must  not  employ  metaphors,

clearly metaphors and metaphorical expressions are precluded in definition:otherwise dialectic would involve metaphors.


14


In order to formulate the connexions we wish to prove we have to select

our analyses and divisions. The method of selection consists in laying down

the common genus of all our subjects of investigation-if e.g. they are animals,

we lay down what the properties are which inhere in every animal. These

established, we next lay down the properties essentially connected with the

first of the remaining classes-e.g. if this first subgenus is bird, the essential

properties  of  every  bird-and  so  on,  always  characterizing  the  proximate

subgenus.  This  will  clearly  at  once  enable  us  to  say  in  virtue  of  what

character the subgenera-man, e.g. or horse-possess their properties. Let A be

animal, B the properties of every animal, C D E various species of animal.

Then it is clear in virtue of what character B inheres in D-namely A-and that

it inheres in C and E for the same reason: and throughout the remaining

subgenera always the same rule applies.

We are now taking our examples from the traditional class-names, but we

must not confine ourselves to considering these. We must collect any other

common character which we observe, and then consider with what species it

is connected and what.properties belong to it. For example, as the common

properties of horned animals we collect the possession of a third stomach and

only one row of teeth. Then since it is clear in virtue of what character they

possess these attributes-namely their horned character-the next question is, to

what species does the possession of horns attach?

Yet a further method of selection is by analogy: for we cannot find a single

identical name to give to a squid’s pounce, a fish’s spine, and an animal’s

bone, although these too possess common properties as if there were a single

osseous nature.


15


  Some connexions that require proof are identical in that they possess an

identical ‘middle’ e.g. a whole group might be proved through ‘reciprocal

replacement’-and of these one class are identical in genus, namely all those

whose difference consists in their concerning different subjects or in theirmode of manifestation. This latter class may be exemplified by the questions

as to the causes respectively of echo, of reflection, and of the rainbow: the

connexions  to  be  proved  which  these  questions  embody  are  identical

generically, because all three are forms of repercussion; but specifically they

are different.

  Other connexions that require proof only differ in that the ‘middle’ of the

one is subordinate to the ‘middle’ of the other. For example: Why does the

Nile rise towards the end of the month? Because towards its close the month

is more stormy. Why is the month more stormy towards its close? Because

the moon is waning. Here the one cause is subordinate to the other.


16


The question might be raised with regard to cause and effect whether when

the effect is present the cause also is present; whether, for instance, if a plant

sheds its leaves or the moon is eclipsed, there is present also the cause of the

eclipse or of the fall of the leaves-the possession of broad leaves, let us say,

in the latter case, in the former the earth’s interposition. For, one might argue,

if this cause is not present, these phenomena will have some other cause: if it

is present, its effect will be at once implied by it-the eclipse by the earth’s

interposition, the fall of the leaves by the possession of broad leaves; but if

so, they will be logically coincident and each capable of proof through the

other. Let me illustrate: Let A be deciduous character, B the possession of

broad leaves, C vine. Now if A inheres in B (for every broad-leaved plant is

deciduous), and B in C (every vine possessing broad leaves); then A inheres

in C (every vine is deciduous), and the middle term B is the cause. But we

can also demonstrate that the vine has broad leaves because it is deciduous.

Thus, let D be broad-leaved, E deciduous, F vine. Then E inheres in F (since

every vine is deciduous), and D in E (for every deciduous plant has broad

leaves): therefore every vine has broad leaves, and the cause is its deciduous

character. If, however, they cannot each be the cause of the other (for cause is

prior to effect, and the earth’s interposition is the cause of the moon’s eclipse

and not the eclipse of the interposition)-if, then, demonstration through the

cause is of the reasoned fact and demonstration not through the cause is of

the bare fact, one who knows it through the eclipse knows the fact of the

earth’s interposition but not the reasoned fact. Moreover, that the eclipse is

not  the  cause  of  the  interposition,  but  the  interposition  of  the  eclipse,  isobvious because the interposition is an element in the definition of eclipse,

which shows that the eclipse is known through the interposition and not vice

versa.

On the other hand, can a single effect have more than one cause? One

might argue as follows: if the same attribute is predicable of more than one

thing as its primary subject, let B be a primary subject in which A inheres,

and C another primary subject of A, and D and E primary subjects of B and C

respectively. A will then inhere in D and E, and B will be the cause of A’s

inherence in D, C of A’s inherence in E. The presence of the cause thus

necessitates that of the effect, but the presence of the effect necessitates the

presence not of all that may cause it but only of a cause which yet need not be

the  whole  cause.  We  may,  however,  suggest  that  if  the  connexion  to  be

proved is always universal and commensurate, not only will the cause be a

whole but also the effect will be universal and commensurate. For instance,

deciduous character will belong exclusively to a subject which is a whole,

and,  if  this  whole  has  species,  universally  and  commensurately  to  those

species-i.e. either to all species of plant or to a single species. So in these

universal  and  commensurate  connexions  the  ‘middle’  and  its  effect  must

reciprocate, i.e. be convertible. Supposing, for example, that the reason why

trees are deciduous is the coagulation of sap, then if a tree is deciduous,

coagulation must be present, and if coagulation is present-not in any subject

but in a tree-then that tree must be deciduous.


17


  Can the cause of an identical effect be not identical in every instance of the

effect but different? Or is that impossible? Perhaps it is impossible if the

effect is demonstrated as essential and not as inhering in virtue of a symptom

or an accident-because the middle is then the definition of the major term-

though possible if the demonstration is not essential. Now it is possible to

consider the effect and its subject as an accidental conjunction, though such

conjunctions  would  not  be  regarded  as  connexions  demanding  scientific

proof. But if they are accepted as such, the middle will correspond to the

extremes, and be equivocal if they are equivocal, generically one if they are

generically one. Take the question why proportionals alternate. The cause

when  they  are  lines,  and  when  they  are  numbers,  is  both  different  and

identical; different in so far as lines are lines and not numbers, identical asinvolving  a  given  determinate  increment.  In  all  proportionals  this  is  so.

Again, the cause of likeness between colour and colour is other than that

between figure and figure; for likeness here is equivocal, meaning perhaps in

the latter case equality of the ratios of the sides and equality of the angles, in

the case of colours identity of the act of perceiving them, or something else of

the sort. Again, connexions requiring proof which are identical by analogy

middles also analogous.

The truth is that cause, effect, and subject are reciprocally predicable in the

following way. If the species are taken severally, the effect is wider than the

subject (e.g. the possession of external angles equal to four right angles is an

attribute wider than triangle or are), but it is coextensive with the species

taken collectively (in this instance with all figures whose external angles are

equal  to  four  right  angles).  And  the  middle  likewise  reciprocates,  for  the

middle is a definition of the major; which is incidentally the reason why all

the sciences are built up through definition.

We may illustrate as follows. Deciduous is a universal attribute of vine,

and is at the same time of wider extent than vine; and of fig, and is of wider

extent than fig: but it is not wider than but coextensive with the totality of the

species. Then if you take the middle which is proximate, it is a definition of

deciduous. I say that, because you will first reach a middle next the subject,

and a premiss asserting it of the whole subject, and after that a middle-the

coagulation of sap or something of the sort-proving the connexion of the first

middle with the major: but it is the coagulation of sap at the junction of leaf-

stalk and stem which defines deciduous.

If an explanation in formal terms of the inter-relation of cause and effect is

demanded, we shall offer the following. Let A be an attribute of all B, and B

of every species of D, but so that both A and B are wider than their respective

subjects. Then B will be a universal attribute of each species of D (since I call

such  an  attribute  universal  even  if  it  is  not  commensurate,  and  I  call  an

attribute  primary  universal  if  it  is  commensurate,  not  with  each  species

severally but with their totality), and it extends beyond each of them taken

separately.

  Thus, B is the cause of A’s inherence in the species of D: consequently A

must be of wider extent than B; otherwise why should B be the cause of A’s

inherence in D any more than A the cause of B’s inherence in D? Now if A is

an attribute of all the species of E, all the species of E will be united by

possessing some common cause other than B: otherwise how shall we be ableto say that A is predicable of all of which E is predicable, while E is not

predicable of all of which A can be predicated? I mean how can there fail to

be some special cause of A’s inherence in E, as there was of A’s inherence in

all the species of D? Then are the species of E, too, united by possessing

some common cause? This cause we must look for. Let us call it C.

We conclude, then, that the same effect may have more than one cause, but

not in subjects specifically identical. For instance, the cause of longevity in

quadrupeds is lack of bile, in birds a dry constitution-or certainly something

different.


18


If immediate premisses are not reached at once, and there is not merely one

middle but several middles, i.e. several causes; is the cause of the property’s

inherence in the several species the middle which is proximate to the primary

universal, or the middle which is proximate to the species? Clearly the cause

is that nearest to each species severally in which it is manifested, for that is

the cause of the subject’s falling under the universal. To illustrate formally: C

is the cause of B’s inherence in D; hence C is the cause of A’s inherence in

D, B of A’s inherence in C, while the cause of A’s inherence in B is B itself.


19


As  regards  syllogism  and  demonstration,  the  definition  of,  and  the

conditions required to produce each of them, are now clear, and with that also

the  definition  of,  and  the  conditions  required  to  produce,  demonstrative

knowledge, since it is the same as demonstration. As to the basic premisses,

how they become known and what is the developed state of knowledge of

them is made clear by raising some preliminary problems.

We have already said that scientific knowledge through demonstration is

impossible unless a man knows the primary immediate premisses. But there

are questions which might be raised in respect of the apprehension of these

immediate premisses: one might not only ask whether it is of the same kind

as the apprehension of the conclusions, but also whether there is or is not

scientific knowledge of both; or scientific knowledge of the latter, and of the

former a different kind of knowledge; and, further, whether the developedstates of knowledge are not innate but come to be in us, or are innate but at

first unnoticed. Now it is strange if we possess them from birth; for it means

that we possess apprehensions more accurate than demonstration and fail to

notice them. If on the other hand we acquire them and do not previously

possess them, how could we apprehend and learn without a basis of pre-

existent knowledge? For that is impossible, as we used to find in the case of

demonstration. So it emerges that neither can we possess them from birth, nor

can they come to be in us if we are without knowledge of them to the extent

of  having  no  such  developed  state  at  all.  Therefore  we  must  possess  a

capacity of some sort, but not such as to rank higher in accuracy than these

developed states. And this at least is an obvious characteristic of all animals,

for they possess a congenital discriminative capacity which is called sense-

perception. But though sense-perception is innate in all animals, in some the

sense-impression comes to persist, in others it does not. So animals in which

this persistence does not come to be have either no knowledge at all outside

the act of perceiving, or no knowledge of objects of which no impression

persists; animals in which it does come into being have perception and can

continue to retain the sense-impression in the soul: and when such persistence

is frequently repeated a further distinction at once arises between those which

out  of  the  persistence  of  such  sense-impressions  develop  a  power  of

systematizing  them  and  those  which  do  not.  So  out  of  sense-perception

comes to be what we call memory, and out of frequently repeated memories

of the same thing develops experience; for a number of memories constitute a

single  experience.  From  experience  again-i.e.  from  the  universal  now

stabilized in its entirety within the soul, the one beside the many which is a

single identity within them all-originate the skill of the craftsman and the

knowledge of the man of science, skill in the sphere of coming to be and

science in the sphere of being.

We  conclude  that  these  states  of  knowledge  are  neither  innate  in  a

determinate form, nor developed from other higher states of knowledge, but

from sense-perception. It is like a rout in battle stopped by first one man

making  a  stand  and  then  another,  until  the  original  formation  has  been

restored. The soul is so constituted as to be capable of this process.

Let  us  now  restate  the  account  given  already,  though  with  insufficient

clearness. When one of a number of logically indiscriminable particulars has

made a stand, the earliest universal is present in the soul: for though the act of

sense-perception  is  of  the  particular,  its  content  is  universal-is  man,  forexample,  not  the  man  Callias.  A  fresh  stand  is  made  among  these

rudimentary universals, and the process does not cease until the indivisible

concepts, the true universals, are established: e.g. such and such a species of

animal is a step towards the genus animal, which by the same process is a

step towards a further generalization.

  Thus  it  is  clear  that  we  must  get  to  know  the  primary  premisses  by

induction;  for  the  method  by  which  even  sense-perception  implants  the

universal is inductive. Now of the thinking states by which we grasp truth,

some are unfailingly true, others admit of error-opinion, for instance, and

calculation, whereas scientific knowing and intuition are always true: further,

no  other  kind  of  thought  except  intuition  is  more  accurate  than  scientific

knowledge,  whereas  primary  premisses  are  more  knowable  than

demonstrations,  and  all  scientific  knowledge  is  discursive.  From  these

considerations it follows that there will be no scientific knowledge of the

primary  premisses,  and  since  except  intuition  nothing  can  be  truer  than

scientific  knowledge,  it  will  be  intuition  that  apprehends  the  primary

premisses-a result which also follows from the fact that demonstration cannot

be  the  originative  source  of  demonstration,  nor,  consequently,  scientific

knowledge of scientific knowledge.If, therefore, it is the only other kind of

true  thinking  except  scientific  knowing,  intuition  will  be  the  originative

source of scientific knowledge. And the originative source of science grasps

the original basic premiss, while science as a whole is similarly related as

originative source to the whole body of fact.                                  Topics, Book I


Translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge


 

 

 


1


Our treatise proposes to find a line of inquiry whereby we shall be able to

reason  from  opinions  that  are  generally  accepted  about  every  problem

propounded to us, and also shall ourselves, when standing up to an argument,

avoid saying anything that will obstruct us. First, then, we must say what

reasoning is, and what its varieties are, in order to grasp dialectical reasoning:

for this is the object of our search in the treatise before us.

Now reasoning is an argument in which, certain things being laid down,

something other than these necessarily comes about through them. (a) It is a

‘demonstration’, when the premisses from which the reasoning starts are true

and primary, or are such that our knowledge of them has originally come

through premisses which are primary and true: (b) reasoning, on the other

hand, is ‘dialectical’, if it reasons from opinions that are generally accepted.

Things are ‘true’ and ‘primary’ which are believed on the strength not of

anything else but of themselves: for in regard to the first principles of science

it is improper to ask any further for the why and wherefore of them; each of

the first principles should command belief in and by itself. On the other hand,

those opinions are ‘generally accepted’ which are accepted by every one or

by the majority or by the philosophers-i.e. by all, or by the majority, or by the

most notable and illustrious of them. Again (c), reasoning is ‘contentious’ if

it starts from opinions that seem to be generally accepted, but are not really

such, or again if it merely seems to reason from opinions that are or seem to

be  generally  accepted.  For  not  every  opinion  that  seems  to  be  generally

accepted actually is generally accepted. For in none of the opinions which we

call generally accepted is the illusion entirely on the surface, as happens in

the case of the principles of contentious arguments; for the nature of thefallacy in these is obvious immediately, and as a rule even to persons with

little  power  of  comprehension.  So  then,  of  the  contentious  reasonings

mentioned, the former really deserves to be called ‘reasoning’ as well, but the

other should be called ‘contentious reasoning’, but not ‘reasoning’, since it

appears  to  reason,  but  does  not  really  do  so.  Further  (d),  besides  all  the

reasonings we have mentioned there are the mis-reasonings that start from the

premisses peculiar to the special sciences, as happens (for example) in the

case of geometry and her sister sciences. For this form of reasoning appears

to differ from the reasonings mentioned above; the man who draws a false

figure reasons from things that are neither true and primary, nor yet generally

accepted.  For  he  does  not  fall  within  the  definition;  he  does  not  assume

opinions  that  are  received  either  by  every  one  or  by  the  majority  or  by

philosophers-that is to say, by all, or by most, or by the most illustrious of

them-but  he  conducts  his  reasoning  upon  assumptions  which,  though

appropriate to the science in question, are not true; for he effects his mis-

reasoning either by describing the semicircles wrongly or by drawing certain

lines in a way in which they could not be drawn.

The foregoing must stand for an outline survey of the species of reasoning.

In general, in regard both to all that we have already discussed and to those

which we shall discuss later, we may remark that that amount of distinction

between them may serve, because it is not our purpose to give the exact

definition of any of them; we merely want to describe them in outline; we

consider it quite enough from the point of view of the line of inquiry before

us to be able to recognize each of them in some sort of way.

 


2


Next in order after the foregoing, we must say for how many and for what

purposes  the  treatise  is  useful.  They  are  three-intellectual  training,  casual

encounters, and the philosophical sciences. That it is useful as a training is

obvious on the face of it. The possession of a plan of inquiry will enable us

more  easily  to  argue  about  the  subject  proposed.  For  purposes  of  casual

encounters, it is useful because when we have counted up the opinions held

by most people, we shall meet them on the ground not of other people’s

convictions but of their own, while we shift the ground of any argument that

they  appear  to  us  to  state  unsoundly.  For  the  study  of  the  philosophicalsciences it is useful, because the ability to raise searching difficulties on both

sides of a subject will make us detect more easily the truth and error about the

several points that arise. It has a further use in relation to the ultimate bases of

the principles used in the several sciences. For it is impossible to discuss

them at all from the principles proper to the particular science in hand, seeing

that the principles are the prius of everything else: it is through the opinions

generally held on the particular points that these have to be discussed, and

this task belongs properly, or most appropriately, to dialectic: for dialectic is

a process of criticism wherein lies the path to the principles of all inquiries.                                  Topics, Book II


Translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge


<

div id="book2" class="book" title="Book II">


1


Of problems some are universal, others particular. Universal problems are

such  as  ‘Every  pleasure  is  good’  and  ‘No  pleasure  is  good’;  particular

problems are such as ‘Some pleasure is good’ and ‘Some pleasure is not

good’. The methods of establishing and overthrowing a view universally are

common to both kinds of problems; for when we have shown that a predicate

belongs in every case, we shall also have shown that it belongs in some cases.

Likewise, also, if we show that it does not belong in any case, we shall also

have shown that it does not belong in every case. First, then, we must speak

of  the  methods  of  overthrowing  a  view  universally,  because  such  are

common to both universal and particular problems, and because people more

usually introduce theses asserting a predicate than denying it, while those

who argue with them overthrow it. The conversion of an appropriate name

which is drawn from the element ‘accident’ is an extremely precarious thing;

for in the case of accidents and in no other it is possible for something to be

true  conditionally  and  not  universally.  Names  drawn  from  the  elements

‘definition’ and ‘property’ and ‘genus’ are bound to be convertible; e.g. if ‘to

be an animal that walks on two feet is an attribute of S’, then it will be true by

conversion to say that ‘S is an animal that walks on two feet’. Likewise, also,

if drawn from the genus; for if ‘to be an animal is an attribute of S’, then ‘S is

an animal’. The same is true also in the case of a property; for if ‘to be

capable of learning grammar is an attribute of S’, then ‘S will be capable of

learning grammar’. For none of these attributes can possibly belong or not

belong in part; they must either belong or not belong absolutely. In the case

of accidents, on the other hand, there is nothing to prevent an attribute (e.g.

whiteness or justice) belonging in part, so that it is not enough to show that

whiteness or justice is an attribute of a man in order to show that he is whiteor just; for it is open to dispute it and say that he is white or just in part only.

Conversion, then, is not a necessary process in the case of accidents.

We must also define the errors that occur in problems. They are of two

kinds, caused either by false statement or by transgression of the established

diction.  For  those  who  make  false  statements,  and  say  that  an  attribute

belongs to thing which does not belong to it, commit error; and those who

call objects by the names of other objects (e.g. calling a planetree a ‘man’)

transgress the established terminology.

<

div id="section20" class="section" title="2">


2


Now one commonplace rule is to look and see if a man has ascribed as an

accident what belongs in some other way. This mistake is most commonly

made in regard to the genera of things, e.g. if one were to say that white

happens  (accidit)  to  be  a  colour-for  being  a  colour  does  not  happen  by

accident to white, but colour is its genus. The assertor may of course define it

so in so many words, saying (e.g.) that ‘Justice happens (accidit) to be a

virtue’;  but  often  even  without  such  definition  it  is  obvious  that  he  has

rendered the genus as an accident; e.g. suppose that one were to say that

whiteness is coloured or that walking is in motion. For a predicate drawn

from  the  genus  is  never  ascribed  to  the  species  in  an  inflected  form,  but

always the genera are predicated of their species literally; for the species take

on both the name and the definition of their genera. A man therefore who

says that white is ‘coloured’ has not rendered ‘coloured’ as its genus, seeing

that he has used an inflected form, nor yet as its property or as its definition:

for the definition and property of a thing belong to it and to nothing else,

whereas many things besides white are coloured, e.g. a log, a stone, a man,

and a horse. Clearly then he renders it as an accident.

  Another rule is to examine all cases where a predicate has been either

asserted or denied universally to belong to something. Look at them species

by  species,  and  not  in  their  infinite  multitude:  for  then  the  inquiry  will

proceed more directly and in fewer steps. You should look and begin with the

most primary groups, and then proceed in order down to those that are not

further divisible: e.g. if a man has said that the knowledge of opposites is the

same, you should look and see whether it be so of relative opposites and ofcontraries and of terms signifying the privation or presence of certain states,

and of contradictory terms. Then, if no clear result be reached so far in these

cases, you should again divide these until you come to those that are not

further divisible, and see (e.g.) whether it be so of just deeds and unjust, or of

the double and the half, or of blindness and sight, or of being and not-being:

for if in any case it be shown that the knowledge of them is not the same we

shall have demolished the problem. Likewise, also, if the predicate belongs in

no  case.  This  rule  is  convertible  for  both  destructive  and  constructive

purposes: for if, when we have suggested a division, the predicate appears to

hold in all or in a large number of cases, we may then claim that the other

should actually assert it universally, or else bring a negative instance to show

in what case it is not so: for if he does neither of these things, a refusal to

assert it will make him look absurd.

  Another rule is to make definitions both of an accident and of its subject,

either of both separately or else of one of them, and then look and see if

anything untrue has been assumed as true in the definitions. Thus (e.g.) to see

if it is possible to wrong a god, ask what is ‘to wrong’? For if it be ‘to injure

deliberately’,  clearly  it  is  not  possible  for  a  god  to  be  wronged:  for  it  is

impossible  that  God  should  be  injured.  Again,  to  see  if  the  good  man  is

jealous, ask who is the ‘jealous’ man and what is ‘jealousy’. For if ‘jealousy’

is pain at the apparent success of some well-behaved person, clearly the good

man is not jealous: for then he would be bad. Again, to see if the indignant

man is jealous, ask who each of them is: for then it will be obvious whether

the  statement  is  true  or  false;  e.g.  if  he  is  ‘jealous’  who  grieves  at  the

successes of the good, and he is ‘indignant’ who grieves at the successes of

the evil, then clearly the indignant man would not be jealous. A man should

substitute definitions also for the terms contained in his definitions, and not

stop until he comes to a familiar term: for often if the definition be rendered

whole, the point at issue is not cleared up, whereas if for one of the terms

used in the definition a definition be stated, it becomes obvious.

  Moreover, a man should make the problem into a proposition for himself,

and then bring a negative instance against it: for the negative instance will be

a ground of attack upon the assertion. This rule is very nearly the same as the

rule  to  look  into  cases  where  a  predicate  has  been  attributed  or  denied

universally: but it differs in the turn of the argument.

  Moreover, you should define what kind of things should be called as most

men call them, and what should not. For this is useful both for establishingand for overthrowing a view: e.g. you should say that we ought to use our

terms to mean the same things as most people mean by them, but when we

ask what kind of things are or are not of such and such a kind, we should not

here go with the multitude: e.g. it is right to call ‘healthy’ whatever tends to

produce health, as do most men: but in saying whether the object before us

tends to produce health or not, we should adopt the language no longer of the

multitude but of the doctor.

<

div id="section21" class="section" title="3">


3


  Moreover, if a term be used in several senses, and it has been laid down

that it is or that it is not an attribute of S, you should show your case of one of

its several senses, if you cannot show it of both. This rule is to be observed in

cases where the difference of meaning is undetected; for supposing this to be

obvious,  then  the  other  man  will  object  that  the  point  which  he  himself

questioned  has  not  been  discussed,  but  only  the  other  point.  This

commonplace rule is convertible for purposes both of establishing and of

overthrowing a view. For if we want to establish a statement, we shall show

that in one sense the attribute belongs, if we cannot show it of both senses:

whereas if we are overthrowing a statement, we shall show that in one sense

the attribute does not belong, if we cannot show it of both senses. Of course,

in  overthrowing  a  statement  there  is  no  need  to  start  the  discussion  by

securing any admission, either when the statement asserts or when it denies

the  attribute  universally:  for  if  we  show  that  in  any  case  whatever  the

attribute does not belong, we shall have demolished the universal assertion of

it, and likewise also if we show that it belongs in a single case, we shall

demolish the universal denial of it. Whereas in establishing a statement we

ought  to  secure  a  preliminary  admission  that  if  it  belongs  in  any  case

whatever, it belongs universally, supposing this claim to be a plausible one.

For it is not enough to discuss a single instance in order to show that an

attribute  belongs  universally;  e.g.  to  argue  that  if  the  soul  of  man  be

immortal, then every soul is immortal, so that a previous admission must be

secured that if any soul whatever be immortal, then every soul is immortal.

This is not to be done in every case, but only whenever we are not easily able

to quote any single argument applying to all cases in common, as (e.g.) thegeometrician can argue that the triangle has its angles equal to two right

angles.

If, again, the variety of meanings of a term be obvious, distinguish how

many meanings it has before proceeding either to demolish or to establish it:

e.g. supposing ‘the right’ to mean ‘the expedient’ or ‘the honourable’, you

should try either to establish or to demolish both descriptions of the subject in

question; e.g. by showing that it is honourable and expedient, or that it is

neither honourable nor expedient. Supposing, however, that it is impossible

to show both, you should show the one, adding an indication that it is true in

the  one  sense  and  not  in  the  other.  The  same  rule  applies  also  when  the

number of senses into which it is divided is more than two.

  Again, consider those expressions whose meanings are many, but differ

not by way of ambiguity of a term, but in some other way: e.g. ‘The science

of many things is one’: here ‘many things’ may mean the end and the means

to that end, as (e.g.) medicine is the science both of producing health and of

dieting; or they may be both of them ends, as the science of contraries is said

to be the same (for of contraries the one is no more an end than the other); or

again  they  may  be  an  essential  and  an  accidental  attribute,  as  (e.g.)  the

essential fact that the triangle has its angles equal to two right angles, and the

accidental fact that the equilateral figure has them so: for it is because of the

accident of the equilateral triangle happening to be a triangle that we know

that it has its angles equal to two right angles. If, then, it is not possible in any

sense of the term that the science of many things should be the same, it

clearly is altogether impossible that it should be so; or, if it is possible in

some sense, then clearly it is possible. Distinguish as many meanings as are

required: e.g. if we want to establish a view, we should bring forward all such

meanings  as  admit  that  view  and  should  divide  them  only  into  those

meanings which also are required for the establishment of our case: whereas

if we want to overthrow a view, we should bring forward all that do not admit

that view, and leave the rest aside. We must deal also in these cases as well

with any uncertainty about the number of meanings involved. Further, that

one thing is, or is not, ‘of’ another should be established by means of the

same commonplace rules; e.g. that a particular science is of a particular thing,

treated either as an end or as a means to its end, or as accidentally connected

with it; or again that it is not ‘of’ it in any of the aforesaid ways. The same

rule holds true also of desire and all other terms that have more than one

object. For the ‘desire of X’ may mean the desire of it as an end (e.g. thedesire of health) or as a means to an end (e.g. the desire of being doctored), or

as a thing desired accidentally, as, in the case of wine, the sweet-toothed

person desires it not because it is wine but because it is sweet. For essentially

he desires the sweet, and only accidentally the wine: for if it be dry, he no

longer desires it. His desire for it is therefore accidental. This rule is useful in

dealing  with  relative  terms:  for  cases  of  this  kind  are  generally  cases  of

relative terms.

<

div id="section22" class="section" title="4">


4


  Moreover, it is well to alter a term into one more familiar, e.g. to substitute

‘clear’ for ‘exact’ in describing a conception, and ‘being fussy’ for ‘being

busy’: for when the expression is made more familiar, the thesis becomes

easier to attack. This commonplace rule also is available for both purposes

alike, both for establishing and for overthrowing a view.

In order to show that contrary attributes belong to the same thing, look at

its genus; e.g. if we want to show that rightness and wrongness are possible

in regard to perception, and to perceive is to judge, while it is possible to

judge rightly or wrongly, then in regard to perception as well rightness and

wrongness must be possible. In the present instance the proof proceeds from

the genus and relates to the species: for ‘to judge’ is the genus of ‘to —

perceive’; for the man who perceives judges in a certain way. But per contra

it may proceed from the species to the genus: for all the attributes that belong

to the species belong to the genus as well; e.g. if there is a bad and a good

knowledge there is also a bad and a good disposition: for ‘disposition’ is the

genus of knowledge. Now the former commonplace argument is fallacious

for purposes of establishing a view, while the second is true. For there is no

necessity that all the attributes that belong to the genus should belong also to

the species; for ‘animal’ is flying and quadruped, but not so ‘man’. All the

attributes, on the other hand, that belong to the species must of necessity

belong also to the genus; for if ‘man’ is good, then animal also is good. On

the other hand, for purposes of overthrowing a view, the former argument is

true while the latter is fallacious; for all the attributes which do not belong to

the  genus  do  not  belong  to  the  species  either;  whereas  all  those  that  are

wanting to the species are not of necessity wanting to the genus.  Since those things of which the genus is predicated must also of necessity

have one of its species predicated of them, and since those things that are

possessed of the genus in question, or are described by terms derived from

that genus, must also of necessity be possessed of one of its species or be

described by terms derived from one of its species (e.g. if to anything the

term ‘scientific knowledge’ be applied, then also there will be applied to it

the term ‘grammatical’ or ‘musical’ knowledge, or knowledge of one of the

other sciences; and if any one possesses scientific knowledge or is described

by a term derived from ‘science’, then he will also possess grammatical or

musical knowledge or knowledge of one of the other sciences, or will be

described by a term derived from one of them, e.g. as a ‘grammarian’ or a

‘musician’)-therefore if any expression be asserted that is in any way derived

from the genus (e.g. that the soul is in motion), look and see whether it be

possible for the soul to be moved with any of the species of motion; whether

(e.g.) it can grow or be destroyed or come to be, and so forth with all the

other species of motion. For if it be not moved in any of these ways, clearly it

does not move at all. This commonplace rule is common for both purposes,

both for overthrowing and for establishing a view: for if the soul moves with

one of the species of motion, clearly it does move; while if it does not move

with any of the species of motion, clearly it does not move.

If you are not well equipped with an argument against the assertion, look

among the definitions, real or apparent, of the thing before you, and if one is

not enough, draw upon several. For it will be easier to attack people when

committed  to  a  definition:  for  an  attack  is  always  more  easily  made  on

definitions.

  Moreover, look and see in regard to the thing in question, what it is whose

reality conditions the reality of the thing in question, or what it is whose

reality necessarily follows if the thing in question be real: if you wish to

establish a view inquire what there is on whose reality the reality of the thing

in question will follow (for if the former be shown to be real, then the thing in

question  will  also  have  been  shown  to  be  real);  while  if  you  want  to

overthrow a view, ask what it is that is real if the thing in question be real, for

if we show that what follows from the thing in question is unreal, we shall

have demolished the thing in question.

  Moreover, look at the time involved, to see if there be any discrepancy

anywhere: e.g. suppose a man to have stated that what is being nourished of

necessity grows: for animals are always of necessity being nourished, butthey  do  not  always  grow.  Likewise,  also,  if  he  has  said  that  knowing  is

remembering: for the one is concerned with past time, whereas the other has

to do also with the present and the future. For we are said to know things

present and future (e.g. that there will be an eclipse), whereas it is impossible

to remember anything save what is in the past.

<

div id="section23" class="section" title="5">


5


  Moreover, there is the sophistic turn of argument, whereby we draw our

opponent into the kind of statement against which we shall be well supplied

with lines of argument. This process is sometimes a real necessity, sometimes

an apparent necessity, sometimes neither an apparent nor a real necessity. It is

really necessary whenever the answerer has denied any view that would be

useful  in  attacking  the  thesis,  and  the  questioner  thereupon  addresses  his

arguments  to  the  support  of  this  view,  and  when  moreover  the  view  in

question happens to be one of a kind on which he has a good stock of lines of

argument. Likewise, also, it is really necessary whenever he (the questioner)

first, by an induction made by means of the view laid down, arrives at a

certain statement and then tries to demolish that statement: for when once this

has been demolished, the view originally laid down is demolished as well. It

is an apparent necessity, when the point to which the discussion comes to be

directed appears to be useful, and relevant to the thesis, without being really

so; whether it be that the man who is standing up to the argument has refused

to concede something, or whether he (the questioner) has first reached it by a

plausible induction based upon the thesis and then tries to demolish it. The

remaining  case  is  when  the  point  to  which  the  discussion  comes  to  be

directed is neither really nor apparently necessary, and it is the answerer’s

luck to be confuted on a mere side issue You should beware of the last of the

aforesaid methods; for it appears to be wholly disconnected from, and foreign

to, the art of dialectic. For this reason, moreover, the answerer should not lose

his temper, but assent to those statements that are of no use in attacking the

thesis, adding an indication whenever he assents although he does not agree

with the view. For, as a rule, it increases the confusion of questioners if, after

all propositions of this kind have been granted them, they can then draw no

conclusion.  Moreover, any one who has made any statement whatever has in a certain

sense made several statements, inasmuch as each statement has a number of

necessary consequences: e.g. the man who said ‘X is a man’ has also said that

it is an animal and that it is animate and a biped and capable of acquiring

reason and knowledge, so that by the demolition of any single one of these

consequences, of whatever kind, the original statement is demolished as well.

But  you  should  beware  here  too  of  making  a  change  to  a  more  difficult

subject: for sometimes the consequence, and sometimes the original thesis, is

the easier to demolish.

<

div id="section24" class="section" title="6">


6


In regard to subjects which must have one and one only of two predicates,

as (e.g.) a man must have either a disease or health, supposing we are well

supplied as regards the one for arguing its presence or absence, we shall be

well equipped as regards the remaining one as well. This rule is convertible

for both purposes: for when we have shown that the one attribute belongs, we

shall have shown that the remaining one does not belong; while if we show

that the one does not belong, we shall have shown that the remaining one

does belong. Clearly then the rule is useful for both purposes.

  Moreover, you may devise a line of attack by reinterpreting a term in its

literal meaning, with the implication that it is most fitting so to take it rather

than  in  its  established  meaning:  e.g.  the  expression  ‘strong  at  heart’  will

suggest not the courageous man, according to the use now established, but

the man the state of whose heart is strong; just as also the expression ‘of a

good  hope’  may  be  taken  to  mean  the  man  who  hopes  for  good  things.

Likewise also ‘well-starred’ may be taken to mean the man whose star is

good, as Xenocrates says ‘well-starred is he who has a noble soul’.’ For a

man’s star is his soul.

  Some  things  occur  of  necessity,  others  usually,  others  however  it  may

chance; if therefore a necessary event has been asserted to occur usually, or if

a usual event (or, failing such an event itself, its contrary) has been stated to

occur  of  necessity,  it  always  gives  an  opportunity  for  attack.  For  if  a

necessary event has been asserted to occur usually, clearly the speaker has

denied an attribute to be universal which is universal, and so has made amistake: and so he has if he has declared the usual attribute to be necessary:

for  then  he  declares  it  to  belong  universally  when  it  does  not  so  belong.

Likewise also if he has declared the contrary of what is usual to be necessary.

For the contrary of a usual attribute is always a comparatively rare attribute:

e.g. if men are usually bad, they are comparatively seldom good, so that his

mistake is even worse if he has declared them to be good of necessity. The

same is true also if he has declared a mere matter of chance to happen of

necessity  or  usually;  for  a  chance  event  happens  neither  of  necessity  nor

usually. If the thing happens usually, then even supposing his statement does

not distinguish whether he meant that it happens usually or that it happens

necessarily, it is open to you to discuss it on the assumption that he meant

that it happens necessarily: e.g. if he has stated without any distinction that

disinherited persons are bad, you may assume in discussing it that he means

that they are so necessarily.

  Moreover, look and see also if he has stated a thing to be an accident of

itself, taking it to be a different thing because it has a different name, as

Prodicus used to divide pleasures into joy and delight and good cheer: for all

these are names of the same thing, to wit, Pleasure. If then any one says that

joyfulness is an accidental attribute of cheerfulness, he would be declaring it

to be an accidental attribute of itself.

<

div id="section25" class="section" title="7">


7


  Inasmuch as contraries can be conjoined with each other in six ways, and

four of these conjunctions constitute a contrariety, we must grasp the subject

of  contraries,  in  order  that  it  may  help  us  both  in  demolishing  and  in

establishing a view. Well then, that the modes of conjunction are six is clear:

for either (1) each of the contrary verbs will be conjoined to each of the

contrary objects; and this gives two modes: e.g. to do good to friends and to

do evil to enemies, or per contra to do evil to friends and to do good to

enemies. Or else (2) both verbs may be attached to one object; and this too

gives two modes, e.g. to do good to friends and to do evil to friends, or to do

good to enemies and to do evil to enemies. Or (3) a single verb may be

attached to both objects: and this also gives two modes; e.g. to do good to

friends  and  to  do  good  to  enemies,  or  to  do  evil  to  friends  and  evil  toenemies.

The  first  two  then  of  the  aforesaid  conjunctions  do  not  constitute  any

contrariety; for the doing of good to friends is not contrary to the doing of

evil  to  enemies:  for  both  courses  are  desirable  and  belong  to  the  same

disposition. Nor is the doing of evil to friends contrary to the doing of good

to  enemies:  for  both  of  these  are  objectionable  and  belong  to  the  same

disposition: and one objectionable thing is not generally thought to be the

contrary of another, unless the one be an expression denoting an excess, and

the other an expression denoting a defect: for an excess is generally thought

to belong to the class of objectionable things, and likewise also a defect. But

the other four all constitute a contrariety. For to do good to friends is contrary

to the doing of evil to friends: for it proceeds from the contrary disposition,

and the one is desirable, and the other objectionable. The case is the same

also in regard to the other conjunctions: for in each combination the one

course is desirable, and the other objectionable, and the one belongs to a

reasonable disposition and the other to a bad. Clearly, then, from what has

been said, the same course has more than one contrary. For the doing of good

to friends has as its contrary both the doing of good to enemies and the doing

of evil to friends. Likewise, if we examine them in the same way, we shall

find that the contraries of each of the others also are two in number. Select

therefore whichever of the two contraries is useful in attacking the thesis.

  Moreover, if the accident of a thing have a contrary, see whether it belongs

to the subject to which the accident in question has been declared to belong:

for if the latter belongs the former could not belong; for it is impossible that

contrary predicates should belong at the same time to the same thing.

Or again, look and see if anything has been said about something, of such a

kind  that  if  it  be  true,  contrary  predicates  must  necessarily  belong  to  the

thing: e.g. if he has said that the ‘Ideas’ exist in us. For then the result will be

that they are both in motion and at rest, and moreover that they are objects

both of sensation and of thought. For according to the views of those who

posit the existence of Ideas, those Ideas are at rest and are objects of thought;

while if they exist in us, it is impossible that they should be unmoved: for

when we move, it follows necessarily that all that is in us moves with us as

well. Clearly also they are objects of sensation, if they exist in us: for it is

through the sensation of sight that we recognize the Form present in each

individual.

  Again, if there be posited an accident which has a contrary, look and see ifthat which admits of the accident will admit of its contrary as well: for the

same thing admits of contraries. Thus (e.g.) if he has asserted that hatred

follows anger, hatred would in that case be in the ‘spirited faculty’: for that is

where anger is. You should therefore look and see if its contrary, to wit,

friendship, be also in the ‘spirited faculty’: for if not-if friendship is in the

faculty of desire-then hatred could not follow anger. Likewise also if he has

asserted  that  the  faculty  of  desire  is  ignorant.  For  if  it  were  capable  of

ignorance, it would be capable of knowledge as well: and this is not generally

held-I mean that the faculty of desire is capable of knowledge. For purposes,

then, of overthrowing a view, as has been said, this rule should be observed:

but for purposes of establishing one, though the rule will not help you to

assert that the accident actually belongs, it will help you to assert that it may

possibly belong. For having shown that the thing in question will not admit of

the contrary of the accident asserted, we shall have shown that the accident

neither belongs nor can possibly belong; while on the other hand, if we show

that the contrary belongs, or that the thing is capable of the contrary, we shall

not indeed as yet have shown that the accident asserted does belong as well;

our proof will merely have gone to this point, that it is possible for it to

belong.

<

div id="section26" class="section" title="8">


8


Seeing that the modes of opposition are four in number, you should look

for arguments among the contradictories of your terms, converting the order

of their sequence, both when demolishing and when establishing a view, and

you should secure them by means of induction-such arguments (e.g.) as that

man be an animal, what is not an animal is not a man’: and likewise also in

other  instances  of  contradictories.  For  in  those  cases  the  sequence  is

converse: for ‘animal’ follows upon ‘man but ‘not-animal’ does not follow

upon ‘not-man’, but conversely ‘not-man’ upon ‘not-animal’. In all cases,

therefore,  a  postulate  of  this  sort  should  be  made,  (e.g.)  that  ‘If  the

honourable is pleasant, what is not pleasant is not honourable, while if the

latter be untrue, so is the former’. Likewise, also, ‘If what is not pleasant be

not  honourable,  then  what  is  honourable  is  pleasant’.  Clearly,  then,  the

conversion of the sequence formed by contradiction of the terms of the thesisis a method convertible for both purposes.

  Then look also at the case of the contraries of S and P in the thesis, and see

if  the  contrary  of  the  one  follows  upon  the  contrary  of  the  other,  either

directly or conversely, both when you are demolishing and when you are

establishing  a  view:  secure  arguments  of  this  kind  as  well  by  means  of

induction, so far as may be required. Now the sequence is direct in a case

such  as  that  of  courage  and  cowardice:  for  upon  the  one  of  them  virtue

follows,  and  vice  upon  the  other;  and  upon  the  one  it  follows  that  it  is

desirable,  while  upon  the  other  it  follows  that  it  is  objectionable.  The

sequence, therefore, in the latter case also is direct; for the desirable is the

contrary of the objectionable. Likewise also in other cases. The sequence is,

on  the  other  hand,  converse  in  such  a  case  as  this:  Health  follows  upon

vigour,  but  disease  does  not  follow  upon  debility;  rather  debility  follows

upon disease. In this case, then, clearly the sequence is converse. Converse

sequence is, however, rare in the case of contraries; usually the sequence is

direct. If, therefore, the contrary of the one term does not follow upon the

contrary of the other either directly or conversely, clearly neither does the one

term  follow  upon  the  other  in  the  statement  made:  whereas  if  the  one

followed the other in the case of the contraries, it must of necessity do so as

well in the original statement.

You should look also into cases of the privation or presence of a state in

like manner to the case of contraries. Only, in the case of such privations the

converse sequence does not occur: the sequence is always bound to be direct:

e.g. as sensation follows sight, while absence of sensation follows blindness.

For the opposition of sensation to absence of sensation is an opposition of the

presence to the privation of a state: for the one of them is a state, and the

other the privation of it.

The case of relative terms should also be studied in like manner to that of a

state and its privation: for the sequence of these as well is direct; e.g. if 3/1 is

a multiple, then 1/3 is a fraction: for 3/1 is relative to 1/3, and so is a multiple

to a fraction. Again, if knowledge be a conceiving, then also the object of

knowledge is an object of conception; and if sight be a sensation, then also

the object of sight is an object of sensation. An objection may be made that

there is no necessity for the sequence to take place, in the case of relative

terms,  in  the  way  described:  for  the  object  of  sensation  is  an  object  of

knowledge, whereas sensation is not knowledge. The objection is, however,

not  generally  received  as  really  true;  for  many  people  deny  that  there  isknowledge of objects of sensation. Moreover, the principle stated is just as

useful for the contrary purpose, e.g. to show that the object of sensation is not

an object of knowledge, on the ground that neither is sensation knowledge.

<

div id="section27" class="section" title="9">


9


  Again look at the case of the co-ordinates and inflected forms of the terms

in the thesis, both in demolishing and in establishing it. By co-ordinates’ are

meant  terms  such  as  the  following:  ‘Just  deeds’  and  the  ‘just  man’  are

coordinates of ‘justice’, and ‘courageous deeds’ and the ‘courageous man’

are co-ordinates of courage. Likewise also things that tend to produce and to

preserve anything are called co-ordinates of that which they tend to produce

and to preserve, as e.g. ‘healthy habits’ are co-ordinates of ‘health’ and a

‘vigorous  constitutional’  of  a  ‘vigorous  constitution’  and  so  forth  also  in

other  cases.  ‘Co-ordinate’,  then,  usually  describes  cases  such  as  these,

whereas ‘inflected forms’ are such as the following: ‘justly’, ‘courageously’,

‘healthily’, and such as are formed in this way. It is usually held that words

when used in their inflected forms as well are co-ordinates, as (e.g.) ‘justly’

in relation to justice, and ‘courageously’ to courage; and then ‘co-ordinate’

describes all the members of the same kindred series, e.g. ‘justice’, ‘just’, of a

man or an act, ‘justly’. Clearly, then, when any one member, whatever its

kind, of the same kindred series is shown to be good or praiseworthy, then all

the rest as well come to be shown to be so: e.g. if ‘justice’ be something

praiseworthy,  then  so  will  ‘just’,  of  a  man  or  thing,  and  ‘justly’  connote

something praiseworthy. Then ‘justly’ will be rendered also ‘praiseworthily’,

derived will by the same inflexion from ‘the praiseworthy’ whereby ‘justly’

is derived from ‘justice’.

  Look not only in the case of the subject mentioned, but also in the case of

its contrary, for the contrary predicate: e.g. argue that good is not necessarily

pleasant; for neither is evil painful: or that, if the latter be the case, so is the

former.  Also,  if  justice  be  knowledge,  then  injustice  is  ignorance:  and  if

‘justly’ means ‘knowingly’ and ‘skilfully’, then ‘unjustly’ means ‘ignorantly’

and ‘unskilfully’: whereas if the latter be not true, neither is the former, as in

the instance given just now: for ‘unjustly’ is more likely to seem equivalent

to ‘skilfully’ than to ‘unskilfully’. This commonplace rule has been statedbefore in dealing with the sequence of contraries; for all we are claiming now

is that the contrary of P shall follow the contrary of S.

  Moreover, look at the modes of generation and destruction of a thing, and

at the things which tend to produce or to destroy it, both in demolishing and

in  establishing  a  view.  For  those  things  whose  modes  of  generation  rank

among  good  things,  are  themselves  also  good;  and  if  they  themselves  be

good, so also are their modes of generation. If, on the other hand, their modes

of generation be evil, then they themselves also are evil. In regard to modes

of destruction the converse is true: for if the modes of destruction rank as

good things, then they themselves rank as evil things; whereas if the modes

of  destruction  count  as  evil,  they  themselves  count  as  good.  The  same

argument applies also to things tending to produce and destroy: for things

whose productive causes are good, themselves also rank as good; whereas if

causes destructive of them are good, they themselves rank as evil.

<

div id="section28" class="section" title="10">


10


  Again, look at things which are like the subject in question, and see if they

are in like case; e.g. if one branch of knowledge has more than one object, so

also will one opinion; and if to possess sight be to see, then also to possess

hearing will be to hear. Likewise also in the case of other things, both those

which are and those which are generally held to be like. The rule in question

is useful for both purposes; for if it be as stated in the case of some one like

thing, it is so with the other like things as well, whereas if it be not so in the

case of some one of them, neither is it so in the case of the others. Look and

see also whether the cases are alike as regards a single thing and a number of

things: for sometimes there is a discrepancy. Thus, if to ‘know’ a thing be to

‘think of’ it, then also to ‘know many things’ is to ‘be thinking of many

things’; whereas this is not true; for it is possible to know many things but not

to be thinking of them. If, then, the latter proposition be not true, neither was

the former that dealt with a single thing, viz. that to ‘know’ a thing is to

‘think of’ it.

  Moreover, argue from greater and less degrees. In regard to greater degrees

there are four commonplace rules. One is: See whether a greater degree of the

predicate follows a greater degree of the subject: e.g. if pleasure be good, seewhether also a greater pleasure be a greater good: and if to do a wrong be

evil, see whether also to do a greater wrong is a greater evil. Now this rule is

of use for both purposes: for if an increase of the accident follows an increase

of the subject, as we have said, clearly the accident belongs; while if it does

not  follow,  the  accident  does  not  belong.  You  should  establish  this  by

induction. Another rule is: If one predicate be attributed to two subjects; then

supposing it does not belong to the subject to which it is the more likely to

belong, neither does it belong where it is less likely to belong; while if it does

belong where it is less likely to belong, then it belongs as well where it is

more likely. Again: If two predicates be attributed to one subject, then if the

one which is more generally thought to belong does not belong, neither does

the one that is less generally thought to belong; or, if the one that is less

generally thought to belong does belong, so also does the other. Moreover: If

two predicates be attributed to two subjects, then if the one which is more

usually thought to belong to the one subject does not belong, neither does the

remaining predicate belong to the remaining subject; or, if the one which is

less usually thought to belong to the one subject does belong, so too does the

remaining predicate to the remaining subject.

  Moreover,  you  can  argue  from  the  fact  that  an  attribute  belongs,  or  is

generally  supposed  to  belong,  in  a  like  degree,  in  three  ways,  viz.  those

described in the last three rules given in regard to a greater degree.’ For

supposing  that  one  predicate  belongs,  or  is  supposed  to  belong,  to  two

subjects in a like degree, then if it does not belong to the one, neither does it

belong to the other; while if it belongs to the one, it belongs to the remaining

one as well. Or, supposing two predicates to belong in a like degree to the

same subject, then, if the one does not belong, neither does the remaining

one; while if the one does belong, the remaining one belongs as well. The

case is the same also if two predicates belong in a like degree to two subjects;

for if the one predicate does not belong to the one subject, neither does the

remaining  predicate  belong  to  the  remaining  subject,  while  if  the  one

predicate does belong to the one subject, the remaining predicate belongs to

the remaining subject as well.

<

div id="section29" class="section" title="11">


11You can argue, then, from greater or less or like degrees of truth in the

aforesaid number of ways. Moreover, you should argue from the addition of

one thing to another. If the addition of one thing to another makes that other

good or white, whereas formerly it was not white or good, then the thing

added will be white or good-it will possess the character it imparts to the

whole  as  well.  Moreover,  if  an  addition  of  something  to  a  given  object

intensifies the character which it had as given, then the thing added will itself

as well be of that character. Likewise, also, in the case of other attributes. The

rule  is  not  applicable  in  all  cases,  but  only  in  those  in  which  the  excess

described as an ‘increased intensity’ is found to take place. The above rule is,

however, not convertible for overthrowing a view. For if the thing added does

not make the other good, it is not thereby made clear whether in itself it may

not be good: for the addition of good to evil does not necessarily make the

whole good, any more than the addition of white to black makes the whole

white.

  Again, any predicate of which we can speak of greater or less degrees

belongs also absolutely: for greater or less degrees of good or of white will

not be attributed to what is not good or white: for a bad thing will never be

said to have a greater or less degree of goodness than another, but always of

badness. This rule is not convertible, either, for the purpose of overthrowing a

predication: for several predicates of which we cannot speak of a greater

degree belong absolutely: for the term ‘man’ is not attributed in greater and

less degrees, but a man is a man for all that.

You  should  examine  in  the  same  way  predicates  attributed  in  a  given

respect, and at a given time and place: for if the predicate be possible in some

respect, it is possible also absolutely. Likewise, also, is what is predicated at a

given time or place: for what is absolutely impossible is not possible either in

any respect or at any place or time. An objection may be raised that in a given

respect  people  may  be  good  by  nature,  e.g.  they  may  be  generous  or

temperately inclined, while absolutely they are not good by nature, because

no one is prudent by nature. Likewise, also, it is possible for a destructible

thing to escape destruction at a given time, whereas it is not possible for it to

escape absolutely. In the same way also it is a good thing at certain places to

follow see and such a diet, e.g. in infected areas, though it is not a good thing

absolutely. Moreover, in certain places it is possible to live singly and alone,

but absolutely it is not possible to exist singly and alone. In the same way

also it is in certain places honourable to sacrifice one’s father, e.g. among theTriballi,  whereas,  absolutely,  it  is  not  honourable.  Or  possibly  this  may

indicate  a  relativity  not  to  places  but  to  persons:  for  it  is  all  the  same

wherever they may be: for everywhere it will be held honourable among the

Triballi themselves, just because they are Triballi. Again, at certain times it is

a good thing to take medicines, e.g. when one is ill, but it is not so absolutely.

Or possibly this again may indicate a relativity not to a certain time, but to a

certain state of health: for it is all the same whenever it occurs, if only one be

in that state. A thing is ‘absolutely’ so which without any addition you are

prepared to say is honourable or the contrary. Thus (e.g.) you will deny that

to  sacrifice  one’s  father  is  honourable:  it  is  honourable  only  to  certain

persons:  it  is  not  therefore  honourable  absolutely.  On  the  other  hand,  to

honour the gods you will declare to be honourable without adding anything,

because that is honourable absolutely. So that whatever without any addition

is generally accounted to be honourable or dishonourable or anything else of

that kind, will be said to be so ‘absolutely’.                                Topics, Book III


Translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge


<

div id="book3" class="book" title="Book III">


1


The question which is the more desirable, or the better, of two or more

things, should be examined upon the following lines: only first of all it must

be clearly laid down that the inquiry we are making concerns not things that

are widely divergent and that exhibit great differences from one another (for

nobody raises any doubt whether happiness or wealth is more desirable), but

things  that  are  nearly  related  and  about  which  we  commonly  discuss  for

which  of  the  two  we  ought  rather  to  vote,  because  we  do  not  see  any

advantage on either side as compared with the other. Clearly, in such cases if

we can show a single advantage, or more than one, our judgement will record

our assent that whichever side happens to have the advantage is the more

desirable.

First, then, that which is more lasting or secure is more desirable than that

which is less so: and so is that which is more likely to be chosen by the

prudent or by the good man or by the right law, or by men who are good in

any particular line, when they make their choice as such, or by the experts in

regard to any particular class of things; i.e. either whatever most of them or

what all of them would choose; e.g. in medicine or in carpentry those things

are more desirable which most, or all, doctors would choose; or, in general,

whatever most men or all men or all things would choose, e.g. the good: for

everything aims at the good. You should direct the argument you intend to

employ  to  whatever  purpose  you  require.  Of  what  is  ‘better’  or  ‘more

desirable’ the absolute standard is the verdict of the better science, though

relatively  to  a  given  individual  the  standard  may  be  his  own  particular

science.

In the second place, that which is known as ‘an x’ is more desirable than

that which does not come within the genus ‘x’-e.g. justice than a just man; forthe former falls within the genus ‘good’, whereas the other does not, and the

former is called ‘a good’, whereas the latter is not: for nothing which does not

happen to belong to the genus in question is called by the generic name; e.g. a

‘white man’ is not ‘a colour’. Likewise also in other cases.

Also, that which is desired for itself is more desirable than that which is

desired for something else; e.g. health is more desirable than gymnastics: for

the former is desired for itself, the latter for something else. Also, that which

is desirable in itself is more desirable than what is desirable per accidens; e.g.

justice in our friends than justice in our enemies: for the former is desirable in

itself, the latter per accidens: for we desire that our enemies should be just per

accidens, in order that they may do us no harm. This last principle is the same

as the one that precedes it, with, however, a different turn of expression. For

we  desire  justice  in  our  friends  for  itself,  even  though  it  will  make  no

difference to us, and even though they be in India; whereas in our enemies we

desire it for something else, in order that they may do us no harm.

Also, that which is in itself the cause of good is more desirable than what

is so per accidens, e.g. virtue than luck (for the former in itself, and the latter

per accidens, the cause of good things), and so in other cases of the same

kind. Likewise also in the case of the contrary; for what is in itself the cause

of  evil  is  more  objectionable  than  what  is  so  per  accidens,  e.g.  vice  and

chance: for the one is bad in itself, whereas chance is so per accidens.

Also, what is good absolutely is more desirable than what is good for a

particular person, e.g. recovery of health than a surgical operation; for the

former is good absolutely, the latter only for a particular person, viz. the man

who needs an operation. So too what is good by nature is more desirable than

the good that is not so by nature, e.g. justice than the just man; for the one is

good by nature, whereas in the other case the goodness is acquired. Also the

attribute is more desirable which belongs to the better and more honourable

subject, e.g. to a god rather than to a man, and to the soul rather than to the

body. So too the property of the better thing is better than the property of the

worse; e.g. the property of God than the property of man: for whereas in

respect of what is common in both of them they do not differ at all from each

other, in respect of their properties the one surpasses the other. Also that is

better which is inherent in things better or prior or more honourable: thus

(e.g.) health is better than strength and beauty: for the former is inherent in

the moist and the dry, and the hot and the cold, in fact in all the primary

constituents  of  an  animal,  whereas  the  others  are  inherent  in  what  issecondary, strength being a feature of the sinews and bones, while beauty is

generally supposed to consist in a certain symmetry of the limbs. Also the

end is generally supposed to be more desirable than the means, and of two

means,  that  which  lies  nearer  the  end.  In  general,  too,  a  means  directed

towards the end of life is more desirable than a means to anything else, e.g.

that which contributes to happiness than that which contributes to prudence.

Also the competent is more desirable than the incompetent. Moreover, of two

productive  agents  that  one  is  more  desirable  whose  end  is  better;  while

between a productive agent and an end we can decide by a proportional sum

whenever the excess of the one end over the other is greater than that of the

latter over its own productive means: e.g. supposing the excess of happiness

over health to be greater than that of health over what produces health, then

what produces happiness is better than health. For what produces happiness

exceeds what produces health just as much as happiness exceeds health. But

health exceeds what produces health by a smaller amount; ergo, the excess of

what produces happiness over what produces health is greater than that of

health  over  what  produces  health.  Clearly,  therefore,  what  produces

happiness is more desirable than health: for it exceeds the same standard by a

greater amount. Moreover, what is in itself nobler and more precious and

praiseworthy  is  more  desirable  than  what  is  less  so,  e.g.  friendship  than

wealth, and justice than strength. For the former belong in themselves to the

class  of  things  precious  and  praiseworthy,  while  the  latter  do  so  not  in

themselves but for something else: for no one prizes wealth for itself but

always  for  something  else,  whereas  we  prize  friendship  for  itself,  even

though nothing else is likely to come to us from it.

<

div id="section31" class="section" title="2">


2


  Moreover, whenever two things are very much like one another, and we

cannot see any superiority in the one over the other of them, we should look

at  them  from  the  standpoint  of  their  consequences.  For  the  one  which  is

followed by the greater good is the more desirable: or, if the consequences be

evil, that is more desirable which is followed by the less evil. For though both

may be desirable, yet there may possibly be some unpleasant consequence

involved to turn the scale. Our survey from the point of view of consequenceslies  in  two  directions,  for  there  are  prior  consequences  and  later

consequences: e.g. if a man learns, it follows that he was ignorant before and

knows afterwards. As a rule, the later consequence is the better to consider.

You  should  take,  therefore,  whichever  of  the  consequences  suits  your

purpose.

  Moreover,  a  greater  number  of  good  things  is  more  desirable  than  a

smaller, either absolutely or when the one is included in the other, viz. the

smaller number in the greater. An objection may be raised suppose in some

particular case the one is valued for the sake of the other; for then the two

together are not more desirable than the one; e.g. recovery of health and

health, than health alone, inasmuch as we desire recovery of health for the

sake of health. Also it is quite possible for what is not good, together with

what is, to be more desirable than a greater number of good things, e.g. the

combination of happiness and something else which is not good may be more

desirable than the combination of justice and courage. Also, the same things

are more valuable if accompanied than if unaccompanied by pleasure, and

likewise when free from pain than when attended with pain.

Also,  everything  is  more  desirable  at  the  season  when  it  is  of  greater

consequence; e.g. freedom from pain in old age more than in youth: for it is

of greater consequence in old age. On the same principle also, prudence is

more  desirable  in  old  age;  for  no  man  chooses  the  young  to  guide  him,

because he does not expect them to be prudent. With courage, the converse is

the  case,  for  it  is  in  youth  that  the  active  exercise  of  courage  is  more

imperatively  required.  Likewise  also  with  temperance;  for  the  young  are

more troubled by their passions than are their elders.

Also, that is more desirable which is more useful at every season or at most

seasons, e.g. justice and temperance rather than courage: for they are always

useful, while courage is only useful at times. Also, that one of two things

which if all possess, we do not need the other thing, is more desirable than

that which all may possess and still we want the other one as well. Take the

case of justice and courage; if everybody were just, there would be no use for

courage, whereas all might be courageous, and still justice would be of use.

  Moreover,  judge  by  the  destructions  and  losses  and  generations  and

acquisitions and contraries of things: for things whose destruction is more

objectionable are themselves more desirable. Likewise also with the losses

and contraries of things; for a thing whose loss or whose contrary is more

objectionable is itself more desirable. With the generations or acquisitions ofthings the opposite is the case: for things whose acquisition or generation is

more desirable are themselves also desirable. Another commonplace rule is

that what is nearer to the good is better and more desirable, i.e. what more

nearly resembles the good: thus justice is better than a just man. Also, that

which is more like than another thing to something better than itself, as e.g.

some say that Ajax was a better man than Odysseus because he was more like

Achilles. An objection may be raised to this that it is not true: for it is quite

possible that Ajax did not resemble Achilles more nearly than Odysseus in

the points which made Achilles the best of them, and that Odysseus was a

good man, though unlike Achilles. Look also to see whether the resemblance

be that of a caricature, like the resemblance of a monkey to a man, whereas a

horse bears none: for the monkey is not the more handsome creature, despite

its nearer resemblance to a man. Again, in the case of two things, if one is

more like the better thing while another is more like the worse, then that is

likely to be better which is more like the better. This too, however, admits of

an objection: for quite possibly the one only slightly resembles the better,

while the other strongly resembles the worse, e.g. supposing the resemblance

of Ajax to Achilles to be slight, while that of Odysseus to Nestor is strong.

Also it may be that the one which is like the better type shows a degrading

likeness, whereas the one which is like the worse type improves upon it:

witness the likeness of a horse to a donkey, and that of a monkey to a man.

  Another rule is that the more conspicuous good is more desirable than the

less conspicuous, and the more difficult than the easier: for we appreciate

better the possession of things that cannot be easily acquired. Also the more

personal possession is more desirable than the more widely shared. Also, that

which is more free from connexion with evil: for what is not attended by any

unpleasantness is more desirable than what is so attended.

  Moreover, if A be without qualification better than B, then also the best of

the members of A is better than the best of the members of B; e.g. if Man be

better than Horse, then also the best man is better than the best horse. Also, if

the best in A be better than the best in B, then also A is better than B without

qualification; e.g. if the best man be better than the best horse, then also Man

is better than Horse without qualification.

  Moreover, things which our friends can share are more desirable than those

they cannot. Also, things which we like rather to do to our friend are more

desirable than those we like to do to the man in the street, e.g. just dealing

and the doing of good rather than the semblance of them: for we would ratherreally do good to our friends than seem to do so, whereas towards the man in

the street the converse is the case.

Also,  superfluities  are  better  than  necessities,  and  are  sometimes  more

desirable as well: for the good life is better than mere life, and good life is a

superfluity, whereas mere life itself is a necessity. Sometimes, though, what

is better is not also more desirable: for there is no necessity that because it is

better it should also be more desirable: at least to be a philosopher is better

than to make money, but it is not more desirable for a man who lacks the

necessities  of  life.  The  expression  ‘superfluity’  applies  whenever  a  man

possesses the necessities of life and sets to work to secure as well other noble

acquisitions.  Roughly  speaking,  perhaps,  necessities  are  more  desirable,

while superfluities are better.

Also, what cannot be got from another is more desirable than what can be

got  from  another  as  well,  as  (e.g.)  is  the  case  of  justice  compared  with

courage. Also, A is more desirable if A is desirable without B, but not B

without A: power (e.g.) is not desirable without prudence, but prudence is

desirable without power. Also, if of two things we repudiate the one in order

to be thought to possess the other, then that one is more desirable which we

wish to be thought to possess; thus (e.g.) we repudiate the love of hard work

in order that people may think us geniuses.

  Moreover, that is more desirable in whose absence it is less blameworthy

for people to be vexed; and that is more desirable in whose absence it is more

blameworthy for a man not to be vexed.

<

div id="section32" class="section" title="3">


3


  Moreover, of things that belong to the same species one which possesses

the peculiar virtue of the species is more desirable than one which does not. If

both possess it, then the one which possesses it in a greater degree is more

desirable.

  Moreover, if one thing makes good whatever it touches, while another does

not, the former is more desirable, just as also what makes things warm is

warmer than what does not. If both do so, then that one is more desirable

which does so in a greater degree, or if it render good the better and more

important object-if (e.g.), the one makes good the soul, and the other thebody.

  Moreover, judge things by their inflexions and uses and actions and works,

and judge these by them: for they go with each other: e.g. if ‘justly’ means

something  more  desirable  than  ‘courageously’,  then  also  justice  means

something more desirable than courage; and if justice be more desirable than

courage,  then  also  ‘justly’  means  something  more  desirable  than

‘courageously’. Similarly also in the other cases.

  Moreover, if one thing exceeds while the other falls short of the same

standard of good, the one which exceeds is the more desirable; or if the one

exceeds  an  even  higher  standard.  Nay  more,  if  there  be  two  things  both

preferable to something, the one which is more highly preferable to it is more

desirable than the less highly preferable. Moreover, when the excess of a

thing is more desirable than the excess of something else, that thing is itself

also more desirable than the other, as (e.g.) friendship than money: for an

excess of friendship is more desirable than an excess of money. So also that

of  which  a  man  would  rather  that  it  were  his  by  his  own  doing  is  more

desirable than what he would rather get by another’s doing, e.g. friends than

money. Moreover, judge by means of an addition, and see if the addition of A

to the same thing as B makes the whole more desirable than does the addition

of B. You must, however, beware of adducing a case in which the common

term uses, or in some other way helps the case of, one of the things added to

it, but not the other, as (e.g.) if you took a saw and a sickle in combination

with the art of carpentry: for in the combination the saw is a more desirable

thing, but it is not a more desirable thing without qualification. Again, a thing

is more desirable if, when added to a lesser good, it makes the whole greater

good. Likewise, also, you should judge by means of subtraction: for the thing

upon whose subtraction the remainder is a lesser good may be taken to be a

greater good, whichever it be whose subtraction makes the remainder a lesser

good.

Also, if one thing be desirable for itself, and the other for the look of it, the

former is more desirable, as (e.g.) health than beauty. A thing is defined as

being desired for the look of it if, supposing no one knew of it, you would not

care to have it. Also, it is more desirable both for itself and for the look of it,

while the other thing is desirable on the one ground alone. Also, whichever is

the more precious for itself, is also better and more desirable. A thing may be

taken to be more precious in itself which we choose rather for itself, without

anything else being likely to come of it.  Moreover, you should distinguish in how many senses ‘desirable’ is used,

and with a view to what ends, e.g. expediency or honour or pleasure. For

what is useful for all or most of them may be taken to be more desirable than

what is not useful in like manner. If the same characters belong to both things

you should look and see which possesses them more markedly, i.e. which of

the two is the more pleasant or more honourable or more expedient. Again,

that is more desirable which serves the better purpose, e.g. that which serves

to promote virtue more than that which serves to promote pleasure. Likewise

also in the case of objectionable things; for that is more objectionable which

stands more in the way of what is desirable, e.g. disease more than ugliness:

for disease is a greater hindrance both to pleasure and to being good.

  Moreover, argue by showing that the thing in question is in like measure

objectionable and desirable: for a thing of such a character that a man might

well desire and object to it alike is less desirable than the other which is

desirable only.

<

div id="section33" class="section" title="4">


4


  Comparisons  of  things  together  should  therefore  be  conducted  in  the

manner prescribed. The same commonplace rules are useful also for showing

that  anything  is  simply  desirable  or  objectionable:  for  we  have  only  to

subtract the excess of one thing over another. For if what is more precious be

more desirable, then also what is precious is desirable; and if what is more

useful be more desirable, then also what is useful is desirable. Likewise, also,

in the case of other things which admit of comparisons of that kind. For in

some cases in the very course of comparing the things together we at once

assert also that each of them, or the one of them, is desirable, e.g. whenever

we call the one good ‘by nature’ and the other ‘not by nature’: for dearly

what is good by nature is desirable.

<

div id="section34" class="section" title="5">


5The  commonplace  rules  relating  to  comparative  degrees  and  amounts

ought to be taken in the most general possible form: for when so taken they

are likely to be useful in a larger number of instances. It is possible to render

some of the actual rules given above more universal by a slight alteration of

the  expression,  e.g.  that  what  by  nature  exhibits  such  and  such  a  quality

exhibits that quality in a greater degree than what exhibits it not by nature.

Also, if one thing does, and another does not, impart such and such a quality

to that which possesses it, or to which it belongs, then whichever does impart

it is of that quality in greater degree than the one which does not impart it;

and  if  both  impart  it,  then  that  one  exhibits  it  in  a  greater  degree  which

imparts it in a greater degree.

  Moreover, if in any character one thing exceeds and another falls short of

the same standard; also, if the one exceeds something which exceeds a given

standard, while the other does not reach that standard, then clearly the first-

named thing exhibits that character in a greater degree. Moreover, you should

judge by means of addition, and see if A when added to the same thing as B

imparts to the whole such and such a character in a more marked degree than

B, or if, when added to a thing which exhibits that character in a less degree,

it imparts that character to the whole in a greater degree. Likewise, also, you

may judge by means of subtraction: for a thing upon whose subtraction the

remainder exhibits such and such a character in a less degree, itself exhibits

that  character  in  a  greater  degree.  Also,  things  exhibit  such  and  such  a

character  in  a  greater  degree  if  more  free  from  admixture  with  their

contraries; e.g. that is whiter which is more free from admixture with black.

Moreover,  apart  from  the  rules  given  above,  that  has  such  and  such  a

character in greater degree which admits in a greater degree of the definition

proper to the given character; e.g. if the definition of ‘white’ be ‘a colour

which pierces the vision’, then that is whiter which is in a greater degree a

colour that pierces the vision.

<

div id="section35" class="section" title="6">


6


If the question be put in a particular and not in a universal form, in the first

place the universal constructive or destructive commonplace rules that have

been given may all be brought into use. For in demolishing or establishing athing universally we also show it in particular: for if it be true of all, it is true

also of some, and if untrue of all, it is untrue of some. Especially handy and

of general application are the commonplace rules that are drawn from the

opposites and co-ordinates and inflexions of a thing: for public opinion grants

alike the claim that if all pleasure be good, then also all pain is evil, and the

claim that if some pleasure be good, then also some pain is evil. Moreover, if

some form of sensation be not a capacity, then also some form of failure of

sensation is not a failure of capacity. Also, if the object of conception is in

some cases an object of knowledge, then also some form of conceiving is

knowledge. Again, if what is unjust be in some cases good, then also what is

just is in some cases evil; and if what happens justly is in some cases evil,

then  also  what  happens  unjustly  is  in  some  cases  good.  Also,  if  what  is

pleasant is in some cases objectionable, then pleasure is in some cases an

objectionable thing. On the same principle, also, if what is pleasant is in some

cases beneficial, then pleasure is in some cases a beneficial thing. The case is

the  same  also  as  regards  the  things  that  destroy,  and  the  processes  of

generation  and  destruction.  For  if  anything  that  destroys  pleasure  or

knowledge  be  in  some  cases  good,  then  we  may  take  it  that  pleasure  or

knowledge is in some cases an evil thing. Likewise, also, if the destruction of

knowledge be in some cases a good thing or its production an evil thing, then

knowledge will be in some cases an evil thing; e.g. if for a man to forget his

disgraceful conduct be a good thing, and to remember it be an evil thing, then

the knowledge of his disgraceful conduct may be taken to be an evil thing.

The same holds also in other cases: in all such cases the premiss and the

conclusion are equally likely to be accepted.

  Moreover you should judge by means of greater or smaller or like degrees:

for if some member of another genus exhibit such and such a character in a

more  marked  degree  than  your  object,  while  no  member  of  that  genus

exhibits that character at all, then you may take it that neither does the object

in question exhibit it; e.g. if some form of knowledge be good in a greater

degree than pleasure, while no form of knowledge is good, then you may take

it that pleasure is not good either. Also, you should judge by a smaller or like

degree in the same way: for so you will find it possible both to demolish and

to establish a view, except that whereas both are possible by means of like

degrees, by means of a smaller degree it is possible only to establish, not to

overthrow.  For  if  a  certain  form  of  capacity  be  good  in  a  like  degree  to

knowledge,  and  a  certain  form  of  capacity  be  good,  then  so  also  isknowledge; while if no form of capacity be good, then neither is knowledge.

If, too, a certain form of capacity be good in a less degree than knowledge,

and a certain form of capacity be good, then so also is knowledge; but if no

form of capacity be good, there is no necessity that no form of knowledge

either should be good. Clearly, then, it is only possible to establish a view by

means of a less degree.

  Not only by means of another genus can you overthrow a view, but also by

means of the same, if you take the most marked instance of the character in

question; e.g. if it be maintained that some form of knowledge is good, then,

suppose it to be shown that prudence is not good, neither will any other kind

be good, seeing that not even the kind upon which there is most general

agreement  is  so.  Moreover,  you  should  go  to  work  by  means  of  an

hypothesis;  you  should  claim  that  the  attribute,  if  it  belongs  or  does  not

belong in one case, does so in a like degree in all, e.g. that if the soul of man

be immortal, so are other souls as well, while if this one be not so, neither are

the  others.  If,  then,  it  be  maintained  that  in  some  instance  the  attribute

belongs, you must show that in some instance it does not belong: for then it

will  follow,  by  reason  of  the  hypothesis,  that  it  does  not  belong  to  any

instance at all. If, on the other hand, it be maintained that it does not belong

in some instance, you must show that it does belong in some instance, for in

this way it will follow that it belongs to all instances. It is clear that the maker

of  the  hypothesis  universalizes  the  question,  whereas  it  was  stated  in  a

particular form: for he claims that the maker of a particular admission should

make  a  universal  admission,  inasmuch  as  he  claims  that  if  the  attribute

belongs in one instance, it belongs also in all instances alike.

If the problem be indefinite, it is possible to overthrow a statement in only

one way; e.g. if a man has asserted that pleasure is good or is not good,

without any further definition. For if he meant that a particular pleasure is

good, you must show universally that no pleasure is good, if the proposition

in question is to be demolished. And likewise, also, if he meant that some

particular pleasure is not good you must show universally that all pleasure is

good: it is impossible to demolish it in any other way. For if we show that

some particular pleasure is not good or is good, the proposition in question is

not  yet  demolished.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  it  is  possible  to  demolish  an

indefinite statement in one way only, whereas it can be established in two

ways: for whether we show universally that all pleasure is good, or whether

we show that a particular pleasure is good, the proposition in question willhave been proved. Likewise, also, supposing we are required to argue that

some particular pleasure is not good, if we show that no pleasure is good or

that a particular pleasure is not good, we shall have produced an argument in

both ways, both universally and in particular, to show that some particular

pleasure is not good. If, on the other hand, the statement made be definite, it

will be possible to demolish it in two ways; e.g. if it be maintained that it is

an attribute of some particular pleasure to be good, while of some it is not:

for whether it be shown that all pleasure, or that no pleasure, is good, the

proposition in question will have been demolished. If, however, he has stated

that only one single pleasure is good, it is possible to demolish it in three

ways: for by showing that all pleasure, or that no pleasure, or that more than

one pleasure, is good, we shall have demolished the statement in question. If

the statement be made still more definite, e.g. that prudence alone of the

virtues is knowledge, there are four ways of demolishing it: for if it be shown

that all virtue is knowledge, or that no virtue is so, or that some other virtue

(e.g. justice) is so, or that prudence itself is not knowledge, the proposition in

question will have been demolished.

It is useful also to take a look at individual instances, in cases where some

attribute has been said to belong or not to belong, as in the case of universal

questions. Moreover, you should take a glance among genera, dividing them

by their species until you come to those that are not further divisible, as has

been said before:’ for whether the attribute is found to belong in all cases or

in none, you should, after adducing several instances, claim that he should

either admit your point universally, or else bring an objection showing in

what case it does not hold. Moreover, in cases where it is possible to make

the accident definite either specifically or numerically, you should look and

see whether perhaps none of them belongs, showing e.g. that time is not

moved, nor yet a movement, by enumerating how many species there are of

movement: for if none of these belong to time, clearly it does not move, nor

yet  is  a  movement.  Likewise,  also,  you  can  show  that  the  soul  is  not  a

number, by dividing all numbers into either odd or even: for then, if the soul

be neither odd nor even, clearly it is not a number.

In regard then to Accident, you should set to work by means like these, and

in this manner.                                Topics, Book IV


Translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge


<

div id="book4" class="book" title="Book IV">


1


Next we must go on to examine questions relating to Genus and Property.

These are elements in the questions that relate to definitions, but dialecticians

seldom address their inquiries to these by themselves. If, then, a genus be

suggested for something that is, first take a look at all objects which belong to

the same genus as the thing mentioned, and see whether the genus suggested

is not predicated of one of them, as happens in the case of an accident: e.g. if

‘good’  be  laid  down  to  be  the  genus  of  ‘pleasure’,  see  whether  some

particular pleasure be not good: for, if so, clearly good’ is not the genus of

pleasure: for the genus is predicated of all the members of the same species.

Secondly, see whether it be predicated not in the category of essence, but as

an accident, as ‘white’ is predicated of ‘snow’, or ‘self-moved’ of the soul.

For ‘snow’ is not a kind of ‘white’, and therefore ‘white’ is not the genus of

snow, nor is the soul a kind of ‘moving object’: its motion is an accident of it,

as it often is of an animal to walk or to be walking. Moreover, ‘moving’ does

not seem to indicate the essence, but rather a state of doing or of having

something done to it. Likewise, also, ‘white’: for it indicates not the essence

of snow, but a certain quality of it. So that neither of them is predicated in the

category of ‘essence’.

  Especially you should take a look at the definition of Accident, and see

whether it fits the genus mentioned, as (e.g.) is also the case in the instances

just given. For it is possible for a thing to be and not to be self-moved, and

likewise,  also,  for  it  to  be  and  not  to  be  white.  So  that  neither  of  these

attributes is the genus but an accident, since we were saying that an accident

is an attribute which can belong to a thing and also not belong.

  Moreover, see whether the genus and the species be not found in the same

division, but the one be a substance while the other is a quality, or the one bea relative while the other is a quality, as (e.g.) ‘slow’ and ‘swan’ are each a

substance, while ‘white’ is not a substance but a quality, so that ‘white’ is not

the genus either of ‘snow’ or of ‘swan’. Again, knowledge’ is a relative,

while ‘good’ and ‘noble’ are each a quality, so that good, or noble, is not the

genus of knowledge. For the genera of relatives ought themselves also to be

relatives, as is the case with ‘double’: for multiple’, which is the genus of

‘double’, is itself also a relative. To speak generally, the genus ought to fall

under the same division as the species: for if the species be a substance, so

too should be the genus, and if the species be a quality, so too the genus

should  be  a  quality;  e.g.  if  white  be  a  quality,  so  too  should  colour  be.

Likewise, also, in other cases.

  Again, see whether it be necessary or possible for the genus to partake of

the object which has been placed in the genus. ‘To partake’ is defined as ‘to

admit the definition of that which is partaken. Clearly, therefore, the species

partake of the genera, but not the genera of the species: for the species admits

the definition of the genus, whereas the genus does not admit that of the

species.  You  must  look,  therefore,  and  see  whether  the  genus  rendered

partakes or can possibly partake of the species, e.g. if any one were to render

anything as genus of ‘being’ or of ‘unity’: for then the result will be that the

genus partakes of the species: for of everything that is, ‘being’ and ‘unity’ are

predicated, and therefore their definition as well.

  Moreover, see if there be anything of which the species rendered is true,

while the genus is not so, e.g. supposing ‘being’ or ‘object of knowledge’

were stated to be the genus of ‘object of opinion’. For ‘object of opinion’ will

be a predicate of what does not exist; for many things which do not exist are

objects  of  opinion;  whereas  that  ‘being’  or  ‘object  of  knowledge’  is  not

predicated of what does not exist is clear. So that neither ‘being’ nor ‘object

of knowledge’ is the genus of ‘object of opinion’: for of the objects of which

the species is predicated, the genus ought to be predicated as well.

  Again,  see  whether  the  object  placed  in  the  genus  be  quite  unable  to

partake of any of its species: for it is impossible that it should partake of the

genus if it do not partake of any of its species, except it be one of the species

reached  by  the  first  division:  these  do  partake  of  the  genus  alone.  If,

therefore, ‘Motion’ be stated as the genus of pleasure, you should look and

see if pleasure be neither locomotion nor alteration, nor any of the rest of the

given modes of motion: for clearly you may then take it that it does not

partake of any of the species, and therefore not of the genus either, since whatpartakes of the genus must necessarily partake of one of the species as well:

so that pleasure could not be a species of Motion, nor yet be one of the

individual phenomena comprised under the term ‘motion’. For individuals as

well partake in the genus and the species, as (e.g.) an individual man partakes

of both ‘man’ and ‘animal’.

  Moreover, see if the term placed in the genus has a wider denotation than

the genus, as (e.g.) ‘object of opinion’ has, as compared with ‘being’: for

both what is and what is not are objects of opinion, so that ‘object of opinion’

could not be a species of being: for the genus is always of wider denotation

than  the  species.  Again,  see  if  the  species  and  its  genus  have  an  equal

denotation;  suppose,  for  instance,  that  of  the  attributes  which  go  with

everything, one were to be stated as a species and the other as its genus, as

for example Being and Unity: for everything has being and unity, so that

neither is the genus of the other, since their denotation is equal. Likewise,

also, if the ‘first’ of a series and the ‘beginning’ were to be placed one under

the other: for the beginning is first and the first is the beginning, so that either

both expressions are identical or at any rate neither is the genus of the other.

The elementary principle in regard to all such cases is that the genus has a

wider denotation than the species and its differentia: for the differentia as

well has a narrower denotation than the genus.

See also whether the genus mentioned fails, or might be generally thought

to fail, to apply to some object which is not specifically different from the

thing in question; or, if your argument be constructive, whether it does so

apply. For all things that are not specifically different have the same genus.

If, therefore, it be shown to apply to one, then clearly it applies to all, and if it

fails to apply to one, clearly it fails to apply to any; e.g. if any one who

assumes ‘indivisible lines’ were to say that the ‘indivisible’ is their genus.

For the aforesaid term is not the genus of divisible lines, and these do not

differ as regards their species from indivisible: for straight lines are never

different from each other as regards their species.

<

div id="section37" class="section" title="2">


2


  Look and see, also, if there be any other genus of the given species which

neither embraces the genus rendered nor yet falls under it, e.g. suppose anyone were to lay down that ‘knowledge’ is the genus of justice. For virtue is its

genus as well, and neither of these genera embraces the remaining one, so

that knowledge could not be the genus of justice: for it is generally accepted

that whenever one species falls under two genera, the one is embraced by the

other. Yet a principle of this kind gives rise to a difficulty in some cases. For

some  people  hold  that  prudence  is  both  virtue  and  knowledge,  and  that

neither  of  its  genera  is  embraced  by  the  other:  although  certainly  not

everybody admits that prudence is knowledge. If, however, any one were to

admit the truth of this assertion, yet it would still be generally agreed to be

necessary that the genera of the same object must at any rate be subordinate

either the one to the other or both to the same, as actually is the case with

virtue and knowledge. For both fall under the same genus; for each of them is

a state and a disposition. You should look, therefore, and see whether neither

of these things is true of the genus rendered; for if the genera be subordinate

neither the one to the other nor both to the same, then what is rendered could

not be the true genus.

Look, also, at the genus of the genus rendered, and so continually at the

next higher genus, and see whether all are predicated of the species, and

predicated in the category of essence: for all the higher genera should be

predicated  of  the  species  in  the  category  of  essence.  If,  then,  there  be

anywhere  a  discrepancy,  clearly  what  is  rendered  is  not  the  true  genus.

[Again,  see  whether  either  the  genus  itself,  or  one  of  its  higher  genera,

partakes of the species: for the higher genus does not partake of any of the

lower.] If, then, you are overthrowing a view, follow the rule as given: if

establishing  one,  then-suppose  that  what  has  been  named  as  genus  be

admitted to belong to the species, only it be disputed whether it belongs as

genus-it is enough to show that one of its higher genera is predicated of the

species in the category of essence. For if one of them be predicated in the

category  of  essence,  all  of  them,  both  higher  and  lower  than  this  one,  if

predicated at all of the species, will be predicated of it in the category of

essence: so that what has been rendered as genus is also predicated in the

category of essence. The premiss that when one genus is predicated in the

category of essence, all the rest, if predicated at all, will be predicated in the

category of essence, should be secured by induction. Supposing, however,

that it be disputed whether what has been rendered as genus belongs at all, it

is not enough to show that one of the higher genera is predicated of the

species in the category of essence: e.g. if any one has rendered ‘locomotion’as the genus of walking, it is not enough to show that walking is ‘motion’ in

order to show that it is ‘locomotion’, seeing that there are other forms of

motion as well; but one must show in addition that walking does not partake

of  any  of  the  species  of  motion  produced  by  the  same  division  except

locomotion. For of necessity what partakes of the genus partakes also of one

of  the  species  produced  by  the  first  division  of  the  genus.  If,  therefore,

walking does not partake either of increase or decrease or of the other kinds

of motion, clearly it would partake of locomotion, so that locomotion would

be the genus of walking.

  Again, look among the things of which the given species is predicated as

genus,  and  see  if  what  is  rendered  as  its  genus  be  also  predicated  in  the

category of essence of the very things of which the species is so predicated,

and likewise if all the genera higher than this genus are so predicated as well.

For if there be anywhere a discrepancy, clearly what has been rendered is not

the true genus: for had it been the genus, then both the genera higher than it,

and it itself, would all have been predicated in the category of essence of

those  objects  of  which  the  species  too  is  predicated  in  the  category  of

essence. If, then, you are overthrowing a view, it is useful to see whether the

genus fails to be predicated in the category of essence of those things of

which the species too is predicated. If establishing a view, it is useful to see

whether it is predicated in the category of essence: for if so, the result will be

that the genus and the species will be predicated of the same object in the

category  of  essence,  so  that  the  same  object  falls  under  two  genera:  the

genera  must  therefore  of  necessity  be  subordinate  one  to  the  other,  and

therefore if it be shown that the one we wish to establish as genus is not

subordinate to the species, clearly the species would be subordinate to it, so

that you may take it as shown that it is the genus.

Look, also, at the definitions of the genera, and see whether they apply

both to the given species and to the objects which partake of the species. For

of necessity the definitions of its genera must be predicated of the species and

of the objects which partake of the species: if, then, there be anywhere a

discrepancy, clearly what has been rendered is not the genus.

  Again, see if he has rendered the differentia as the genus, e.g. ‘immortal’

as the genus of ‘God’. For ‘immortal’ is a differentia of ‘living being’, seeing

that of living beings some are mortal and others immortal. Clearly, then, a

bad mistake has been made; for the differentia of a thing is never its genus.

And  that  this  is  true  is  clear:  for  a  thing’s  differentia  never  signifies  itsessence, but rather some quality, as do ‘walking’ and ‘biped’.

Also, see whether he has placed the differentia inside the genus, e.g. by

taking ‘odd’ as a number’. For ‘odd’ is a differentia of number, not a species.

Nor is the differentia generally thought to partake of the genus: for what

partakes of the genus is always either a species or an individual, whereas the

differentia  is  neither  a  species  nor  an  individual.  Clearly,  therefore,  the

differentia does not partake of the genus, so that ‘odd’ too is no species but a

differentia, seeing that it does not partake of the genus.

  Moreover, see whether he has placed the genus inside the species, e.g. by

taking ‘contact’ to be a ‘juncture’, or ‘mixture’ a ‘fusion’, or, as in Plato’s

definition,’  ‘locomotion’  to  be  the  same  as  ‘carriage’.  For  there  is  no

necessity that contact should be juncture: rather, conversely, juncture must be

contact: for what is in contact is not always joined, though what is joined is

always in contact. Likewise, also, in the remaining instances: for mixture is

not  always  a  ‘fusion’  (for  to  mix  dry  things  does  not  fuse  them),  nor  is

locomotion  always  ‘carriage’.  For  walking  is  not  generally  thought  to  be

carriage: for ‘carriage’ is mostly used of things that change one place for

another involuntarily, as happens in the case of inanimate things. Clearly,

also,  the  species,  in  the  instances  given,  has  a  wider  denotation  than  the

genus, whereas it ought to be vice versa.

  Again, see whether he has placed the differentia inside the species, by

taking (e.g.) ‘immortal’ to be ‘a god’. For the result will be that the species

has  an  equal  or  wider  denotation:  and  this  cannot  be,  for  always  the

differentia has an equal or a wider denotation than the species. Moreover, see

whether he has placed the genus inside the differentia, by making ‘colour’

(e.g.) to be a thing that ‘pierces’, or ‘number’ a thing that is ‘odd’. Also, see

if he has mentioned the genus as differentia: for it is possible for a man to

bring  forward  a  statement  of  this  kind  as  well,  e.g.  that  ‘mixture’  is  the

differentia of ‘fusion’, or that change of place’ is the differentia of ‘carriage’.

All such cases should be examined by means of the same principles: for they

depend upon common rules: for the genus should have a wider denotation

that its differentia, and also should not partake of its differentia; whereas, if it

be  rendered  in  this  manner,  neither  of  the  aforesaid  requirements  can  be

satisfied:  for  the  genus  will  both  have  a  narrower  denotation  than  its

differentia, and will partake of it.

  Again, if no differentia belonging to the genus be predicated of the given

species, neither will the genus be predicated of it; e.g. of ‘soul’ neither ‘odd’nor ‘even’ is predicated: neither therefore is ‘number’. Moreover, see whether

the species is naturally prior and abolishes the genus along with itself: for the

contrary is the general view. Moreover, if it be possible for the genus stated,

or  for  its  differentia,  to  be  absent  from  the  alleged  species,  e.g.  for

‘movement’  to  be  absent  from  the  ‘soul’,  or  ‘truth  and  falsehood’  from

‘opinion’, then neither of the terms stated could be its genus or its differentia:

for  the  general  view  is  that  the  genus  and  the  differentia  accompany  the

species, as long as it exists.

<

div id="section38" class="section" title="3">


3


  Look  and  see,  also,  if  what  is  placed  in  the  genus  partakes  or  could

possibly partake of any contrary of the genus: for in that case the same thing

will at the same time partake of contrary things, seeing that the genus is never

absent from it, while it partakes, or can possibly partake, of the contrary

genus as well. Moreover, see whether the species shares in any character

which it is utterly impossible for any member of the genus to have. Thus

(e.g.) if the soul has a share in life, while it is impossible for any number to

live, then the soul could not be a species of number.

You should look and see, also, if the species be a homonym of the genus,

and employ as your elementary principles those already stated for dealing

with homonymity: for the genus and the species are synonymous.

Seeing that of every genus there is more than one species, look and see if it

be  impossible  that  there  should  be  another  species  than  the  given  one

belonging to the genus stated: for if there should be none, then clearly what

has been stated could not be a genus at all.

  Look and see, also, if he has rendered as genus a metaphorical expression,

describing (e.g. ‘temperance’ as a ‘harmony’: a ‘harmony’: for a genus is

always predicated of its species in its literal sense, whereas ‘harmony’ is

predicated  of  temperance  not  in  a  literal  sense  but  metaphorically:  for  a

harmony always consists in notes.

  Moreover,  if  there  be  any  contrary  of  the  species,  examine  it.  The

examination may take different forms; first of all see if the contrary as well

be found in the same genus as the species, supposing the genus to have no

contrary; for contraries ought to be found in the same genus, if there be nocontrary to the genus. Supposing, on the other hand, that there is a contrary to

the genus, see if the contrary of the species be found in the contrary genus:

for of necessity the contrary species must be in the contrary genus, if there be

any contrary to the genus. Each of these points is made plain by means of

induction. Again, see whether the contrary of the species be not found in any

genus at all, but be itself a genus, e.g. ‘good’: for if this be not found in any

genus, neither will its contrary be found in any genus, but will itself be a

genus, as happens in the case of ‘good’ and ‘evil’: for neither of these is

found in a genus, but each of them is a genus. Moreover, see if both genus

and species be contrary to something, and one pair of contraries have an

intermediary, but not the other. For if the genera have an intermediary, so

should their species as well, and if the species have, so should their genera as

well, as is the case with (1) virtue and vice and (2) justice and injustice: for

each  pair  has  an  intermediary.  An  objection  to  this  is  that  there  is  no

intermediary between health and disease, although there is one between evil

and good. Or see whether, though there be indeed an intermediary between

both pairs, i.e. both between the species and between the genera, yet it be not

similarly related, but in one case be a mere negation of the extremes, whereas

in the other case it is a subject. For the general view is that the relation should

be similar in both cases, as it is in the cases of virtue and vice and of justice

and  injustice:  for  the  intermediaries  between  both  are  mere  negations.

Moreover,  whenever  the  genus  has  no  contrary,  look  and  see  not  merely

whether  the  contrary  of  the  species  be  found  in  the  same  genus,  but  the

intermediate  as  well:  for  the  genus  containing  the  extremes  contains  the

intermediates as well, as (e.g.) in the case of white and black: for ‘colour’ is

the  genus  both  of  these  and  of  all  the  intermediate  colours  as  well.  An

objection  may  be  raised  that  ‘defect’  and  ‘excess’  are  found  in  the  same

genus  (for  both  are  in  the  genus  ‘evil’),  whereas  moderate  amount’,  the

intermediate between them, is found not in ‘evil’ but in ‘good’. Look and see

also whether, while the genus has a contrary, the species has none; for if the

genus be contrary to anything, so too is the species, as virtue to vice and

justice to injustice.

  Likewise. also, if one were to look at other instances, one would come to

see clearly a fact like this. An objection may be raised in the case of health

and  disease:  for  health  in  general  is  the  contrary  of  disease,  whereas  a

particular disease, being a species of disease, e.g. fever and ophthalmia and

any other particular disease, has no contrary.If, therefore, you are demolishing a view, there are all these ways in which

you should make your examination: for if the aforesaid characters do not

belong to it, clearly what has been rendered is not the genus. If, on the other

hand, you are establishing a view, there are three ways: in the first place, see

whether the contrary of the species be found in the genus stated, suppose the

genus have no contrary: for if the contrary be found in it, clearly the species

in question is found in it as well. Moreover, see if the intermediate species is

found  in  the  genus  stated:  for  whatever  genus  contains  the  intermediate

contains the extremes as well. Again, if the genus have a contrary, look and

see whether also the contrary species is found in the contrary genus: for if so,

clearly also the species in question is found in the genus in question.

  Again, consider in the case of the inflexions and the co-ordinates of species

and genus, and see whether they follow likewise, both in demolishing and in

establishing a view. For whatever attribute belongs or does not belong to one

belongs  or  does  not  belong  at  the  same  time  to  all;  e.g.  if  justice  be  a

particular form of knowledge, then also ‘justly’ is ‘knowingly’ and the just

man is a man of knowledge: whereas if any of these things be not so, then

neither is any of the rest of them.

<

div id="section39" class="section" title="4">


4


  Again, consider the case of things that bear a like relation to one another.

Thus (e.g.) the relation of the pleasant to pleasure is like that of the useful to

the good: for in each case the one produces the other. If therefore pleasure be

a kind of ‘good’, then also the pleasant will be a kind of ‘useful’: for clearly it

may be taken to be productive of good, seeing that pleasure is good. In the

same way also consider the case of processes of generation and destruction; if

(e.g.) to build be to be active, then to have built is to have been active, and if

to learn be to recollect, then also to have learnt is to have recollected, and if

to be decomposed be to be destroyed, then to have been decomposed is to

have been destroyed, and decomposition is a kind of destruction. Consider

also in the same way the case of things that generate or destroy, and of the

capacities and uses of things; and in general, both in demolishing and in

establishing  an  argument,  you  should  examine  things  in  the  light  of  any

resemblance  of  whatever  description,  as  we  were  saying  in  the  case  ofgeneration and destruction. For if what tends to destroy tends to decompose,

then also to be destroyed is to be decomposed: and if what tends to generate

tends to produce, then to be generated is to be produced, and generation is

production. Likewise, also, in the case of the capacities and uses of things:

for if a capacity be a disposition, then also to be capable of something is to be

disposed to it, and if the use of anything be an activity, then to use it is to be

active, and to have used it is to have been active.

If  the  opposite  of  the  species  be  a  privation,  there  are  two  ways  of

demolishing an argument, first of all by looking to see if the opposite be

found in the genus rendered: for either the privation is to be found absolutely

nowhere in the same genus, or at least not in the same ultimate genus: e.g. if

the ultimate genus containing sight be sensation, then blindness will not be a

sensation. Secondly, if there be a sensation. Secondly, if there be a privation

opposed to both genus and species, but the opposite of the species be not

found in the opposite of the genus, then neither could the species rendered be

in  the  genus  rendered.  If,  then,  you  are  demolishing  a  view,  you  should

follow the rule as stated; but if establishing one there is but one way: for if

the opposite species be found in the opposite genus, then also the species in

question would be found in the genus in question: e.g. if ‘blindness’ be a

form of ‘insensibility’, then ‘sight’ is a form of ‘sensation’.

  Again, look at the negations of the genus and species and convert the order

of terms, according to the method described in the case of Accident: e.g. if

the pleasant be a kind of good, what is not good is not pleasant. For were this

no something not good as well would then be pleasant. That, however, cannot

be, for it is impossible, if ‘good’ be the genus of pleasant, that anything not

good should be pleasant: for of things of which the genus is not predicated,

none of the species is predicated either. Also, in establishing a view, you

should adopt the same method of examination: for if what is not good be not

pleasant,  then  what  is  pleasant  is  good,  so  that  ‘good’  is  the  genus  of

‘pleasant’.

If the species be a relative term, see whether the genus be a relative term as

well: for if the species be a relative term, so too is the genus, as is the case

with ‘double’ and ‘multiple’: for each is a relative term. If, on the other hand,

the genus be a relative term, there is no necessity that the species should be

so  as  well:  for  ‘knowledge’is  a  relative  term,  but  not  so  ‘grammar’.  Or

possibly not even the first statement would be generally considered true: for

virtue is a kind of ‘noble’ and a kind of ‘good’ thing, and yet, while ‘virtue’is a relative term, ‘good’ and ‘noble’ are not relatives but qualities. Again, see

whether the species fails to be used in the same relation when called by its

own name, and when called by the name of its genus: e.g. if the term ‘double’

be used to mean the double of a ‘half’, then also the term ‘multiple’ ought to

be used to mean multiple of a ‘half’. Otherwise ‘multiple’ could not be the

genus of ‘double’.

  Moreover, see whether the term fail to be used in the same relation both

when called by the name of its genus, and also when called by those of all the

genera of its genus. For if the double be a multiple of a half, then ‘in excess

of ‘will also be used in relation to a ‘half’: and, in general, the double will be

called  by  the  names  of  all  the  higher  genera  in  relation  to  a  ‘half’.  An

objection may be raised that there is no necessity for a term to be used in the

same relation when called by its own name and when called by that of its

genus:  for  ‘knowledge’  is  called  knowledge  ‘of  an  object’,  whereas  it  is

called a ‘state’ and ‘disposition’ not of an ‘object’ but of the ‘soul’.

  Again, see whether the genus and the species be used in the same way in

respect of the inflexions they take, e.g. datives and genitives and all the rest.

For as the species is used, so should the genus be as well, as in the case of

‘double’ and its higher genera: for we say both ‘double of’ and ‘multiple of’ a

thing. Likewise, also, in the case of ‘knowledge’: for both knowledge’ itself

and its genera, e.g. ‘disposition’ and ‘state’, are said to be ‘of’ something. An

objection may be raised that in some cases it is not so: for we say ‘superior

to’ and ‘contrary to’ so and so, whereas ‘other’, which is the genus of these

terms, demands not ‘to’ but ‘than’: for the expression is ‘other than’ so and

so.

  Again, see whether terms used in like case relationships fail to yield a like

construction when converted, as do ‘double’ and ‘multiple’. For each of these

terms takes a genitive both in itself and in its converted form: for we say both

a half of’ and ‘a fraction of’ something. The case is the same also as regards

both  ‘knowledge’  and  ‘conception’:  for  these  take  a  genitive,  and  by

conversion an ‘object of knowledge’ and an ‘object of conception’ are both

alike  used  with  a  dative.  If,  then,  in  any  cases  the  constructions  after

conversion be not alike, clearly the one term is not the genus of the other.

  Again, see whether the species and the genus fail to be used in relation to

an equal number of things: for the general view is that the uses of both are

alike and equal in number, as is the case with ‘present’ and ‘grant’. For a

present’ is of something or to some one, and also a ‘grant’ is of somethingand to some one: and ‘grant’ is the genus of ‘present’, for a ‘present’ is a

‘grant that need not be returned’. In some cases, however, the number of

relations  in  which  the  terms  are  used  happens  not  to  be  equal,  for  while

‘double’  is  double  of  something,  we  speak  of  ‘in  excess’  or  ‘greater’  in

something, as well as of or than something: for what is in excess or greater is

always in excess in something, as well as in excess of something. Hence the

terms in question are not the genera of ‘double’, inasmuch as they are not

used in relation to an equal number of things with the species. Or possibly it

is not universally true that species and genus are used in relation to an equal

number of things.

See, also, if the opposite of the species have the opposite of the genus as its

genus, e.g. whether, if ‘multiple’ be the genus of ‘double’, ‘fraction’ be also

the genus of ‘half’. For the opposite of the genus should always be the genus

of the opposite species. If, then, any one were to assert that knowledge is a

kind of sensation, then also the object of knowledge will have to be a kind of

object  of  sensation,  whereas  it  is  not:  for  an  object  of  knowledge  is  not

always an object of sensation: for objects of knowledge include some of the

objects of intuition as well. Hence ‘object of sensation’ is not the genus of

‘object of knowledge’: and if this be so, neither is ‘sensation’ the genus of

‘knowledge’.

Seeing that of relative terms some are of necessity found in, or used of, the

things  in  relation  to  which  they  happen  at  any  time  to  be  used  (e.g.

‘disposition’ and ‘state’ and ‘balance’; for in nothing else can the aforesaid

terms possibly be found except in the things in relation to which they are

used), while others need not be found in the things in relation to which they

are used at any time, though they still may be (e.g. if the term ‘object of

knowledge’ be applied to the soul: for it is quite possible that the knowledge

of itself should be possessed by the soul itself, but it is not necessary, for it is

possible for this same knowledge to be found in some one else), while for

others, again, it is absolutely impossible that they should be found in the

things in relation to which they happen at any time to be used (as e.g. that the

contrary  should  be  found  in  the  contrary  or  knowledge  in  the  object  of

knowledge, unless the object of knowledge happen to be a soul or a man)-you

should look, therefore, and see whether he places a term of one kind inside a

genus that is not of that kind, e.g. suppose he has said that ‘memory’ is the

‘abiding of knowledge’. For ‘abiding’ is always found in that which abides,

and is used of that, so that the abiding of knowledge also will be found inknowledge.  Memory,  then,  is  found  in  knowledge,  seeing  that  it  is  the

abiding of knowledge. But this is impossible, for memory is always found in

the  soul.  The  aforesaid  commonplace  rule  is  common  to  the  subject  of

Accident as well: for it is all the same to say that ‘abiding’ is the genus of

memory, or to allege that it is an accident of it. For if in any way whatever

memory be the abiding of knowledge, the same argument in regard to it will

apply.

<

div id="section40" class="section" title="5">


5


  Again, see if he has placed what is a ‘state’ inside the genus ‘activity’, or

an activity inside the genus ‘state’, e.g. by defining ‘sensation’ as ‘movement

communicated  through  the  body’:  for  sensation  is  a  ‘state’,  whereas

movement is an ‘activity’. Likewise, also, if he has said that memory is a

‘state that is retentive of a conception’, for memory is never a state, but rather

an activity.

  They also make a bad mistake who rank a ‘state’ within the ‘capacity’ that

attends  it,  e.g.  by  defining  ‘good  temper’  as  the  ‘control  of  anger’,  and

‘courage’  and  ‘justice’  as  ‘control  of  fears’  and  of  ‘gains’:  for  the  terms

‘courageous’ and ‘good-tempered’ are applied to a man who is immune from

passion,  whereas  ‘self-controlled’  describes  the  man  who  is  exposed  to

passion  and  not  led  by  it.  Quite  possibly,  indeed,  each  of  the  former  is

attended by a capacity such that, if he were exposed to passion, he would

control it and not be led by it: but, for all that, this is not what is meant by

being ‘courageous’ in the one case, and ‘good tempered’ in the other; what is

meant is an absolute immunity from any passions of that kind at all.

  Sometimes, also, people state any kind of attendant feature as the genus,

e.g. ‘pain’ as the genus of ‘anger’ and ‘conception’ as that of conviction’. For

both  of  the  things  in  question  follow  in  a  certain  sense  upon  the  given

species, but neither of them is genus to it. For when the angry man feels pain,

the pain bas appeared in him earlier than the anger: for his anger is not the

cause of his pain, but his pain of his anger, so that anger emphatically is not

pain.  By  the  same  reasoning,  neither  is  conviction  conception:  for  it  is

possible to have the same conception even without being convinced of it,

whereas this is impossible if conviction be a species of conception: for it isimpossible for a thing still to remain the same if it be entirely transferred out

of its species, just as neither could the same animal at one time be, and at

another not be, a man. If, on the other hand, any one says that a man who has

a conception must of necessity be also convinced of it, then ‘conception’ and

‘conviction’ will be used with an equal denotation, so that not even so could

the former be the genus of the latter: for the denotation of the genus should be

wider.

See, also, whether both naturally come to be anywhere in the same thing:

for what contains the species contains the genus as well: e.g. what contains

‘white’ contains ‘colour’ as well, and what contains ‘knowledge of grammar’

contains  ‘knowledge’  as  well.  If,  therefore,  any  one  says  that  ‘shame’  is

‘fear’, or that ‘anger’ is ‘pain’, the result will be that genus and species are

not found in the same thing: for shame is found in the ‘reasoning’ faculty,

whereas fear is in the ‘spirited’ faculty, and ‘pain’ is found in the faculty of

‘desires’. (for in this pleasure also is found), whereas ‘anger’ is found in the

‘spirited’ faculty. Hence the terms rendered are not the genera, seeing that

they do not naturally come to be in the same faculty as the species. Likewise,

also, if ‘friendship’ be found in the faculty of desires, you may take it that it

is not a form of ‘wishing’: for wishing is always found in the ‘reasoning’

faculty. This commonplace rule is useful also in dealing with Accident: for

the accident and that of which it is an accident are both found in the same

thing, so that if they do not appear in the same thing, clearly it is not an

accident.

  Again, see if the species partakes of the genus attributed only in some

particular respect: for it is the general view that the genus is not thus imparted

only in some particular respect: for a man is not an animal in a particular

respect, nor is grammar knowledge in a particular respect only. Likewise also

in other instances. Look, therefore, and see if in the case of any of its species

the genus be imparted only in a certain respect; e.g. if ‘animal’ has been

described as an ‘object of perception’ or of ‘sight’. For an animal is an object

of perception or of sight in a particular respect only; for it is in respect of its

body that it is perceived and seen, not in respect of its soul, so that-’object of

sight’ and ‘object of perception’ could not be the genus of ‘animal’.

  Sometimes also people place the whole inside the part without detection,

defining  (e.g.)  ‘animal’  as  an  ‘animate  body’;  whereas  the  part  is  not

predicated in any sense of the whole, so that ‘body’ could not be the genus of

animal, seeing that it is a part.See also if he has put anything that is blameworthy or objectionable into

the class ‘capacity’ or ‘capable’, e.g. by defining a ‘sophist’ or a ‘slanderer’,

or  a  ‘thief’  as  ‘one  who  is  capable  of  secretly  thieving  other  people’s

property’. For none of the aforesaid characters is so called because he is

‘capable’  in  one  of  these  respects:  for  even  God  and  the  good  man  are

capable of doing bad things, but that is not their character: for it is always in

respect of their choice that bad men are so called. Moreover, a capacity is

always a desirable thing: for even the capacities for doing bad things are

desirable, and therefore it is we say that even God and the good man possess

them; for they are capable (we say) of doing evil. So then ‘capacity’ can

never be the genus of anything blameworthy. Else, the result will be that what

is blameworthy is sometimes desirable: for there will be a certain form of

capacity that is blameworthy.

Also, see if he has put anything that is precious or desirable for its own

sake into the class ‘capacity’ or ‘capable’ or ‘productive’ of anything. For

capacity, and what is capable or productive of anything, is always desirable

for the sake of something else.

Or see if he has put anything that exists in two genera or more into one of

them only. For some things it is impossible to place in a single genus, e.g. the

‘cheat’  and  the  ‘slanderer’:  for  neither  he  who  has  the  will  without  the

capacity, nor he who has the capacity without the will, is a slanderer or cheat,

but he who has both of them. Hence he must be put not into one genus, but

into both the aforesaid genera.

  Moreover, people sometimes in converse order render genus as differentia,

and  differentia  as  genus,  defining  (e.g.)  astonishment  as  ‘excess  of

wonderment’  and  conviction  as  ‘vehemence  of  conception’.  For  neither

‘excess’ nor ‘vehemence’ is the genus, but the differentia: for astonishment is

usually  taken  to  be  an  ‘excessive  wonderment’,  and  conviction  to  be  a

‘vehement conception’, so that ‘wonderment’ and ‘conception’ are the genus,

while  ‘excess’  and  ‘vehemence’  are  the  differentia.  Moreover,  if  any  one

renders ‘excess’ and ‘vehemence’ as genera, then inanimate things will be

convinced and astonished. For ‘vehemence’ and ‘excess’ of a thing are found

in a thing which is thus vehement and in excess. If, therefore, astonishment

be excess of wonderment the astonishment will be found in the wonderment,

so that ‘wonderment’ will be astonished! Likewise, also, conviction will be

found  in  the  conception,  if  it  be  ‘vehemence  of  conception’,  so  that  the

conception will be convinced. Moreover, a man who renders an answer inthis style will in consequence find himself calling vehemence vehement and

excess excessive: for there is such a thing as a vehement conviction: if then

conviction  be  ‘vehemence’,  there  would  be  a  ‘vehement  vehemence’.

Likewise,  also,  there  is  such  a  thing  as  excessive  astonishment:  if  then

astonishment be an excess, there would be an ‘excessive excess’. Whereas

neither of these things is generally believed, any more than that knowledge is

a knower or motion a moving thing.

  Sometimes, too, people make the bad mistake of putting an affection into

that which is affected, as its genus, e.g. those who say that immortality is

everlasting life: for immortality seems to be a certain affection or accidental

feature of life. That this saying is true would appear clear if any one were to

admit that a man can pass from being mortal and become immortal: for no

one will assert that he takes another life, but that a certain accidental feature

or affection enters into this one as it is. So then ‘life’ is not the genus of

immortality.

  Again, see if to an affection he has ascribed as genus the object of which it

is an affection, by defining (e.g.) wind as ‘air in motion’. Rather, wind is ‘a

movement of air’: for the same air persists both when it is in motion and

when it is still. Hence wind is not ‘air’ at all: for then there would also have

been wind when the air was not in motion, seeing that the same air which

formed the wind persists. Likewise, also, in other cases of the kind. Even,

then,  if  we  ought  in  this  instance  to  admit  the  point  that  wind  is  ‘air  in

motion’, yet we should accept a definition of the kind, not about all those

things of which the genus is not true, but only in cases where the genus

rendered is a true predicate. For in some cases, e.g. ‘mud’ or ‘snow’, it is not

generally held to be true. For people tell you that snow is ‘frozen water’ and

mud  is  earth  mixed  with  moisture’,  whereas  snow  is  not  water,  nor  mud

earth, so that neither of the terms rendered could be the genus: for the genus

should be true of all its species. Likewise neither is wine ‘fermented water’,

as Empedocles speaks of ‘water fermented in wood’;’ for it simply is not

water at all.

<

div id="section41" class="section" title="6">


6


  Moreover, see whether the term rendered fail to be the genus of anything atall; for then clearly it also fails to be the genus of the species mentioned.

Examine the point by seeing whether the objects that partake of the genus fail

to be specifically different from one another, e.g. white objects: for these do

not differ specifically from one another, whereas of a genus the species are

always different, so that ‘white’ could not be the genus of anything.

  Again, see whether he has named as genus or differentia some feature that

goes with everything: for the number of attributes that follow everything is

comparatively large: thus (e.g.) ‘Being’ and ‘Unity’ are among the number of

attributes that follow everything. If, therefore, he has rendered ‘Being’ as a

genus, clearly it would be the genus of everything, seeing that it is predicated

of everything; for the genus is never predicated of anything except of its

species.  Hence  Unity,  inter  alia,  will  be  a  species  of  Being.  The  result,

therefore, is that of all things of which the genus is predicated, the species is

predicated as well, seeing that Being and Unity are predicates of absolutely

everything, whereas the predication of the species ought to be of narrower

range. If, on the other hand, he has named as differentia some attribute that

follows everything, clearly the denotation of the differentia will be equal to,

or wider than, that of the genus. For if the genus, too, be some attribute that

follows  everything,  the  denotation  of  the  differentia  will  be  equal  to  its

denotation, while if the genus do not follow everything, it will be still wider.

  Moreover,  see  if  the  description  ‘inherent  in  S’  be  used  of  the  genus

rendered in relation to its species, as it is used of ‘white’ in the case of snow,

thus showing clearly that it could not be the genus: for ‘true of S’ is the only

description used of the genus in relation to its species. Look and see also if

the genus fails to be synonymous with its species. For the genus is always

predicated of its species synonymously.

  Moreover, beware, whenever both species and genus have a contrary, and

he places the better of the contraries inside the worse genus: for the result will

be that the remaining species will be found in the remaining genus, seeing

that contraries are found in contrary genera, so that the better species will be

found in the worse genus and the worse in the better: whereas the usual view

is that of the better species the genus too is better. Also see if he has placed

the species inside the worse and not inside the better genus, when it is at the

same time related in like manner to both, as (e.g.) if he has defined the ‘soul’

as a ‘form of motion’ or ‘a form of moving thing’. For the same soul is

usually thought to be a principle alike of rest and of motion, so that, if rest is

the better of the two, this is the genus into which the soul should have beenput.

  Moreover, judge by means of greater and less degrees: if overthrowing a

view, see whether the genus admits of a greater degree, whereas neither the

species itself does so, nor any term that is called after it: e.g. if virtue admits

of a greater degree, so too does justice and the just man: for one man is called

‘more just than another’. If, therefore, the genus rendered admits of a greater

degree, whereas neither the species does so itself nor yet any term called after

it, then what has been rendered could not be the genus.

  Again, if what is more generally, or as generally, thought to be the genus

be not so, clearly neither is the genus rendered. The commonplace rule in

question  is  useful  especially  in  cases  where  the  species  appears  to  have

several predicates in the category of essence, and where no distinction has

been drawn between them, and we cannot say which of them is genus; e.g.

both  ‘pain’  and  the  ‘conception  of  a  slight’  are  usually  thought  to  be

predicates of ‘anger in the category of essence: for the angry man is both in

pain and also conceives that he is slighted. The same mode of inquiry may be

applied  also  to  the  case  of  the  species,  by  comparing  it  with  some  other

species: for if the one which is more generally, or as generally, thought to be

found in the genus rendered be not found therein, then clearly neither could

the species rendered be found therein.

In demolishing a view, therefore, you should follow the rule as stated. In

establishing one, on the other hand, the commonplace rule that you should

see if both the genus rendered and the species admit of a greater degree will

not serve: for even though both admit it, it is still possible for one not to be

the genus of the other. For both ‘beautiful’ and ‘white’ admit of a greater

degree,  and  neither  is  the  genus  of  the  other.  On  the  other  hand,  the

comparison of the genera and of the species one with another is of use: e.g.

supposing A and B to have a like claim to be genus, then if one be a genus, so

also is the other. Likewise, also, if what has less claim be a genus, so also is

what has more claim: e.g. if ‘capacity’ have more claim than ‘virtue’ to be the

genus of self-control, and virtue be the genus, so also is capacity. The same

observations  will  apply  also  in  the  case  of  the  species.  For  instance,

supposing  A  and  B  to  have  a  like  claim  to  be  a  species  of  the  genus  in

question, then if the one be a species, so also is the other: and if that which is

less generally thought to be so be a species, so also is that which is more

generally thought to be so.

  Moreover, to establish a view, you should look and see if the genus ispredicated in the category of essence of those things of which it has been

rendered as the genus, supposing the species rendered to be not one single

species but several different ones: for then clearly it will be the genus. If, on

the other, the species rendered be single, look and see whether the genus be

predicated in the category of essence of other species as well: for then, again,

the result will be that it is predicated of several different species.

  Since  some  people  think  that  the  differentia,  too,  is  a  predicate  of  the

various species in the category of essence, you should distinguish the genus

from the differentia by employing the aforesaid elementary principles-(a) that

the genus has a wider denotation than the differentia; (b) that in rendering the

essence of a thing it is more fitting to state the genus than the differentia: for

any one who says that ‘man’ is an ‘animal’ shows what man is better than he

who describes him as ‘walking’; also (c) that the differentia always signifies a

quality of the genus, whereas the genus does not do this of the differentia: for

he who says ‘walking’ describes an animal of a certain quality, whereas he

who says ‘animal’ describes an animal of a certain quality, whereas he who

says ‘animal’ does not describe a walking thing of a certain quality.

The  differentia,  then,  should  be  distinguished  from  the  genus  in  this

manner. Now seeing it is generally held that if what is musical, in being

musical,  possesses  knowledge  in  some  respect,  then  also  ‘music’  is  a

particular  kind  of  ‘knowledge’;  and  also  that  if  what  walks  is  moved  in

walking,  then  ‘walking’  is  a  particular  kind  of  ‘movement’;  you  should

therefore examine in the aforesaid manner any genus in which you want to

establish  the  existence  of  something;  e.g.  if  you  wish  to  prove  that

‘knowledge’ is a form of ‘conviction’, see whether the knower in knowing is

convinced:  for  then  clearly  knowledge  would  be  a  particular  kind  of

conviction. You should proceed in the same way also in regard to the other

cases of this kind.

  Moreover, seeing that it is difficult to distinguish whatever always follows

along with a thing, and is not convertible with it, from its genus, if A follows

B universally, whereas B does not follow A universally-as e.g. ‘rest’ always

follows a ‘calm’ and ‘divisibility’ follows ‘number’, but not conversely (for

the  divisible  is  not  always  a  number,  nor  rest  a  calm)-you  may  yourself

assume in your treatment of them that the one which always follows is the

genus, whenever the other is not convertible with it: if, on the other hand,

some one else puts forward the proposition, do not accept it universally. An

objection to it is that ‘not-being’ always follows what is ‘coming to be’ (forwhat is coming to be is not) and is not convertible with it (for what is not is

not  always  coming  to  be),  and  that  still  ‘not-being’  is  not  the  genus  of

‘coming to be’: for ‘not-being’ has not any species at all. Questions, then, in

regard to Genus should be investigated in the ways described.                                  Topics, Book V


Translated by W. A. Pickard-Cambridge


<

div id="book4" class="book" title="Book IV">1


The question whether the attribute stated is or is not a property, should be

examined by the following methods:

Any  ‘property’  rendered  is  always  either  essential  and  permanent  or

relative and temporary: e.g. it is an ‘essential property’ of man to be ‘by

nature a civilized animal’: a ‘relative property’ is one like that of the soul in

relation to the body, viz. that the one is fitted to command, and the other to

obey: a ‘permanent property’ is one like the property which belongs to God,

of being an ‘immortal living being’: a ‘temporary property’ is one like the

property which belongs to any particular man of walking in the gymnasium.

  [The rendering of a property ‘relatively’ gives rise either to two problems

or to four. For if he at the same time render this property of one thing and

deny it of another, only two problems arise, as in the case of a statement that

it is a property of a man, in relation to a horse, to be a biped. For one might

try both to show that a man is not a biped, and also that a horse is a biped: in

both ways the property would be upset. If on the other hand he render one

apiece of two attributes to each of two things, and deny it in each case of the

other, there will then be four problems; as in the case of a statement that it is

a property of a man in relation to a horse for the former to be a biped and the

latter a quadruped. For then it is possible to try to show both that a man is not

naturally a biped, and that he is a quadruped, and also that the horse both is a

biped, and is not a quadruped. If you show any of these at all, the intended

attribute is demolished.]

An ‘essential’ property is one which is rendered of a thing in comparison

with everything else and distinguishes the said thing from everything else, as

does ‘a mortal living being capable of receiving knowledge’ in the case of

man. A ‘relative’ property is one which separates its subject off not from

everything else but only from a particular definite thing, as does the property

which virtue possesses, in comparison with knowledge, viz. that the former is

naturally produced in more than one faculty, whereas the latter is produced inthat  of  reason  alone,  and  in  those  who  have  a  reasoning  faculty.  A

‘permanent’ property is one which is true at every time, and never fails, like

being’ compounded of soul and body’, in the case of a living creature. A

‘temporary’ property is one which is true at some particular time, and does

not of necessity always follow; as, of some particular man, that he walks in

the market-place.

To  render  a  property  ‘relatively’  to  something  else  means  to  state  the

difference  between  them  as  it  is  found  either  universally  and  always,  or

generally and in most cases: thus a difference that is found universally and

always, is one such as man possesses in comparison with a horse, viz. being a

biped: for a man is always and in every case a biped, whereas a horse is never

a biped at any time. On the other hand, a difference that is found generally

and  in  most  cases,  is  one  such  as  the  faculty  of  reason  possesses  in

comparison with that of desire and spirit, in that the former commands, while

the latter obeys: for the reasoning faculty does not always command, but

sometimes also is under command, nor is that of desire and spirit always

under command, but also on occasion assumes the command, whenever the

soul of a man is vicious.

Of ‘properties’ the most ‘arguable’ are the essential and permanent and the

relative.  For  a  relative  property  gives  rise,  as  we  said  before,  to  several

questions: for of necessity the questions arising are either two or four, or that

arguments  in  regard  to  these  are  several.  An  essential  and  a  permanent

property you can discuss in relation to many things, or can observe in relation

to many periods of time: if essential’, discuss it in comparison with many

things: for the property ought to belong to its subject in comparison with

every single thing that is, so that if the subject be not distinguished by it in

comparison with everything else, the property could not have been rendered

correctly. So a permanent property you should observe in relation to many

periods of time; for if it does not or did not, or is not going to, belong, it will

not be a property. On the other hand, about a temporary property we do not

inquire  further  than  in  regard  to  the  time  called  ‘the  present’;  and  so

arguments in regard to it are not many; whereas an arguable’ question is one

in regard to which it is possible for arguments both numerous and good to

arise.

The so-called ‘relative’ property, then, should be examined by means of

the commonplace arguments relating to Accident, to see whether it belongs to

the one thing and not to the other: on the other hand, permanent and essentialproperties should be considered by the following methods.

<

div id="section43" class="section" title="2">


2


First, see whether the property has or has not been rendered correctly. Of a

rendering being incorrect or correct, one test is to see whether the terms in

which the property is stated are not or are more intelligible-for destructive

purposes, whether they are not so, and for constructive purposes, whether

they  are  so.  Of  the  terms  not  being  more  intelligible,  one  test  is  to  see

whether the property which he renders is altogether more unintelligible than

the subject whose property he has stated: for, if so, the property will not have

been stated correctly. For the object of getting a property constituted is to be

intelligible:  the  terms  therefore  in  which  it  is  rendered  should  be  more

intelligible: for in that case it will be possible to conceive it more adequately,

e.g. any one who has stated that it is a property of ‘fire’ to ‘bear a very close

resemblance to the soul’, uses the term ‘soul’, which is less intelligible than

‘fire’-for we know better what fire is than what soul is-, and therefore a ‘very

close resemblance to the soul’ could not be correctly stated to be a property

of fire. Another test is to see whether the attribution of A (property) to B

(subject) fails to be more intelligible. For not only should the property be

more  intelligible  than  its  subject,  but  also  it  should  be  something  whose

attribution to the particular subject is a more intelligible attribution. For he

who does not know whether it is an attribute of the particular subject at all,

will not know either whether it belongs to it alone, so that whichever of these

results happens, its character as a property becomes obscure. Thus (e.g.) a

man who has stated that it is a property of fire to be ‘the primary element

wherein the soul is naturally found’, has introduced a subject which is less

intelligible than ‘fire’, viz. whether the soul is found in it, and whether it is

found there primarily; and therefore to be ‘the primary element in which the

soul is naturally found’ could not be correctly stated to be a property of ‘fire’.

On the other hand, for constructive purposes, see whether the terms in which

the property is stated are more intelligible, and if they are more intelligible in

each of the aforesaid ways. For then the property will have been correctly

stated in this respect: for of constructive arguments, showing the correctness

of a rendering, some will show the correctness merely in this respect, whileothers will show it without qualification. Thus (e.g.) a man who has said that

the ‘possession of sensation’ is a property of ‘animal’ has both used more

intelligible terms and has rendered the property more intelligible in each of

the aforesaid senses; so that to ‘possess sensation’ would in this respect have

been correctly rendered as a property of ‘animal’.

Next, for destructive purposes, see whether any of the terms rendered in

the property is used in more than one sense, or whether the whole expression

too signifies more than one thing. For then the property will not have been

correctly stated. Thus (e.g.) seeing that to ‘being natural sentient’ signifies

more than one thing, viz. (1) to possess sensation, (2) to use one’s sensation,

being naturally sentient’ could not be a correct statement of a property of

‘animal’.  The  reason  why  the  term  you  use,  or  the  whole  expression

signifying the property, should not bear more than one meaning is this, that

an expression bearing more than one meaning makes the object described

obscure, because the man who is about to attempt an argument is in doubt

which of the various senses the expression bears: and this will not do, for the

object  of  rendering  the  property  is  that  he  may  understand.  Moreover,  in

addition to this, it is inevitable that those who render a property after this

fashion  should  be  somehow  refuted  whenever  any  one  addresses  his

syllogism to that one of the term’s several meanings which does not agree.

For constructive purposes, on the other hand, see whether both all the terms

and also the expression as a whole avoid bearing more than one sense: for

then the property will have been correctly stated in this respect. Thus (e.g.)

seeing  that  ‘body’  does  not  bear  several  meanings,  nor  quickest  to  move

upwards  in  space’,  nor  yet  the  whole  expression  made  by  putting  them

together, it would be correct in this respect to say that it is a property of fire

to be the ‘body quickest to move upwards in space’.

Next, for destructive purposes, see if the term of which he renders the

property is used in more than one sense, and no distinction has been drawn as

to which of them it is whose property he is stating: for then the property will

not have been correctly rendered. The reasons why this is so are quite clear

from what has been said above: for the same results are bound to follow.

Thus (e.g.) seeing that ‘the knowledge of this’ signifies many things for it

means (1) the possession of knowledge by it, (2) the use of its knowledge by

it, (3) the existence of knowledge about it, (4) the use of knowledge about it-

no property of the ‘knowledge of this’ could be rendered correctly unless he

draw a distinction as to which of these it is whose property he is rendering.