CONTENTS


Biographic Sketch

Preface

Anarchism: What It Really Stands For

Minorities Versus Majorities

The Psychology of Political Violence

Prisons: A Social Crime and Failure

Patriotism: A Menace to Liberty

Francisco Ferrer and The Modern School

The Hypocrisy of Puritanism

The Traffic in Women

Woman Suffrage

The Tragedy of Woman's Emancipation

Marriage and Love

The Drama: A Powerful Disseminator of Radical Thought




EMMA GOLDMAN



     Propagandism is not, as some suppose, a "trade," because
     nobody will follow a "trade" at which you may work with
     the industry of a slave and die with the reputation of a
     mendicant.  The motives of any persons to pursue such a
     profession must be different from those of trade, deeper
     than pride, and stronger than interest.
                                       GEORGE JACOB HOLYOAKE.


Among the men and women prominent in the public life of America there
are but few whose names are mentioned as often as that of Emma
Goldman.  Yet the real Emma Goldman is almost quite unknown.  The
sensational press has surrounded her name with so much
misrepresentation and slander, it would seem almost a miracle that,
in spite of this web of calumny, the truth breaks through and a
better appreciation of this much maligned idealist begins to manifest
itself.  There is but little consolation in the fact that almost
every representative of a new idea has had to struggle and suffer
under similar difficulties.  Is it of any avail that a former
president of a republic pays homage at Osawatomie to the memory of
John Brown?  Or that the president of another republic participates
in the unveiling of a statue in honor of Pierre Proudhon, and holds
up his life to the French nation as a model worthy of enthusiastic
emulation?  Of what avail is all this when, at the same time, the
LIVING John Browns and Proudhons are being crucified?  The honor and
glory of a Mary Wollstonecraft or of a Louise Michel are not enhanced
by the City Fathers of London or Paris naming a street after
them--the living generation should be concerned with doing justice to
the LIVING Mary Wollstonecrafts and Louise Michels.  Posterity
assigns to men like Wendel Phillips and Lloyd Garrison the proper
niche of honor in the temple of human emancipation; but it is the
duty of their contemporaries to bring them due recognition and
appreciation while they live.

The path of the propagandist of social justice is strewn with thorns.
The powers of darkness and injustice exert all their might lest a ray
of sunshine enter his cheerless life.  Nay, even his comrades in the
struggle--indeed, too often his most intimate friends--show but
little understanding for the personality of the pioneer.  Envy,
sometimes growing to hatred, vanity and jealousy, obstruct his way
and fill his heart with sadness.  It requires an inflexible will and
tremendous enthusiasm not to lose, under such conditions, all faith
in the Cause.  The representative of a revolutionizing idea stands
between two fires: on the one hand, the persecution of the existing
powers which hold him responsible for all acts resulting from social
conditions; and, on the other, the lack of understanding on the part
of his own followers who often judge all his activity from a narrow
standpoint.  Thus it happens that the agitator stands quite alone in
the midst of the multitude surrounding him.  Even his most intimate
friends rarely understand how solitary and deserted he feels.  That
is the tragedy of the person prominent in the public eye.

The mist in which the name of Emma Goldman has so long been enveloped
is gradually beginning to dissipate.  Her energy in the furtherance
of such an unpopular idea as Anarchism, her deep earnestness, her
courage and abilities, find growing understanding and admiration.

The debt American intellectual growth owes to the revolutionary
exiles has never been fully appreciated.  The seed disseminated by
them, though so little understood at the time, has brought a rich
harvest.  They have at all times held aloft the banner of liberty,
thus impregnating the social vitality of the Nation.  But very few
have succeeding in preserving their European education and culture
while at the same time assimilating themselves with American life.
It is difficult for the average man to form an adequate conception
what strength, energy, and perseverance are necessary to absorb the
unfamiliar language, habits, and customs of a new country, without
the loss of one's own personality.

Emma Goldman is one of the few who, while thoroughly preserving their
individuality, have become an important factor in the social and
intellectual atmosphere of America.  The life she leads is rich in
color, full of change and variety.  She has risen to the topmost
heights, and she has also tasted the bitter dregs of life.

Emma Goldman was born of Jewish parentage on the 27th day of June,
1869, in the Russian province of Kovno.  Surely these parents never
dreamed what unique position their child would some day occupy.  Like
all conservative parents they, too, were quite convinced that their
daughter would marry a respectable citizen, bear him children, and
round out her allotted years surrounded by a flock of grandchildren,
a good, religious woman.  As most parents, they had no inkling what a
strange, impassioned spirit would take hold of the soul of their
child, and carry it to the heights which separate generations in
eternal struggle.  They lived in a land and at a time when antagonism
between parent and offspring was fated to find its most acute
expression, irreconcilable hostility.  In this tremendous struggle
between fathers and sons--and especially between parents and
daughters--there was no compromise, no weak yielding, no truce.  The
spirit of liberty, of progress--an idealism which knew no
considerations and recognized no obstacles--drove the young
generation out of the parental house and away from the hearth of the
home.  Just as this same spirit once drove out the revolutionary
breeder of discontent, Jesus, and alienated him from his native
traditions.

What role the Jewish race--notwithstanding all anti-semitic calumnies
the race of transcendental idealism--played in the struggle of the
Old and the New will probably never be appreciated with complete
impartiality and clarity.  Only now are we beginning to perceive the
tremendous debt we owe to Jewish idealists in the realm of science,
art, and literature.  But very little is still known of the important
part the sons and daughters of Israel have played in the
revolutionary movement and, especially, in that of modern times.

The first years of her childhood Emma Goldman passed in a small,
idyllic place in the German-Russian province of Kurland, where her
father had charge of the government stage.  At the time Kurland was
thoroughly German; even the Russian bureaucracy of that Baltic
province was recruited mostly from German JUNKERS.  German fairy
tales and stories, rich in the miraculous deeds of the heroic knights
of Kurland, wove their spell over the youthful mind.  But the
beautiful idyl was of short duration.  Soon the soul of the growing
child was overcast by the dark shadows of life.  Already in her
tenderest youth the seeds of rebellion and unrelenting hatred of
oppression were to be planted in the heart of Emma Goldman.  Early
she learned to know the beauty of the State: she saw her father
harassed by the Christian CHINOVNIKS and doubly persecuted as petty
official and hated Jew.  The brutality of forced conscription ever
stood before her eyes: she beheld the young men, often the sole
supporter of a large family, brutally dragged to the barracks to lead
the miserable life of a soldier.  She heard the weeping of the poor
peasant women, and witnessed the shameful scenes of official venality
which relieved the rich from military service at the expense of the
poor.  She was outraged by the terrible treatment to which the female
servants were subjected: maltreated and exploited by their BARINYAS,
they fell to the tender mercies of the regimental officers, who
regarded them as their natural sexual prey.  The girls, made pregnant
by respectable gentlemen and driven out by their mistresses, often
found refuge in the Goldman home.  And the little girl, her heart
palpitating with sympathy, would abstract coins from the parental
drawer to clandestinely press the money into the hands of the
unfortunate women.  Thus Emma Goldman's most striking characteristic,
her sympathy with the underdog, already became manifest in these
early years.

At the age of seven little Emma was sent by her parents to her
grandmother at Konigsberg, the city of Emanuel Kant, in Eastern
Prussia.  Save for occasional interruptions, she remained there till her
13th birthday.  The first years in these surroundings do not exactly
belong to her happiest recollections.  The grandmother, indeed, was
very amiable, but the numerous aunts of the household were concerned
more with the spirit of practical rather than pure reason, and the
categoric imperative was applied all too frequently.  The situation
was changed when her parents migrated to Konigsberg, and little Emma
was relieved from her role of Cinderella.  She now regularly attended
public school and also enjoyed the advantages of private instruction,
customary in middle class life; French and music lessons played an
important part in the curriculum.  The future interpreter of Ibsen
and Shaw was then a little German Gretchen, quite at home in the
German atmosphere.  Her special predilections in literature were the
sentimental romances of Marlitt; she was a great admirer of the good
Queen Louise, whom the bad Napoleon Buonaparte treated with so marked
a lack of knightly chivalry.  What might have been her future
development had she remained in this milieu?  Fate--or was it
economic necessity?--willed it otherwise.  Her parents decided to
settle in St. Petersburg, the capital of the Almighty Tsar, and there
to embark in business.  It was here that a great change took place in
the life of the young dreamer.

It was an eventful period--the year of 1882--in which Emma Goldman,
then in her 13th year, arrived in St. Petersburg.  A struggle for
life and death between the autocracy and the Russian intellectuals
swept the country.  Alexander II had fallen the previous year.
Sophia Perovskaia, Zheliabov, Grinevitzky, Rissakov, Kibalchitch,
Michailov, the heroic executors of the death sentence upon the
tyrant, had then entered the Walhalla of immortality.  Jessie
Helfman, the only regicide whose life the government had reluctantly
spared because of pregnancy, followed the unnumbered Russian martyrs
to the etapes of Siberia.  It was the most heroic period in the great
battle of emancipation, a battle for freedom such as the world had
never witnessed before.  The names of the Nihilist martyrs were on
all lips, and thousands were enthusiastic to follow their example.
The whole INTELLIGENZIA of Russia was filled with the ILLEGAL
spirit: revolutionary sentiments penetrated into every home, from
mansion to hovel, impregnating the military, the CHINOVNIKS, factory
workers, and peasants.  The atmosphere pierced the very casemates of
the royal palace.  New ideas germinated in the youth.  The difference
of sex was forgotten.  Shoulder to shoulder fought the men and the
women.  The Russian woman!  Who shall ever do justice or adequately
portray her heroism and self-sacrifice, her loyalty and devotion?
Holy, Turgeniev calls her in his great prose poem, ON THE THRESHOLD.

It was inevitable that the young dreamer from Konigsberg should be
drawn into the maelstrom.  To remain outside of the circle of free
ideas meant a life of vegetation, of death.  One need not wonder at
the youthful age.  Young enthusiasts were not then--and, fortunately,
are not now--a rare phenomenon in Russia.  The study of the Russian
language soon brought young Emma Goldman in touch with revolutionary
students and new ideas.  The place of Marlitt was taken by Nekrassov
and Tchernishevsky.  The quondam admirer of the good Queen Louise
became a glowing enthusiast of liberty, resolving, like thousands of
others, to devote her life to the emancipation of the people.

The struggle of generations now took place in the Goldman family.
The parents could not comprehend what interest their daughter could
find in the new ideas, which they themselves considered fantastic
utopias.  They strove to persuade the young girl out of these
chimeras, and daily repetition of soul-racking disputes was the
result.  Only in one member of the family did the young idealist find
understanding--in her elder sister, Helene, with whom she later
emigrated to America, and whose love and sympathy have never failed
her.  Even in the darkest hours of later persecution Emma Goldman
always found a haven of refuge in the home of this loyal sister.

Emma Goldman finally resolved to achieve her independence.  She saw
hundreds of men and women sacrificing brilliant careers to go V
NAROD, to the people.  She followed their example.  She became a
factory worker; at first employed as a corset maker, and later in the
manufacture of gloves.  She was now 17 years of age and proud to earn
her own living.  Had she remained in Russia, she would have probably
sooner or later shared the fate of thousands buried in the snows of
Siberia.  But a new chapter of life was to begin for her.  Sister
Helene decided to emigrate to America, where another sister had
already made her home.  Emma prevailed upon Helene to be allowed to
join her, and together they departed for America, filled with the
joyous hope of a great, free land, the glorious Republic.


America!  What magic word.  The yearning of the enslaved, the
promised land of the oppressed, the goal of all longing for progress.
Here man's ideals had found their fulfillment: no Tsar, no Cossack,
no CHINOVNIK.  The Republic!  Glorious synonym of equality, freedom,
brotherhood.

Thus thought the two girls as they travelled, in the year 1886, from
New York to Rochester.  Soon, all too soon, disillusionment awaited
them.  The ideal conception of America was punctured already at
Castle Garden, and soon burst like a soap bubble.  Here Emma Goldman
witnessed sights which reminded her of the terrible scenes of her
childhood in Kurland.  The brutality and humiliation the future
citizens of the great Republic were subjected to on board ship, were
repeated at Castle Garden by the officials of the democracy in a more
savage and aggravating manner.  And what bitter disappointment
followed as the young idealist began to familiarize herself with the
conditions in the new land!  Instead of one Tsar, she found scores of
them; the Cossack was replaced by the policeman with the heavy club,
and instead of the Russian CHINOVNIK there was the far more inhuman
slave-driver of the factory.

Emma Goldman soon obtained work in the clothing establishment of the
Garson Co.  The wages amounted to two and a half dollars a week.  At
that time the factories were not provided with motor power, and the
poor sewing girls had to drive the wheels by foot, from early morning
till late at night.  A terribly exhausting toil it was, without a ray
of light, the drudgery of the long day passed in complete
silence--the Russian custom of friendly conversation at work was not
permissible in the free country.  But the exploitation of the girls
was not only economic; the poor wage workers were looked upon by
their foremen and bosses as sexual commodities.  If a girl resented
the advances of her "superiors", she would speedily find herself on
the street as an undesirable element in the factory.  There was never
a lack of willing victims: the supply always exceeded the demand.

The horrible conditions were made still more unbearable by the
fearful dreariness of life in the small American city.  The Puritan
spirit suppresses the slightest manifestation of joy; a deadly
dullness beclouds the soul; no intellectual inspiration, no thought
exchange between congenial spirits is possible.  Emma Goldman almost
suffocated in this atmosphere.  She, above all others, longed for
ideal surroundings, for friendship and understanding, for the
companionship of kindred minds.  Mentally she still lived in Russia.
Unfamiliar with the language and life of the country, she dwelt more
in the past than in the present.  It was at this period that she met
a young man who spoke Russian.  With great joy the acquaintance was
cultivated.  At last a person with whom she could converse, one who
could help her bridge the dullness of the narrow existence.  The
friendship gradually ripened and finally culminated in marriage.

Emma Goldman, too, had to walk the sorrowful road of married life;
she, too, had to learn from bitter experience that legal statutes
signify dependence and self-effacement, especially for the woman.
The marriage was no liberation from the Puritan dreariness of
American life; indeed, it was rather aggravated by the loss of
self-ownership.  The characters of the young people differed too
widely.  A separation soon followed, and Emma Goldman went to New
Haven, Conn.  There she found employment in a factory, and her
husband disappeared from her horizon.  Two decades later she was
fated to be unexpectedly reminded of him by the Federal authorities.

The revolutionists who were active in the Russian movement of the
80's were but little familiar with the social ideas then agitating
Western Europe and America.  Their sole activity consisted in
educating the people, their final goal the destruction of the
autocracy.  Socialism and Anarchism were terms hardly known even by
name.  Emma Goldman, too, was entirely unfamiliar with the
significance of those ideals.

She arrived in America, as four years previously in Russia, at a
period of great social and political unrest.  The working people were
in revolt against the terrible labor conditions; the eight-hour
movement of the Knights of Labor was at its height, and throughout
the country echoed the din of sanguine strife between strikers and
police.  The struggle culminated in the great strike against the
Harvester Company of Chicago, the massacre of the strikers, and the
judicial murder of the labor leaders, which followed upon the
historic Haymarket bomb explosion.  The Anarchists stood the martyr
test of blood baptism.  The apologists of capitalism vainly seek to
justify the killing of Parsons, Spies, Lingg, Fischer, and Engel.
Since the publication of Governor Altgeld's reason for his liberation
of the three incarcerated Haymarket Anarchists, no doubt is left that
a fivefold legal murder had been committed in Chicago, in 1887.

Very few have grasped the significance of the Chicago martyrdom;
least of all the ruling classes.  By the destruction of a number of
labor leaders they thought to stem the tide of a world-inspiring
idea.  They failed to consider that from the blood of the martyrs
grows the new seed, and that the frightful injustice will win new
converts to the Cause.

The two most prominent representatives of the Anarchist idea in
America, Voltairine de Cleyre and Emma Goldman--the one a native
American, the other a Russian--have been converted, like numerous
others, to the ideas of Anarchism by the judicial murder.  Two women
who had not known each other before, and who had received a widely
different education, were through that murder united in one idea.

Like most working men and women of America, Emma Goldman followed the
Chicago trial with great anxiety and excitement.  She, too, could not
believe that the leaders of the proletariat would be killed.  The
11th of November, 1887, taught her differently.  She realized that no
mercy could be expected from the ruling class, that between the
Tsarism of Russia and the plutocracy of America there was no
difference save in name.  Her whole being rebelled against the crime,
and she vowed to herself a solemn vow to join the ranks of the
revolutionary proletariat and to devote all her energy and strength
to their emancipation from wage slavery.  With the glowing enthusiasm
so characteristic of her nature, she now began to familiarize herself
with the literature of Socialism and Anarchism.  She attended public
meetings and became acquainted with socialistically and
anarchistically inclined workingmen.  Johanna Greie, the well-known
German lecturer, was the first Socialist speaker heard by Emma
Goldman.  In New Haven, Conn., where she was employed in a corset
factory, she met Anarchists actively participating in the movement.
Here she read the FREIHEIT, edited by John Most.  The Haymarket
tragedy developed her inherent Anarchist tendencies: the reading of
the FREIHEIT made her a conscious Anarchist.  Subsequently she was to
learn that the idea of Anarchism found its highest expression through
the best intellects of America: theoretically by Josiah Warren,
Stephen Pearl Andrews, Lysander Spooner; philosophically by Emerson,
Thoreau, and Walt Whitman.

Made ill by the excessive strain of factory work, Emma Goldman
returned to Rochester where she remained till August, 1889, at which
time she removed to New York, the scene of the most important phase
of her life.  She was now twenty years old.  Features pallid with
suffering, eyes large and full of compassion, greet one in her
pictured likeness of those days.  Her hair is, as customary with
Russian student girls, worn short, giving free play to the strong
forehead.


It is the heroic epoch of militant Anarchism.  By leaps and bounds
the movement had grown in every country.  In spite of the most severe
governmental persecution new converts swell the ranks.  The
propaganda is almost exclusively of a secret character.  The
repressive measures of the government drive the disciples of the new
philosophy to conspirative methods.  Thousands of victims fall into
the hands of the authorities and languish in prisons.  But nothing
can stem the rising tide of enthusiasm, of self-sacrifice and
devotion to the Cause.  The efforts of teachers like Peter Kropotkin,
Louise Michel, Elisee Reclus, and others, inspire the devotees with
ever greater energy.

Disruption is imminent with the Socialists, who have sacrificed the
idea of liberty and embraced the State and politics.  The struggle is
bitter, the factions irreconcilable.  This struggle is not merely
between Anarchists and Socialists; it also finds its echo within the
Anarchist groups.  Theoretic differences and personal controversies
lead to strife and acrimonious enmities.  The anti-Socialist
legislation of Germany and Austria had driven thousands of Socialists
and Anarchists across the seas to seek refuge in America.  John Most,
having lost his seat in the Reichstag, finally had to flee his native
land, and went to London.  There, having advanced toward Anarchism,
he entirely withdrew from the Social Democratic Party.  Later, coming
to America, he continued the publication of the FREIHEIT in New York,
and developed great activity among the German workingmen.

When Emma Goldman arrived in New York in 1889, she experienced little
difficulty in associating herself with active Anarchists.  Anarchist
meetings were an almost daily occurrence.  The first lecturer she
heard on the Anarchist platform was Dr. A. Solotaroff.  Of great
importance to her future development was her acquaintance with John
Most, who exerted a tremendous influence over the younger elements.
His impassioned eloquence, untiring energy, and the persecution he
had endured for the Cause, all combined to enthuse the comrades.  It
was also at this period that she met Alexander Berkman, whose
friendship played an important part throughout her life.  Her talents
as a speaker could not long remain in obscurity.  The fire of
enthusiasm swept her toward the public platform.  Encouraged by her
friends, she began to participate as a German and Yiddish speaker at
Anarchist meetings.  Soon followed a brief tour of agitation taking
her as far as Cleveland.  With the whole strength and earnestness of
her soul she now threw herself into the propaganda of Anarchist
ideas.  The passionate period of her life had begun.  Through
constantly toiling in sweat shops, the fiery young orator was at the
same time very active as an agitator and participated in various
labor struggles, notably in the great cloakmakers' strike, in 1889,
led by Professor Garsyde and Joseph Barondess.

A year later Emma Goldman was a delegate to an Anarchist conference
in New York.  She was elected to the Executive Committee, but later
withdrew because of differences of opinion regarding tactical
matters.  The ideas of the German-speaking Anarchists had at that
time not yet become clarified.  Some still believed in parliamentary
methods, the great majority being adherents of strong centralism.
These differences of opinion in regard to tactics led in 1891 to a
breach with John Most.  Emma Goldman, Alexander Berkman, and other
comrades joined the group AUTONOMY, in which Joseph Peukert, Otto
Rinke, and Claus Timmermann played an active part.  The bitter
controversies which followed this secession terminated only with the
death of Most, in 1906.

A great source of inspiration to Emma Goldman proved the Russian
revolutionists who were associated in the group ZNAMYA.  Goldenberg,
Solotaroff, Zametkin, Miller, Cahan, the poet Edelstadt, Ivan von
Schewitsch, husband of Helene von Racowitza and editor of the
VOLKSZEITUNG, and numerous other Russian exiles, some of whom are
still living, were members of this group.  It was also at this time
that Emma Goldman met Robert Reitzel, the German-American Heine, who
exerted a great influence on her development.  Through him she became
acquainted with the best writers of modern literature, and the
friendship thus begun lasted till Reitzel's death, in 1898.


The labor movement of America had not been drowned in the Chicago
massacre; the murder of the Anarchists had failed to bring peace to
the profit-greedy capitalist.  The struggle for the eight-hour day
continued.  In 1892 broke out the great strike in Pittsburg.  The
Homestead fight, the defeat of the Pinkertons, the appearance of the
militia, the suppression of the strikers, and the complete triumph of
the reaction are matters of comparatively recent history.  Stirred to
the very depths by the terrible events at the seat of war, Alexander
Berkman resolved to sacrifice his life to the Cause and thus give an
object lesson to the wage slaves of America of active Anarchist
solidarity with labor.  His attack upon Frick, the Gessler of
Pittsburg, failed, and the twenty-two-year-old youth was doomed to a
living death of twenty-two years in the penitentiary.  The
bourgeoisie, which for decades had exalted and eulogized tyrannicide,
now was filled with terrible rage.  The capitalist press organized a
systematic campaign of calumny and misrepresentation against
Anarchists.  The police exerted every effort to involve Emma Goldman
in the act of Alexander Berkman.  The feared agitator was to be
silenced by all means.  It was only due to the circumstance of her
presence in New York that she escaped the clutches of the law.  It
was a similar circumstance which, nine years later, during the
McKinley incident, was instrumental in preserving her liberty.  It is
almost incredible with what amount of stupidity, baseness, and
vileness the journalists of the period sought to overwhelm the
Anarchist.  One must peruse the newspaper files to realize the
enormity of incrimination and slander.  It would be difficult to
portray the agony of soul Emma Goldman experienced in those days.
The persecutions of the capitalist press were to be borne by an
Anarchist with comparative equanimity; but the attacks from one's own
ranks were far more painful and unbearable.  The act of Berkman was
severely criticized by Most and some of his followers among the
German and Jewish Anarchists.  Bitter accusations and recriminations
at public meetings and private gatherings followed.  Persecuted on
all sides, both because she championed Berkman and his act, and on
account of her revolutionary activity, Emma Goldman was harassed even
to the extent of inability to secure shelter.  Too proud to seek
safety in the denial of her identity, she chose to pass the nights in
the public parks rather than expose her friends to danger or vexation
by her visits.  The already bitter cup was filled to overflowing by
the attempted suicide of a young comrade who had shared living
quarters with Emma Goldman, Alexander Berkman, and a mutual artist
friend.


Many changes have since taken place.  Alexander Berkman has survived
the Pennsylvania Inferno, and is back again in the ranks of the
militant Anarchists, his spirit unbroken, his soul full of enthusiasm
for the ideals of his youth.  The artist comrade is now among the
well-known illustrators of New York.  The suicide candidate left
America shortly after his unfortunate attempt to die, and was
subsequently arrested and condemned to eight years of hard labor for
smuggling Anarchist literature into Germany.  He, too, has withstood
the terrors of prison life, and has returned to the revolutionary
movement, since earning the well deserved reputation of a talented
writer in Germany.


To avoid indefinite camping in the parks Emma Goldman finally was
forced to move into a house on Third Street, occupied exclusively by
prostitutes.  There, among the outcasts of our good Christian
society, she could at least rent a bit of a room, and find rest and
work at her sewing machine.  The women of the street showed more
refinement of feeling and sincere sympathy than the priests of the
Church.  But human endurance had been exhausted by overmuch suffering
and privation.  There was a complete physical breakdown, and the
renowned agitator was removed to the "Bohemian Republic"--a large
tenement house which derived its euphonious appellation from the fact
that its occupants were mostly Bohemian Anarchists.  Here Emma
Goldman found friends ready to aid her.  Justus Schwab, one of the
finest representatives of the German revolutionary period of that
time, and Dr. Solotaroff were indefatigable in the care of the
patient.  Here, too, she met Edward Brady, the new friendship
subsequently ripening into close intimacy.  Brady had been an active
participant in the revolutionary movement of Austria and had, at the
time of his acquaintance with Emma Goldman, lately been released from
an Austrian prison after an incarceration of ten years.

Physicians diagnosed the illness as consumption, and the patient was
advised to leave New York.  She went to Rochester, in the hope that
the home circle would help restore her to health.  Her parents had
several years previously emigrated to America, settling in that city.
Among the leading traits of the Jewish race is the strong attachment
between the members of the family, and, especially, between parents
and children.  Though her conservative parents could not sympathize
with the idealist aspirations of Emma Goldman and did not approve of
her mode of life, they now received their sick daughter with open
arms.  The rest and care enjoyed in the parental home, and the
cheering presence of the beloved sister Helene, proved so beneficial
that within a short time she was sufficiently restored to resume her
energetic activity.

There is no rest in the life of Emma Goldman.  Ceaseless effort and
continuous striving toward the conceived goal are the essentials of
her nature.  Too much precious time had already been wasted.  It was
imperative to resume her labors immediately.  The country was in the
throes of a crisis, and thousands of unemployed crowded the streets
of the large industrial centers.  Cold and hungry they tramped
through the land in the vain search for work and bread.  The
Anarchists developed a strenuous propaganda among the unemployed and
the strikers.  A monster demonstration of striking cloakmakers and of
the unemployed took place at Union Square, New York.  Emma Goldman
was one of the invited speakers.  She delivered an impassioned
speech, picturing in fiery words the misery of the wage slave's life,
and quoted the famous maxim of Cardinal Manning: "Necessity knows no
law, and the starving man has a natural right to a share of his
neighbor's bread."  She concluded her exhortation with the words:
"Ask for work.  If they do not give you work, ask for bread.  If they
do not give you work or bread, then take bread."

The following day she left for Philadelphia, where she was to address
a public meeting.  The capitalist press again raised the alarm.  If
Socialists and Anarchists were to be permitted to continue agitating,
there was imminent danger that the workingmen would soon learn to
understand the manner in which they are robbed of the joy and
happiness of life.  Such a possibility was to be prevented at all
cost.  The Chief of Police of New York, Byrnes, procured a court
order for the arrest of Emma Goldman.  She was detained by the
Philadelphia authorities and incarcerated for several days in the
Moyamensing prison, awaiting the extradition papers which Byrnes
intrusted to Detective Jacobs.  This man Jacobs (whom Emma Goldman
again met several years later under very unpleasant circumstances)
proposed to her, while she was returning a prisoner to New York, to
betray the cause of labor.  In the name of his superior, Chief
Byrnes, he offered lucrative reward.  How stupid men sometimes are!
What poverty of psychologic observation to imagine the possibility of
betrayal on the part of a young Russian idealist, who had willingly
sacrificed all personal considerations to help in labor's
emancipation.

In October, 1893, Emma Goldman was tried in the criminal courts of
New York on the charge of inciting to riot.  The "intelligent" jury
ignored the testimony of the twelve witnesses for the defense in
favor of the evidence given by one single man--Detective Jacobs.  She
was found guilty and sentenced to serve one year in the penitentiary
at Blackwell's Island.  Since the foundation of the Republic she was
the first woman--Mrs. Surratt excepted--to be imprisoned for a
political offense.  Respectable society had long before stamped upon
her the Scarlet Letter.

Emma Goldman passed her time in the penitentiary in the capacity of
nurse in the prison hospital.  Here she found opportunity to shed
some rays of kindness into the dark lives of the unfortunates whose
sisters of the street did not disdain two years previously to share
with her the same house.  She also found in prison opportunity to
study English and its literature, and to familiarize herself with the
great American writers.  In Bret Harte, Mark Twain, Walt Whitman,
Thoreau, and Emerson she found great treasures.

She left Blackwell's Island in the month of August, 1894, a woman of
twenty-five, developed and matured, and intellectually transformed.
Back into the arena, richer in experience, purified by suffering.
She did not feel herself deserted and alone any more.  Many hands
were stretched out to welcome her.  There were at the time numerous
intellectual oases in New York.  The saloon of Justus Schwab, at
Number Fifty, First Street, was the center where gathered Anarchists,
litterateurs, and bohemians.  Among others she also met at this time
a number of American Anarchists, and formed the friendship of
Voltairine de Cleyre, Wm. C. Owen, Miss Van Etton, and Dyer D. Lum,
former editor of the ALARM and executor of the last wishes of the
Chicago martyrs.  In John Swinton, the noble old fighter for liberty,
she found one of her staunchest friends.  Other intellectual centers
there were: SOLIDARITY, published by John Edelman; LIBERTY, by the
Individualist Anarchist, Benjamin R. Tucker; the REBEL, by Harry
Kelly; DER STURMVOGEL, a German Anarchist publication, edited by
Claus Timmermann; DER ARME TEUFEL, whose presiding genius was the
inimitable Robert Reitzel.  Through Arthur Brisbane, now chief
lieutenant of William Randolph Hearst, she became acquainted with the
writings of Fourier.  Brisbane then was not yet submerged in the
swamp of political corruption.  He sent Emma Goldman an amiable
letter to Blackwell's Island, together with the biography of his
father, the enthusiastic American disciple of Fourier.

Emma Goldman became, upon her release from the penitentiary, a factor
in the public life of New York.  She was appreciated in radical ranks
for her devotion, her idealism, and earnestness.  Various persons
sought her friendship, and some tried to persuade her to aid in the
furtherance of their special side issues.  Thus Rev. Parkhurst,
during the Lexow investigation, did his utmost to induce her to join
the Vigilance Committee in order to fight Tammany Hall.  Maria
Louise, the moving spirit of a social center, acted as Parkhurst's
go-between.  It is hardly necessary to mention what reply the latter
received from Emma Goldman.  Incidentally, Maria Louise subsequently
became a Mahatma.  During the free silver campaign, ex-Burgess
McLuckie, one of the most genuine personalities in the Homestead
strike, visited New York in an endeavor to enthuse the local radicals
for free silver.  He also attempted to interest Emma Goldman, but
with no greater success than Mahatma Maria Louise of Parkhurst-Lexow
fame.


In 1894 the struggle of the Anarchists in France reached its highest
expression.  The white terror on the part of the Republican upstarts
was answered by the red terror of our French comrades.  With feverish
anxiety the Anarchists throughout the world followed this social
struggle.  Propaganda by deed found its reverberating echo in almost
all countries.  In order to better familiarize herself with
conditions in the old world, Emma Goldman left for Europe, in the
year 1895.  After a lecture tour in England and Scotland, she went to
Vienna where she entered the ALLGEMEINE KRANKENHAUS to prepare
herself as midwife and nurse, and where at the same time she studied
social conditions.  She also found opportunity to acquaint herself
with the newest literature of Europe: Hauptmann, Nietzsche, Ibsen,
Zola, Thomas Hardy, and other artist rebels were read with great
enthusiasm.

In the autumn of 1896 she returned to New York by way of Zurich and
Paris.  The project of Alexander Berkman's liberation was on hand.
The barbaric sentence of twenty-two years had roused tremendous
indignation among the radical elements.  It was known that the Pardon
Board of Pennsylvania would look to Carnegie and Frick for advice in
the case of Alexander Berkman.  It was therefore suggested that these
Sultans of Pennsylvania be approached--not with a view of obtaining
their grace, but with the request that they do not attempt to
influence the Board.  Ernest Crosby offered to see Carnegie, on
condition that Alexander Berkman repudiate his act.  That, however,
was absolutely out of the question.  He would never be guilty of such
forswearing of his own personality and self-respect.  These efforts
led to friendly relations between Emma Goldman and the circle of
Ernest Crosby, Bolton Hall, and Leonard Abbott.  In the year 1897 she
undertook her first great lecture tour, which extended as far as
California.  This tour popularized her name as the representative of
the oppressed, her eloquence ringing from coast to coast.  In
California Emma Goldman became friendly with the members of the Isaak
family, and learned to appreciate their efforts for the Cause.  Under
tremendous obstacles the Isaaks first published the FIREBRAND and,
upon its suppression by the Postal Department, the FREE SOCIETY.  It
was also during this tour that Emma Goldman met that grand old rebel
of sexual freedom, Moses Harman.

During the Spanish-American war the spirit of chauvinism was at its
highest tide.  To check this dangerous situation, and at the same
time collect funds for the revolutionary Cubans, Emma Goldman became
affiliated with the Latin comrades, among others with Gori, Esteve,
Palaviccini, Merlino, Petruccini, and Ferrara.  In the year 1899
followed another protracted tour of agitation, terminating on the
Pacific Coast.  Repeated arrests and accusations, though without
ultimate bad results, marked every propaganda tour.

In November of the same year the untiring agitator went on a second
lecture tour to England and Scotland, closing her journey with the
first International Anarchist Congress at Paris.  It was at the time of
the Boer war, and again jingoism was at its height, as two years
previously it had celebrated its orgies during the Spanish-American
war.  Various meetings, both in England and Scotland, were disturbed
and broken up by patriotic mobs.  Emma Goldman found on this occasion
the opportunity of again meeting various English comrades and
interesting personalities like Tom Mann and the sisters Rossetti, the
gifted daughters of Dante Gabriel Rossetti, then publishers of the
Anarchist review, the TORCH.  One of her life-long hopes found here
its fulfillment: she came in close and friendly touch with Peter
Kropotkin, Enrico Malatesta, Nicholas Tchaikovsky, W. Tcherkessov,
and Louise Michel.  Old warriors in the cause of humanity, whose
deeds have enthused thousands of followers throughout the world, and
whose life and work have inspired other thousands with noble idealism
and self-sacrifice.  Old warriors they, yet ever young with the
courage of earlier days, unbroken in spirit and filled with the firm
hope of the final triumph of Anarchy.

The chasm in the revolutionary labor movement, which resulted from
the disruption of the INTERNATIONALE, could not be bridged any more.
Two social philosophies were engaged in bitter combat.  The
International Congress in 1889, at Paris; in 1892, at Zurich, and in
1896, at London, produced irreconcilable differences.  The majority
of Social Democrats, forswearing their libertarian past and becoming
politicians, succeeded in excluding the revolutionary and Anarchist
delegates.  The latter decided thenceforth to hold separate
congresses.  Their first congress was to take place in 1900, at
Paris.  The Socialist renegade, Millerand, who had climbed into the
Ministry of the Interior, here played a Judas role.  The congress of
the revolutionists was suppressed, and the delegates dispersed two
days prior to their scheduled opening.  But Millerand had no
objections against the Social Democratic Congress, which was
afterwards opened with all the trumpets of the advertiser's art.

However, the renegade did not accomplish his object.  A number of
delegates succeeded in holding a secret conference in the house of a
comrade outside of Paris, where various points of theory and tactics
were discussed.  Emma Goldman took considerable part in these
proceedings, and on that occasion came in contact with numerous
representatives of the Anarchist movement of Europe.

Owing to the suppression of the congress, the delegates were in
danger of being expelled from France.  At this time also came the bad
news from America regarding another unsuccessful attempt to liberate
Alexander Berkman, proving a great shock to Emma Goldman.  In
November, 1900, she returned to America to devote herself to her
profession of nurse, at the same time taking an active part in the
American propaganda.  Among other activities she organized monster
meetings of protest against the terrible outrages of the Spanish
government, perpetrated upon the political prisoners tortured in
Montjuich.

In her vocation as nurse Emma Goldman enjoyed many opportunities of
meeting the most unusual and peculiar characters.  Few would have
identified the "notorious Anarchist" in the small blonde woman,
simply attired in the uniform of a nurse.  Soon after her return from
Europe she became acquainted with a patient by the name of Mrs.
Stander, a morphine fiend, suffering excruciating agonies.  She
required careful attention to enable her to supervise a very
important business she conducted,--that of Mrs. Warren.  In Third
Street, near Third Avenue, was situated her private residence, and
near it, connected by a separate entrance, was her place of business.
One evening, the nurse, upon entering the room of her patient,
suddenly came face to face with a male visitor, bull-necked and of
brutal appearance.  The man was no other than Mr. Jacobs, the
detective who seven years previously had brought Emma Goldman a
prisoner from Philadelphia and who had attempted to persuade her, on
their way to New York, to betray the cause of the workingmen.  It
would be difficult to describe the expression of bewilderment on the
countenance of the man as he so unexpectedly faced Emma Goldman, the
nurse of his mistress.  The brute was suddenly transformed into a
gentleman, exerting himself to excuse his shameful behavior on the
previous occasion.  Jacobs was the "protector" of Mrs. Stander, and
go-between for the house and the police.  Several years later, as one
of the detective staff of District Attorney Jerome, he committed
perjury, was convicted, and sent to Sing Sing for a year.  He is now
probably employed by some private detective agency, a desirable
pillar of respectable society.

In 1901 Peter Kropotkin was invited by the Lowell Institute of
Massachusetts to deliver a series of lectures on Russian literature.
It was his second American tour, and naturally the comrades were
anxious to use his presence for the benefit of the movement.  Emma
Goldman entered into correspondence with Kropotkin and succeeded in
securing his consent to arrange for him a series of lectures.  She
also devoted her energies to organizing the tours of other well known
Anarchists, principally those of Charles W. Mowbray and John Turner.
Similarly she always took part in all the activities of the movement,
ever ready to give her time, ability, and energy to the Cause.

On the sixth of September, 1901, President McKinley was shot by Leon
Czolgosz at Buffalo.  Immediately an unprecedented campaign of
persecution was set in motion against Emma Goldman as the best known
Anarchist in the country.  Although there was absolutely no
foundation for the accusation, she, together with other prominent
Anarchists, was arrested in Chicago, kept in confinement for several
weeks, and subjected to severest cross-examination.  Never before in
the history of the country had such a terrible man-hunt taken place
against a person in public life.  But the efforts of police and press
to connect Emma Goldman with Czolgosz proved futile.  Yet the episode
left her wounded to the heart.  The physical suffering, the
humiliation and brutality at the hands of the police she could bear.
The depression of soul was far worse.  She was overwhelmed by
realization of the stupidity, lack of understanding, and vileness
which characterized the events of those terrible days.  The attitude
of misunderstanding on the part of the majority of her own comrades
toward Czolgosz almost drove her to desperation.  Stirred to the very
inmost of her soul, she published an article on Czolgosz in which she
tried to explain the deed in its social and individual aspects.  As
once before, after Berkman's act, she now also was unable to find
quarters; like a veritable wild animal she was driven from place to
place.  This terrible persecution and, especially, the attitude of
her comrades made it impossible for her to continue propaganda.  The
soreness of body and soul had first to heal.  During 1901-1903 she
did not resume the platform.  As "Miss Smith" she lived a quiet life,
practicing her profession and devoting her leisure to the study of
literature and, particularly, to the modern drama, which she
considers one of the greatest disseminators of radical ideas and
enlightened feeling.

Yet one thing the persecution of Emma Goldman accomplished.  Her name
was brought before the public with greater frequency and emphasis
than ever before, the malicious harassing of the much maligned
agitator arousing strong sympathy in many circles.  Persons in
various walks of life began to get interested in her struggle and her
ideas.  A better understanding and appreciation were now beginning to
manifest themselves.

The arrival in America of the English Anarchist, John Turner, induced
Emma Goldman to leave her retirement.  Again she threw herself into
her public activities, organizing an energetic movement for the
defense of Turner, whom the Immigration authorities condemned to
deportation on account of the Anarchist exclusion law, passed after
the death of McKinley.

When Paul Orleneff and Mme. Nazimova arrived in New York to acquaint
the American public with Russian dramatic art, Emma Goldman became
the manager of the undertaking.  By much patience and perseverance
she succeeded in raising the necessary funds to introduce the Russian
artists to the theater-goers of New York and Chicago.  Though
financially not a success, the venture proved of great artistic
value.  As manager of the Russian theater Emma Goldman enjoyed some
unique experiences.  M. Orleneff could converse only in Russian, and
"Miss Smith" was forced to act as his interpreter at various polite
functions.  Most of the aristocratic ladies of Fifth Avenue had not
the least inkling that the amiable manager who so entertainingly
discussed philosophy, drama, and literature at their five o'clock
teas, was the "notorious" Emma Goldman.  If the latter should some
day write her autobiography, she will no doubt have many interesting
anecdotes to relate in connection with these experiences.

The weekly Anarchist publication, FREE SOCIETY, issued by the Isaak
family, was forced to suspend in consequence of the nation-wide fury
that swept the country after the death of McKinley.  To fill out the
gap Emma Goldman, in co-operation with Max Baginski and other
comrades, decided to publish a monthly magazine devoted to the
furtherance of Anarchist ideas in life and literature.  The first
issue of MOTHER EARTH appeared in the month of March, 1906, the
initial expenses of the periodical partly covered by the proceeds of
a theater benefit given by Orleneff, Mme. Nazimova, and their
company, in favor of the Anarchist magazine.  Under tremendous
difficulties and obstacles the tireless propagandist has succeeded in
continuing MOTHER EARTH uninterruptedly since 1906--an achievement
rarely equalled in the annals of radical publications.

In May, 1906, Alexander Berkman at last left the hell of
Pennsylvania, where he had passed the best fourteen years of his
life.  No one had believed in the possibility of his survival.  His
liberation terminated a nightmare of fourteen years for Emma Goldman,
and an important chapter of her career was thus concluded.

Nowhere had the birth of the Russian revolution aroused such vital
and active response as among the Russians living in America.  The
heroes of the revolutionary movement in Russia, Tchaikovsky, Mme.
Breshkovskaia, Gershuni, and others visited these shores to waken the
sympathies of the American people toward the struggle for liberty,
and to collect aid for its continuance and support.  The success of
these efforts was to a considerable extent due to the exertions,
eloquence, and the talent for organization on the part of Emma
Goldman.  This opportunity enabled her to give valuable services to
the struggle for liberty in her native land.  It is not generally
known that it is the Anarchists who are mainly instrumental in
insuring the success, moral as well as financial, of most of the
radical undertakings.  The Anarchist is indifferent to acknowledged
appreciation; the needs of the Cause absorb his whole interest, and
to these he devotes his energy and abilities.  Yet it may be
mentioned that some otherwise decent folks, though at all times
anxious for Anarchist support and co-operation, are ever willing to
monopolize all the credit for the work done.  During the last several
decades it was chiefly the Anarchists who had organized all the great
revolutionary efforts, and aided in every struggle for liberty.  But
for fear of shocking the respectable mob, who looks upon the
Anarchists as the apostles of Satan, and because of their social
position in bourgeois society, the would-be radicals ignore the
activity of the Anarchists.

In 1907 Emma Goldman participated as delegate to the second Anarchist
Congress, at Amsterdam.  She was intensely active in all its
proceedings and supported the organization of the Anarchist
INTERNATIONALE.  Together with the other American delegate, Max
Baginski, she submitted to the congress an exhaustive report of
American conditions, closing with the following characteristic
remarks:


"The charge that Anarchism is destructive, rather than constructive,
and that, therefore, Anarchism is opposed to organization, is one of
the many falsehoods spread by our opponents.  They confound our
present social institutions with organization; hence they fail to
understand how we can oppose the former, and yet favor the latter.
The fact, however, is that the two are not identical.

"The State is commonly regarded as the highest form of organization.
But is it in reality a true organization?  Is it not rather an
arbitrary institution, cunningly imposed upon the masses?

"Industry, too, is called an organization; yet nothing is farther
from the truth.  Industry is the ceaseless piracy of the rich against
the poor.

"We are asked to believe that the Army is an organization, but a
close investigation will show that it is nothing else than a cruel
instrument of blind force.

"The Public School!  The colleges and other institutions of learning,
are they not models of organization, offering the people fine
opportunities for instruction?  Far from it.  The school, more than
any other institution, is a veritable barrack, where the human mind
is drilled and manipulated into submission to various social and
moral spooks, and thus fitted to continue our system of exploitation
and oppression.

"Organization, as WE understand it, however, is a different thing.
It is based, primarily, on freedom.  It is a natural and voluntary
grouping of energies to secure results beneficial to humanity.

"It is the harmony of organic growth which produces variety of color
and form, the complete whole we admire in the flower.  Analogously
will the organized activity of free human beings, imbued with the
spirit of solidarity, result in the perfection of social harmony,
which we call Anarchism.  In fact, Anarchism alone makes
non-authoritarian organization of common interests possible, since it
abolishes the existing antagonism between individuals and classes.

"Under present conditions the antagonism of economic and social
interests results in relentless war among the social units, and
creates an insurmountable obstacle in the way of a co-operative
commonwealth.

"There is a mistaken notion that organization does not foster
individual freedom; that, on the contrary, it means the decay of
individuality.  In reality, however, the true function of
organization is to aid the development and growth of personality.

"Just as the animal cells, by mutual co-operation, express their
latent powers in formation of the complete organism, so does the
individual, by co-operative effort with other individuals, attain his
highest form of development.

"An organization, in the true sense, cannot result from the
combination of mere nonentities.  It must be composed of
self-conscious, intelligent individualities.  Indeed, the total of
the possibilities and activities of an organization is represented in
the expression of individual energies.

"It therefore logically follows that the greater the number of
strong, self-conscious personalities in an organization, the less
danger of stagnation, and the more intense its life element.

"Anarchism asserts the possibility of an organization without
discipline, fear, or punishment, and without the pressure of poverty:
a new social organism which will make an end to the terrible struggle
for the means of existence,--the savage struggle which undermines the
finest qualities in man, and ever widens the social abyss.  In short,
Anarchism strives towards a social organization which will establish
well-being for all.

"The germ of such an organization can be found in that form of trades
unionism which has done away with centralization, bureaucracy, and
discipline, and which favors independent and direct action on the
part of its members."


The very considerable progress of Anarchist ideas in America can best
be gauged by the remarkable success of the three extensive lecture
tours of Emma Goldman since the Amsterdam Congress of 1907.  Each
tour extended over new territory, including localities where
Anarchism had never before received a hearing.  But the most
gratifying aspect of her untiring efforts is the tremendous sale of
Anarchist literature, whose propagandist effect cannot be estimated.
It was during one of these tours that a remarkable incident happened,
strikingly demonstrating the inspiring potentialities of the
Anarchist idea.  In San Francisco, in 1908, Emma Goldman's lecture
attracted a soldier of the United States Army, William Buwalda.  For
daring to attend an Anarchist meeting, the free Republic
court-martialed Buwalda and imprisoned him for one year.  Thanks to
the regenerating power of the new philosophy, the government lost a
soldier, but the cause of liberty gained a man.


A propagandist of Emma Goldman's importance is necessarily a sharp
thorn to the reaction.  She is looked upon as a danger to the
continued existence of authoritarian usurpation.  No wonder, then,
that the enemy resorts to any and all means to make her impossible.
A systematic attempt to suppress her activities was organized a year
ago by the united police force of the country.  But like all previous
similar attempts, it failed in a most brilliant manner.  Energetic
protests on the part of the intellectual element of America succeeded
in overthrowing the dastardly conspiracy against free speech.
Another attempt to make Emma Goldman impossible was essayed by the
Federal authorities at Washington.  In order to deprive her of the
rights of citizenship, the government revoked the citizenship papers
of her husband, whom she had married at the youthful age of eighteen,
and whose whereabouts, if he be alive, could not be determined for
the last two decades.  The great government of the glorious United
States did not hesitate to stoop to the most despicable methods to
accomplish that achievement.  But as her citizenship had never proved
of use to Emma Goldman, she can bear the loss with a light heart.


There are personalities who possess such a powerful individuality
that by its very force they exert the most potent influence over the
best representatives of their time.  Michael Bakunin was such a
personality.  But for him, Richard Wagner had never written DIE KUNST
UND DIE REVOLUTION.  Emma Goldman is a similar personality.  She is a
strong factor in the socio-political life of America.  By virtue of
her eloquence, energy, and brilliant mentality, she moulds the minds
and hearts of thousands of her auditors.

Deep sympathy and compassion for suffering humanity, and an
inexorable honesty toward herself, are the leading traits of Emma
Goldman.  No person, whether friend or foe, shall presume to control
her goal or dictate her mode of life.  She would perish rather than
sacrifice her convictions, or the right of self-ownership of soul and
body.  Respectability could easily forgive the teaching of theoretic
Anarchism; but Emma Goldman does not merely preach the new
philosophy; she also persists in living it,--and that is the one
supreme, unforgivable crime.  Were she, like so many radicals, to
consider her ideal as merely an intellectual ornament; were she to
make concessions to existing society and compromise with old
prejudices,--then even the most radical views could be pardoned in
her.  But that she takes her radicalism seriously; that it has
permeated her blood and marrow to the extent where she not merely
teaches but also practices her convictions--this shocks even the
radical Mrs. Grundy.  Emma Goldman lives her own life; she associates
with publicans--hence the indignation of the Pharisees and Sadducees.

It is no mere coincidence that such divergent writers as Pietro Gori
and William Marion Reedy find similar traits in their
characterization of Emma Goldman.  In a contribution to LA QUESTIONE
SOCIALE, Pietro Gori calls her a "moral power, a woman who, with the
vision of a sibyl, prophesies the coming of a new kingdom for the
oppressed; a woman who, with logic and deep earnestness, analyses the
ills of society, and portrays, with artist touch, the coming dawn of
humanity, founded on equality, brotherhood, and liberty."

William Reedy sees in Emma Goldman the "daughter of the dream, her
gospel a vision which is the vision of every truly great-souled man
and woman who has ever lived."

Cowards who fear the consequences of their deeds have coined the word
of philosophic Anarchism.  Emma Goldman is too sincere, too defiant,
to seek safety behind such paltry pleas.  She is an Anarchist, pure
and simple.  She represents the idea of Anarchism as framed by Josiah
Warrn, Proudhon, Bakunin, Kropotkin, Tolstoy.  Yet she also
understands the psychologic causes which induce a Caserio, a
Vaillant, a Bresci, a Berkman, or a Czolgosz to commit deeds of
violence.  To the soldier in the social struggle it is a point of
honor to come in conflict with the powers of darkness and tyranny,
and Emma Goldman is proud to count among her best friends and
comrades men and women who bear the wounds and scars received in
battle.

In the words of Voltairine de Cleyre, characterizing Emma Goldman
after the latter's imprisonment in 1893: The spirit that animates
Emma Goldman is the only one which will emancipate the slave from his
slavery, the tyrant from his tyranny--the spirit which is willing to
dare and suffer.

HIPPOLYTE HAVEL.

New York, December, 1910.




PREFACE


Some twenty-one years ago I heard the first great Anarchist
speaker--the inimitable John Most.  It seemed to me then, and for
many years after, that the spoken word hurled forth among the masses
with such wonderful eloquence, such enthusiasm and fire, could never
be erased from the human mind and soul.  How could any one of all the
multitudes who flocked to Most's meetings escape his prophetic voice!
Surely they had but to hear him to throw off their old beliefs, and
see the truth and beauty of Anarchism!

My one great longing then was to be able to speak with the tongue of
John Most,--that I, too, might thus reach the masses.  Oh, for the
naivety of Youth's enthusiasm!  It is the time when the hardest thing
seems but child's play.  It is the only period in life worth while.
Alas!  This period is but of short duration.  Like Spring, the STURM
UND DRANG period of the propagandist brings forth growth, frail and
delicate, to be matured or killed according to its powers of
resistance against a thousand vicissitudes.

My great faith in the wonder worker, the spoken word, is no more.  I
have realized its inadequacy to awaken thought, or even emotion.
Gradually, and with no small struggle against this realization, I
came to see that oral propaganda is at best but a means of shaking
people from their lethargy: it leaves no lasting impression.  The
very fact that most people attend meetings only if aroused by
newspaper sensations, or because they expect to be amused, is proof
that they really have no inner urge to learn.

It is altogether different with the written mode of human expression.
No one, unless intensely interested in progressive ideas, will bother
with serious books.  That leads me to another discovery made after
many years of public activity.  It is this: All claims of education
notwithstanding, the pupil will accept only that which his mind
craves.  Already this truth is recognized by most modern educators in
relation to the immature mind.  I think it is equally true regarding
the adult.  Anarchists or revolutionists can no more be made than
musicians.  All that can be done is to plant the seeds of thought.
Whether something vital will develop depends largely on the fertility
of the human soil, though the quality of the intellectual seed must
not be overlooked.

In meetings the audience is distracted by a thousand non-essentials.
The speaker, though ever so eloquent, cannot escape the restlessness
of the crowd, with the inevitable result that he will fail to strike
root.  In all probability he will not even do justice to himself.

The relation between the writer and the reader is more intimate.
True, books are only what we want them to be; rather, what we read
into them.  That we can do so demonstrates the importance of written
as against oral expression.  It is this certainty which has induced
me to gather in one volume my ideas on various topics of individual
and social importance.  They represent the mental and soul struggles
of twenty-one years,--the conclusions derived after many changes and
inner revisions.

I am not sanguine enough to hope that my readers will be as numerous
as those who have heard me.  But I prefer to reach the few who really
want to learn, rather than the many who come to be amused.

As to the book, it must speak for itself.  Explanatory remarks do but
detract from the ideas set forth.  However, I wish to forestall two
objections which will undoubtedly be raised.  One is in reference to
the essay on ANARCHISM; the other, on MINORITIES VERSUS MAJORITIES.

"Why do you not say how things will be operated under Anarchism?" is
a question I have had to meet thousands of times.  Because I believe
that Anarchism can not consistently impose an iron-clad program or
method on the future.  The things every new generation has to fight,
and which it can least overcome, are the burdens of the past, which
holds us all as in a net.  Anarchism, at least as I understand it,
leaves posterity free to develop its own particular systems, in
harmony with its needs.  Our most vivid imagination can not foresee
the potentialities of a race set free from external restraints.
How, then, can any one assume to map out a line of conduct for those
to come?  We, who pay dearly for every breath of pure, fresh air,
must guard against the tendency to fetter the future.  If we succeed
in clearing the soil from the rubbish of the past and present, we
will leave to posterity the greatest and safest heritage of all ages.

The most disheartening tendency common among readers is to tear out
one sentence from a work, as a criterion of the writer's ideas or
personality.  Friedrich Nietzsche, for instance, is decried as a
hater of the weak because he believed in the UEBERMENSCH.  It does
not occur to the shallow interpreters of that giant mind that this
vision of the UEBERMENSCH also called for a state of society which
will not give birth to a race of weaklings and slaves.

It is the same narrow attitude which sees in Max Stirner naught but
the apostle of the theory "each for himself, the devil take the hind
one."  That Stirner's individualism contains the greatest social
possibilities is utterly ignored.  Yet, it is nevertheless true that
if society is ever to become free, it will be so through liberated
individuals, whose free efforts make society.

These examples bring me to the objection that will be raised to
MINORITIES VERSUS MAJORITIES.  No doubt, I shall be excommunicated as
an enemy of the people, because I repudiate the mass as a creative
factor.  I shall prefer that rather than be guilty of the demagogic
platitudes so commonly in vogue as a bait for the people.  I realize
the malady of the oppressed and disinherited masses only too well,
but I refuse to prescribe the usual ridiculous palliatives which
allow the patient neither to die nor to recover.  One cannot be too
extreme in dealing with social ills; besides, the extreme thing is
generally the true thing.  My lack of faith in the majority is
dictated by my faith in the potentialities of the individual.  Only
when the latter becomes free to choose his associates for a common
purpose, can we hope for order and harmony out of this world of chaos
and inequality.

For the rest, my book must speak for itself.

Emma Goldman




ANARCHISM: WHAT IT REALLY STANDS FOR


                           ANARCHY.

          Ever reviled, accursed, ne'er understood,
            Thou art the grisly terror of our age.
          "Wreck of all order," cry the multitude,
            "Art thou, and war and murder's endless rage."
          O, let them cry. To them that ne'er have striven
            The truth that lies behind a word to find,
          To them the word's right meaning was not given.
            They shall continue blind among the blind.
          But thou, O word, so clear, so strong, so pure,
            Thou sayest all which I for goal have taken.
          I give thee to the future! Thine secure
            When each at least unto himself shall waken.
          Comes it in sunshine? In the tempest's thrill?
            I cannot tell--but it the earth shall see!
          I am an Anarchist! Wherefore I will
            Not rule, and also ruled I will not be!
                                        JOHN HENRY MACKAY.


The history of human growth and development is at the same time the
history of the terrible struggle of every new idea heralding the
approach of a brighter dawn.  In its tenacious hold on tradition, the
Old has never hesitated to make use of the foulest and cruelest means
to stay the advent of the New, in whatever form or period the latter
may have asserted itself.  Nor need we retrace our steps into the
distant past to realize the enormity of opposition, difficulties, and
hardships placed in the path of every progressive idea.  The rack,
the thumbscrew, and the knout are still with us; so are the convict's
garb and the social wrath, all conspiring against the spirit that is
serenely marching on.

Anarchism could not hope to escape the fate of all other ideas of
innovation.  Indeed, as the most revolutionary and uncompromising
innovator, Anarchism must needs meet with the combined ignorance and
venom of the world it aims to reconstruct.

To deal even remotely with all that is being said and done against
Anarchism would necessitate the writing of a whole volume.  I shall
therefore meet only two of the principal objections.  In so doing, I
shall attempt to elucidate what Anarchism really stands for.

The strange phenomenon of the opposition to Anarchism is that it
brings to light the relation between so-called intelligence and
ignorance.  And yet this is not so very strange when we consider the
relativity of all things.  The ignorant mass has in its favor that it
makes no pretense of knowledge or tolerance.  Acting, as it always
does, by mere impulse, its reasons are like those of a child.
"Why?"  "Because."  Yet the opposition of the uneducated to Anarchism
deserves the same consideration as that of the intelligent man.

What, then, are the objections?  First, Anarchism is impractical,
though a beautiful ideal.  Second, Anarchism stands for violence and
destruction, hence it must be repudiated as vile and dangerous.
Both the intelligent man and the ignorant mass judge not from a
thorough knowledge of the subject, but either from hearsay or false
interpretation.

A practical scheme, says Oscar Wilde, is either one already in
existence, or a scheme that could be carried out under the existing
conditions; but it is exactly the existing conditions that one
objects to, and any scheme that could accept these conditions is
wrong and foolish.  The true criterion of the practical, therefore,
is not whether the latter can keep intact the wrong or foolish;
rather is it whether the scheme has vitality enough to leave the
stagnant waters of the old, and build, as well as sustain, new life.
In the light of this conception, Anarchism is indeed practical.
More than any other idea, it is helping to do away with the wrong and
foolish; more than any other idea, it is building and sustaining new
life.

The emotions of the ignorant man are continuously kept at a pitch by
the most blood-curdling stories about Anarchism.  Not a thing too
outrageous to be employed against this philosophy and its exponents.
Therefore Anarchism represents to the unthinking what the proverbial
bad man does to the child,--a black monster bent on swallowing
everything; in short, destruction and violence.

Destruction and violence!  How is the ordinary man to know that the
most violent element in society is ignorance; that its power of
destruction is the very thing Anarchism is combating?  Nor is he
aware that Anarchism, whose roots, as it were, are part of nature's
forces, destroys, not healthful tissue, but parasitic growths that
feed on the life's essence of society.  It is merely clearing the
soil from weeds and sagebrush, that it may eventually bear healthy
fruit.

Someone has said that it requires less mental effort to condemn than
to think.  The widespread mental indolence, so prevalent in society,
proves this to be only too true.  Rather than to go to the bottom of
any given idea, to examine into its origin and meaning, most people
will either condemn it altogether, or rely on some superficial or
prejudicial definition of non-essentials.

Anarchism urges man to think, to investigate, to analyze every
proposition; but that the brain capacity of the average reader be not
taxed too much, I also shall begin with a definition, and then
elaborate on the latter.

     ANARCHISM:--The philosophy of a new social order based on
       liberty unrestricted by man-made law; the theory that all
       forms of government rest on violence, and are therefore wrong
       and harmful, as well as unnecessary.

The new social order rests, of course, on the materialistic basis of
life; but while all Anarchists agree that the main evil today is an
economic one, they maintain that the solution of that evil can be
brought about only through the consideration of EVERY PHASE of
life,--individual, as well as the collective; the internal, as well
as the external phases.

A thorough perusal of the history of human development will disclose
two elements in bitter conflict with each other; elements that are
only now beginning to be understood, not as foreign to each other,
but as closely related and truly harmonious, if only placed in proper
environment: the individual and social instincts.  The individual and
society have waged a relentless and bloody battle for ages, each
striving for supremacy, because each was blind to the value and
importance of the other.  The individual and social instincts,--the
one a most potent factor for individual endeavor, for growth,
aspiration, self-realization; the other an equally potent factor for
mutual helpfulness and social well-being.

The explanation of the storm raging within the individual, and
between him and his surroundings, is not far to seek.  The primitive
man, unable to understand his being, much less the unity of all life,
felt himself absolutely dependent on blind, hidden forces ever ready
to mock and taunt him.  Out of that attitude grew the religious
concepts of man as a mere speck of dust dependent on superior powers
on high, who can only be appeased by complete surrender.  All the
early sagas rest on that idea, which continues to be the LEIT-MOTIF
of the biblical tales dealing with the relation of man to God, to the
State, to society.  Again and again the same motif, MAN IS NOTHING,
THE POWERS ARE EVERYTHING.  Thus Jehovah would only endure man on
condition of complete surrender.  Man can have all the glories of the
earth, but he must not become conscious of himself.  The State,
society, and moral laws all sing the same refrain: Man can have all
the glories of the earth, but he must not become conscious of
himself.

Anarchism is the only philosophy which brings to man the
consciousness of himself; which maintains that God, the State, and
society are non-existent, that their promises are null and void,
since they can be fulfilled only through man's subordination.
Anarchism is therefore the teacher of the unity of life; not merely
in nature, but in man.  There is no conflict between the individual
and the social instincts, any more than there is between the heart
and the lungs: the one the receptacle of a precious life essence, the
other the repository of the element that keeps the essence pure and
strong.  The individual is the heart of society, conserving the
essence of social life; society is the lungs which are distributing
the element to keep the life essence--that is, the individual--pure
and strong.

"The one thing of value in the world," says Emerson, "is the active
soul; this every man contains within him.  The soul active sees
absolute truth and utters truth and creates."  In other words, the
individual instinct is the thing of value in the world.  It is the
true soul that sees and creates the truth alive, out of which is to
come a still greater truth, the re-born social soul.

Anarchism is the great liberator of man from the phantoms that have
held him captive; it is the arbiter and pacifier of the two forces
for individual and social harmony.  To accomplish that unity,
Anarchism has declared war on the pernicious influences which have so
far prevented the harmonious blending of individual and social
instincts, the individual and society.

Religion, the dominion of the human mind; Property, the dominion of
human needs; and Government, the dominion of human conduct, represent
the stronghold of man's enslavement and all the horrors it entails.
Religion! How it dominates man's mind, how it humiliates and degrades
his soul.  God is everything, man is nothing, says religion.  But out
of that nothing God has created a kingdom so despotic, so tyrannical,
so cruel, so terribly exacting that naught but gloom and tears and
blood have ruled the world since gods began.  Anarchism rouses man to
rebellion against this black monster.  Break your mental fetters, says
Anarchism to man, for not until you think and judge for yourself will
you get rid of the dominion of darkness, the greatest obstacle to all
progress.

Property, the dominion of man's needs, the denial of the right to
satisfy his needs.  Time was when property claimed a divine right,
when it came to man with the same refrain, even as religion,
"Sacrifice! Abnegate! Submit!"  The spirit of Anarchism has lifted
man from his prostrate position.  He now stands erect, with his face
toward the light.  He has learned to see the insatiable, devouring,
devastating nature of property, and he is preparing to strike the
monster dead.

"Property is robbery," said the great French Anarchist, Proudhon.
Yes, but without risk and danger to the robber.  Monopolizing the
accumulated efforts of man, property has robbed him of his
birthright, and has turned him loose a pauper and an outcast.
Property has not even the time-worn excuse that man does not create
enough to satisfy all needs.  The A B C student of economics knows
that the productivity of labor within the last few decades far
exceeds normal demand a hundredfold.  But what are normal demands to
an abnormal institution?  The only demand that property recognizes is
its own gluttonous appetite for greater wealth, because wealth means
power; the power to subdue, to crush, to exploit, the power to
enslave, to outrage, to degrade.  America is particularly boastful of
her great power, her enormous national wealth.  Poor America, of what
avail is all her wealth, if the individuals comprising the nation are
wretchedly poor?  If they live in squalor, in filth, in crime, with
hope and joy gone, a homeless, soilless army of human prey.

It is generally conceded that unless the returns of any business
venture exceed the cost, bankruptcy is inevitable.  But those engaged
in the business of producing wealth have not yet learned even this
simple lesson.  Every year the cost of production in human life is
growing larger (50,000 killed, 100,000 wounded in America last year);
the returns to the masses, who help to create wealth, are ever
getting smaller.  Yet America continues to be blind to the inevitable
bankruptcy of our business of production.  Nor is this the only crime
of the latter.  Still more fatal is the crime of turning the producer
into a mere particle of a machine, with less will and decision than
his master of steel and iron.  Man is being robbed not merely of the
products of his labor, but of the power of free initiative, of
originality, and the interest in, or desire for, the things he is
making.

Real wealth consists in things of utility and beauty, in things that
help to create strong, beautiful bodies and surroundings inspiring to
live in.  But if man is doomed to wind cotton around a spool, or dig
coal, or build roads for thirty years of his life, there can be no
talk of wealth.  What he gives to the world is only gray and hideous
things, reflecting a dull and hideous existence,--too weak to live,
too cowardly to die.  Strange to say, there are people who extol this
deadening method of centralized production as the proudest
achievement of our age.  They fail utterly to realize that if we are
to continue in machine subserviency, our slavery is more complete
than was our bondage to the King.  They do not want to know that
centralization is not only the death-knell of liberty, but also of
health and beauty, of art and science, all these being impossible in
a clock-like, mechanical atmosphere.

Anarchism cannot but repudiate such a method of production: its goal
is the freest possible expression of all the latent powers of the
individual.  Oscar Wilde defines a perfect personality as "one who
develops under perfect conditions, who is not wounded, maimed, or in
danger."  A perfect personality, then, is only possible in a state of
society where man is free to choose the mode of work, the conditions
of work, and the freedom to work.  One to whom the making of a table,
the building of a house, or the tilling of the soil, is what the
painting is to the artist and the discovery to the scientist,--the
result of inspiration, of intense longing, and deep interest in work
as a creative force.  That being the ideal of Anarchism, its economic
arrangements must consist of voluntary productive and distributive
associations, gradually developing into free communism, as the best
means of producing with the least waste of human energy.  Anarchism,
however, also recognizes the right of the individual, or numbers of
individuals, to arrange at all times for other forms of work, in
harmony with their tastes and desires.

Such free display of human energy being possible only under complete
individual and social freedom, Anarchism directs its forces against
the third and greatest foe of all social equality; namely, the State,
organized authority, or statutory law,--the dominion of human
conduct.

Just as religion has fettered the human mind, and as property, or the
monopoly of things, has subdued and stifled man's needs, so has the
State enslaved his spirit, dictating every phase of conduct.  "All
government in essence," says Emerson, "is tyranny."  It matters not
whether it is government by divine right or majority rule.  In every
instance its aim is the absolute subordination of the individual.

Referring to the American government, the greatest American
Anarchist, David Thoreau, said: "Government, what is it but a
tradition, though a recent one, endeavoring to transmit itself
unimpaired to posterity, but each instance losing its integrity; it
has not the vitality and force of a single living man.  Law never
made man a whit more just; and by means of their respect for it, even
the well disposed are daily made agents of injustice."

Indeed, the keynote of government is injustice.  With the arrogance
and self-sufficiency of the King who could do no wrong, governments
ordain, judge, condemn, and punish the most insignificant offenses,
while maintaining themselves by the greatest of all offenses, the
annihilation of individual liberty.  Thus Ouida is right when she
maintains that "the State only aims at instilling those qualities in
its public by which its demands are obeyed, and its exchequer is
filled.  Its highest attainment is the reduction of mankind to
clockwork.  In its atmosphere all those finer and more delicate
liberties, which require treatment and spacious expansion, inevitably
dry up and perish.  The State requires a taxpaying machine in which
there is no hitch, an exchequer in which there is never a deficit,
and a public, monotonous, obedient, colorless, spiritless, moving
humbly like a flock of sheep along a straight high road between two
walls."

Yet even a flock of sheep would resist the chicanery of the State, if
it were not for the corruptive, tyrannical, and oppressive methods it
employs to serve its purposes.  Therefore Bakunin repudiates the
State as synonymous with the surrender of the liberty of the
individual or small minorities,--the destruction of social
relationship, the curtailment, or complete denial even, of life
itself, for its own aggrandizement.  The State is the altar of
political freedom and, like the religious altar, it is maintained for
the purpose of human sacrifice.

In fact, there is hardly a modern thinker who does not agree that
government, organized authority, or the State, is necessary ONLY to
maintain or protect property and monopoly.  It has proven efficient
in that function only.

Even George Bernard Shaw, who hopes for the miraculous from the State
under Fabianism, nevertheless admits that "it is at present a huge
machine for robbing and slave-driving of the poor by brute force."
This being the case, it is hard to see why the clever prefacer wishes
to uphold the State after poverty shall have ceased to exist.

Unfortunately there are still a number of people who continue in the
fatal belief that government rests on natural laws, that it maintains
social order and harmony, that it diminishes crime, and that it
prevents the lazy man from fleecing his fellows.  I shall therefore
examine these contentions.

A natural law is that factor in man which asserts itself freely and
spontaneously without any external force, in harmony with the
requirements of nature.  For instance, the demand for nutrition, for
sex gratification, for light, air, and exercise, is a natural law.
But its expression needs not the machinery of government, needs not
the club, the gun, the handcuff, or the prison.  To obey such laws,
if we may call it obedience, requires only spontaneity and free
opportunity.  That governments do not maintain themselves through
such harmonious factors is proven by the terrible array of violence,
force, and coercion all governments use in order to live.  Thus
Blackstone is right when he says, "Human laws are invalid, because
they are contrary to the laws of nature."

Unless it be the order of Warsaw after the slaughter of thousands of
people, it is difficult to ascribe to governments any capacity for
order or social harmony.  Order derived through submission and
maintained by terror is not much of a safe guaranty; yet that is the
only "order" that governments have ever maintained.  True social
harmony grows naturally out of solidarity of interests.  In a society
where those who always work never have anything, while those who
never work enjoy everything, solidarity of interests is non-existent;
hence social harmony is but a myth.  The only way organized authority
meets this grave situation is by extending still greater privileges
to those who have already monopolized the earth, and by still further
enslaving the disinherited masses.  Thus the entire arsenal of
government--laws, police, soldiers, the courts, legislatures,
prisons,--is strenuously engaged in "harmonizing" the most
antagonistic elements in society.

The most absurd apology for authority and law is that they serve to
diminish crime.  Aside from the fact that the State is itself the
greatest criminal, breaking every written and natural law, stealing
in the form of taxes, killing in the form of war and capital
punishment, it has come to an absolute standstill in coping with
crime.  It has failed utterly to destroy or even minimize the
horrible scourge of its own creation.

Crime is naught but misdirected energy.  So long as every institution
of today, economic, political, social, and moral, conspires to
misdirect human energy into wrong channels; so long as most people
are out of place doing the things they hate to do, living a life they
loathe to live, crime will be inevitable, and all the laws on the
statutes can only increase, but never do away with, crime.  What does
society, as it exists today, know of the process of despair, the
poverty, the horrors, the fearful struggle the human soul must pass
on its way to crime and degradation.  Who that knows this terrible
process can fail to see the truth in these words of Peter Kropotkin:

"Those who will hold the balance between the benefits thus attributed
to law and punishment and the degrading effect of the latter on
humanity; those who will estimate the torrent of depravity poured
abroad in human society by the informer, favored by the Judge even,
and paid for in clinking cash by governments, under the pretext of
aiding to unmask crime; those who will go within prison walls and
there see what human beings become when deprived of liberty, when
subjected to the care of brutal keepers, to coarse, cruel words, to a
thousand stinging, piercing humiliations, will agree with us that the
entire apparatus of prison and punishment is an abomination which
ought to be brought to an end."

The deterrent influence of law on the lazy man is too absurd to merit
consideration.  If society were only relieved of the waste and
expense of keeping a lazy class, and the equally great expense of the
paraphernalia of protection this lazy class requires, the social
tables would contain an abundance for all, including even the
occasional lazy individual.  Besides, it is well to consider that
laziness results either from special privileges, or physical and
mental abnormalities.  Our present insane system of production
fosters both, and the most astounding phenomenon is that people
should want to work at all now.  Anarchism aims to strip labor of its
deadening, dulling aspect, of its gloom and compulsion.  It aims to
make work an instrument of joy, of strength, of color, of real
harmony, so that the poorest sort of a man should find in work both
recreation and hope.

To achieve such an arrangement of life, government, with its unjust,
arbitrary, repressive measures, must be done away with.  At best it
has but imposed one single mode of life upon all, without regard to
individual and social variations and needs.  In destroying government
and statutory laws, Anarchism proposes to rescue the self-respect and
independence of the individual from all restraint and invasion by
authority.  Only in freedom can man grow to his full stature.  Only
in freedom will he learn to think and move, and give the very best in
him.  Only in freedom will he realize the true force of the social
bonds which knit men together, and which are the true foundation of a
normal social life.

But what about human nature?  Can it be changed?  And if not, will it
endure under Anarchism?

Poor human nature, what horrible crimes have been committed in thy
name!  Every fool, from king to policeman, from the flatheaded parson
to the visionless dabbler in science, presumes to speak
authoritatively of human nature.  The greater the mental charlatan,
the more definite his insistence on the wickedness and weaknesses of
human nature.  Yet, how can any one speak of it today, with every
soul in a prison, with every heart fettered, wounded, and maimed?

John Burroughs has stated that experimental study of animals in
captivity is absolutely useless.  Their character, their habits,
their appetites undergo a complete transformation when torn from
their soil in field and forest.  With human nature caged in a narrow
space, whipped daily into submission, how can we speak of its
potentialities?

Freedom, expansion, opportunity, and, above all, peace and repose,
alone can teach us the real dominant factors of human nature and all
its wonderful possibilities.

Anarchism, then, really stands for the liberation of the human mind
from the dominion of religion; the liberation of the human body from
the dominion of property; liberation from the shackles and restraint
of government.  Anarchism stands for a social order based on the free
grouping of individuals for the purpose of producing real social
wealth; an order that will guarantee to every human being free access
to the earth and full enjoyment of the necessities of life, according
to individual desires, tastes, and inclinations.

This is not a wild fancy or an aberration of the mind.  It is the
conclusion arrived at by hosts of intellectual men and women the
world over; a conclusion resulting from the close and studious
observation of the tendencies of modern society: individual liberty
and economic equality, the twin forces for the birth of what is fine
and true in man.

As to methods.  Anarchism is not, as some may suppose, a theory of
the future to be realized through divine inspiration.  It is a living
force in the affairs of our life, constantly creating new conditions.
The methods of Anarchism therefore do not comprise an iron-clad
program to be carried out under all circumstances.  Methods must grow
out of the economic needs of each place and clime, and of the
intellectual and temperamental requirements of the individual.  The
serene, calm character of a Tolstoy will wish different methods for
social reconstruction than the intense, overflowing personality of a
Michael Bakunin or a Peter Kropotkin.  Equally so it must be apparent
that the economic and political needs of Russia will dictate more
drastic measures than would England or America.  Anarchism does not
stand for military drill and uniformity; it does, however, stand for
the spirit of revolt, in whatever form, against everything that
hinders human growth.  All Anarchists agree in that, as they also
agree in their opposition to the political machinery as a means of
bringing about the great social change.

"All voting," says Thoreau, "is a sort of gaming, like checkers, or
backgammon, a playing with right and wrong; its obligation never
exceeds that of expediency.  Even voting for the right thing is doing
nothing for it.  A wise man will not leave the right to the mercy of
chance, nor wish it to prevail through the power of the majority."
A close examination of the machinery of politics and its achievements
will bear out the logic of Thoreau.

What does the history of parliamentarism show?  Nothing but failure
and defeat, not even a single reform to ameliorate the economic and
social stress of the people.  Laws have been passed and enactments
made for the improvement and protection of labor.  Thus it was proven
only last year that Illinois, with the most rigid laws for mine
protection, had the greatest mine disasters.  In States where child
labor laws prevail, child exploitation is at its highest, and though
with us the workers enjoy full political opportunities, capitalism
has reached the most brazen zenith.

Even were the workers able to have their own representatives, for
which our good Socialist politicians are clamoring, what chances are
there for their honesty and good faith?  One has but to bear in mind
the process of politics to realize that its path of good intentions
is full of pitfalls: wire-pulling, intriguing, flattering, lying,
cheating; in fact, chicanery of every description, whereby the
political aspirant can achieve success.  Added to that is a complete
demoralization of character and conviction, until nothing is left
that would make one hope for anything from such a human derelict.
Time and time again the people were foolish enough to trust, believe,
and support with their last farthing aspiring politicians, only to
find themselves betrayed and cheated.

It may be claimed that men of integrity would not become corrupt in
the political grinding mill.  Perhaps not; but such men would be
absolutely helpless to exert the slightest influence in behalf of
labor, as indeed has been shown in numerous instances.  The State is
the economic master of its servants.  Good men, if such there be,
would either remain true to their political faith and lose their
economic support, or they would cling to their economic master and be
utterly unable to do the slightest good.  The political arena leaves
one no alternative, one must either be a dunce or a rogue.

The political superstition is still holding sway over the hearts and
minds of the masses, but the true lovers of liberty will have no more
to do with it.  Instead, they believe with Stirner that man has as
much liberty as he is willing to take.  Anarchism therefore stands
for direct action, the open defiance of, and resistance to, all laws
and restrictions, economic, social, and moral.  But defiance and
resistance are illegal.  Therein lies the salvation of man.
Everything illegal necessitates integrity, self-reliance, and
courage.  In short, it calls for free, independent spirits, for "men
who are men, and who have a bone in their backs which you cannot pass
your hand through."

Universal suffrage itself owes its existence to direct action.  If
not for the spirit of rebellion, of the defiance on the part of the
American revolutionary fathers, their posterity would still wear the
King's coat.  If not for the direct action of a John Brown and his
comrades, America would still trade in the flesh of the black man.
True, the trade in white flesh is still going on; but that, too, will
have to be abolished by direct action.  Trade-unionism, the economic
arena of the modern gladiator, owes its existence to direct action.
It is but recently that law and government have attempted to crush
the trade-union movement, and condemned the exponents of man's right
to organize to prison as conspirators.  Had they sought to assert
their cause through begging, pleading, and compromise, trade-unionism
would today be a negligible quantity.  In France, in Spain, in Italy,
in Russia, nay even in England (witness the growing rebellion of
English labor unions) direct, revolutionary, economic action has
become so strong a force in the battle for industrial liberty as to
make the world realize the tremendous importance of labor's power.
The General Strike, the supreme expression of the economic
consciousness of the workers, was ridiculed in America but a short
time ago.  Today every great strike, in order to win, must realize
the importance of the solidaric general protest.

Direct action, having proven effective along economic lines, is
equally potent in the environment of the individual.  There a hundred
forces encroach upon his being, and only persistent resistance to
them will finally set him free.  Direct action against the authority
in the shop, direct action against the authority of the law, direct
action against the invasive, meddlesome authority of our moral code,
is the logical, consistent method of Anarchism.

Will it not lead to a revolution?  Indeed, it will.  No real social
change has ever come about without a revolution.  People are either
not familiar with their history, or they have not yet learned that
revolution is but thought carried into action.

Anarchism, the great leaven of thought, is today permeating every
phase of human endeavor.  Science, art, literature, the drama, the
effort for economic betterment, in fact every individual and social
opposition to the existing disorder of things, is illumined by the
spiritual light of Anarchism.  It is the philosophy of the
sovereignty of the individual.  It is the theory of social harmony.
It is the great, surging, living truth that is reconstructing the
world, and that will usher in the Dawn.




MINORITIES VERSUS MAJORITIES


If I were to give a summary of the tendency of our times, I would
say, Quantity.  The multitude, the mass spirit, dominates everywhere,
destroying quality.  Our entire life--production, politics, and
education--rests on quantity, on numbers.  The worker who once took
pride in the thoroughness and quality of his work, has been replaced
by brainless, incompetent automatons, who turn out enormous
quantities of things, valueless to themselves, and generally
injurious to the rest of mankind.  Thus quantity, instead of adding
to life's comforts and peace, has merely increased man's burden.

In politics, naught but quantity counts.  In proportion to its
increase, however, principles, ideals, justice, and uprightness are
completely swamped by the array of numbers.  In the struggle for
supremacy the various political parties outdo each other in trickery,
deceit, cunning, and shady machinations, confident that the one who
succeeds is sure to be hailed by the majority as the victor.  That is
the only god,--Success.  As to what expense, what terrible cost to
character, is of no moment.  We have not far to go in search of proof
to verify this sad fact.

Never before did the corruption, the complete rottenness of our
government stand so thoroughly exposed; never before were the
American people brought face to face with the Judas nature of that
political body, which has claimed for years to be absolutely beyond
reproach, as the mainstay of our institutions, the true protector of
the rights and liberties of the people.

Yet when the crimes of that party became so brazen that even the
blind could see them, it needed but to muster up its minions, and its
supremacy was assured.  Thus the very victims, duped, betrayed,
outraged a hundred times, decided, not against, but in favor of the
victor.  Bewildered, the few asked how could the majority betray the
traditions of American liberty?  Where was its judgment, its
reasoning capacity?  That is just it, the majority cannot reason; it
has no judgment.  Lacking utterly in originality and moral courage,
the majority has always placed its destiny in the hands of others.
Incapable of standing responsibilities, it has followed its leaders
even unto destruction.  Dr. Stockman was right: "The most dangerous
enemies of truth and justice in our midst are the compact majorities,
the damned compact majority."  Without ambition or initiative, the
compact mass hates nothing so much as innovation.  It has always
opposed, condemned, and hounded the innovator, the pioneer of a new
truth.

The oft repeated slogan of our time is, among all politicians, the
Socialists included, that ours is an era of individualism, of the
minority.  Only those who do not probe beneath the surface might be
led to entertain this view.  Have not the few accumulated the wealth
of the world?  Are they not the masters, the absolute kings of the
situation?  Their success, however, is due not to individualism, but
to the inertia, the cravenness, the utter submission of the mass.
The latter wants but to be dominated, to be led, to be coerced.  As
to individualism, at no time in human history did it have less chance
of expression, less opportunity to assert itself in a normal, healthy
manner.

The individual educator imbued with honesty of purpose, the artist or
writer of original ideas, the independent scientist or explorer, the
non-compromising pioneers of social changes are daily pushed to the
wall by men whose learning and creative ability have become decrepit
with age.

Educators of Ferrer's type are nowhere tolerated, while the
dietitians of predigested food, a la Professors Eliot and Butler, are
the successful perpetuators of an age of nonentities, of automatons.
In the literary and dramatic world, the Humphrey Wards and Clyde
Fitches are the idols of the mass, while but few know or appreciate
the beauty and genius of an Emerson, Thoreau, Whitman; an Ibsen, a
Hauptmann, a Butler Yeats, or a Stephen Phillips.  They are like
solitary stars, far beyond the horizon of the multitude.

Publishers, theatrical managers, and critics ask not for the quality
inherent in creative art, but will it meet with a good sale, will it
suit the palate of the people?  Alas, this palate is like a dumping
ground; it relishes anything that needs no mental mastication.  As a
result, the mediocre, the ordinary, the commonplace represents the
chief literary output.

Need I say that in art we are confronted with the same sad facts?
One has but to inspect our parks and thoroughfares to realize the
hideousness and vulgarity of the art manufacture.  Certainly, none
but a majority taste would tolerate such an outrage on art.  False in
conception and barbarous in execution, the statuary that infests
American cities has as much relation to true art, as a totem to a
Michael Angelo.  Yet that is the only art that succeeds.  The true
artistic genius, who will not cater to accepted notions, who
exercises originality, and strives to be true to life, leads an
obscure and wretched existence.  His work may some day become the fad
of the mob, but not until his heart's blood had been exhausted; not
until the pathfinder has ceased to be, and a throng of an idealless
and visionless mob has done to death the heritage of the master.

It is said that the artist of today cannot create because
Prometheus-like he is bound to the rock of economic necessity.
This, however, is true of art in all ages.  Michael Angelo was
dependent on his patron saint, no less than the sculptor or painter
of today, except that the art connoisseurs of those days were far
away from the madding crowd.  They felt honored to be permitted to
worship at the shrine of the master.

The art protector of our time knows but one criterion, one
value,--the dollar.  He is not concerned about the quality of any
great work, but in the quantity of dollars his purchase implies.
Thus the financier in Mirbeau's LES AFFAIRES SONT LES AFFAIRES points
to some blurred arrangement in colors, saying "See how great it is;
it cost 50,000 francs."  Just like our own parvenues.  The fabulous
figures paid for their great art discoveries must make up for the
poverty of their taste.

The most unpardonable sin in society is independence of thought.
That this should be so terribly apparent in a country whose symbol is
democracy, is very significant of the tremendous power of the
majority.

Wendell Phillips said fifty years ago: "In our country of absolute
democratic equality, public opinion is not only omnipotent, it is
omnipresent.  There is no refuge from its tyranny, there is no hiding
from its reach, and the result is that if you take the old Greek
lantern and go about to seek among a hundred, you will not find a
single American who has not, or who does not fancy at least he has,
something to gain or lose in his ambition, his social life, or
business, from the good opinion and the votes of those around him.
And the consequence is that instead of being a mass of individuals,
each one fearlessly blurting out his own conviction, as a nation
compared to other nations we are a mass of cowards.  More than any
other people we are afraid of each other."  Evidently we have not
advanced very far from the condition that confronted Wendell
Phillips.

Today, as then, public opinion is the omnipresent tyrant; today, as
then, the majority represents a mass of cowards, willing to accept
him who mirrors its own soul and mind poverty.  That accounts for the
unprecedented rise of a man like Roosevelt.  He embodies the very
worst element of mob psychology.  A politician, he knows that the
majority cares little for ideals or integrity.  What it craves is
display.  It matters not whether that be a dog show, a prize fight,
the lynching of a "nigger," the rounding up of some petty offender,
the marriage exposition of an heiress, or the acrobatic stunts of an
ex-president.  The more hideous the mental contortions, the greater
the delight and bravos of the mass.  Thus, poor in ideals and vulgar
of soul, Roosevelt continues to be the man of the hour.

On the other hand, men towering high above such political pygmies,
men of refinement, of culture, of ability, are jeered into silence as
mollycoddles.  It is absurd to claim that ours is the era of
individualism.  Ours is merely a more poignant repetition of the
phenomenon of all history: every effort for progress, for
enlightenment, for science, for religious, political, and economic
liberty, emanates from the minority, and not from the mass.  Today,
as ever, the few are misunderstood, hounded, imprisoned, tortured,
and killed.

The principle of brotherhood expounded by the agitator of Nazareth
preserved the germ of life, of truth and justice, so long as it was
the beacon light of the few.  The moment the majority seized upon it,
that great principle became a shibboleth and harbinger of blood and
fire, spreading suffering and disaster.  The attack on the
omnipotence of Rome was like a sunrise amid the darkness of the
night, only so long as it was made by the colossal figures of a Huss,
a Calvin, or a Luther.  Yet when the mass joined in the procession
against the Catholic monster, it was no less cruel, no less
bloodthirsty than its enemy.  Woe to the heretics, to the minority,
who would not bow to its dicta.  After infinite zeal, endurance, and
sacrifice, the human mind is at last free from the religious phantom;
the minority has gone on in pursuit of new conquests, and the
majority is lagging behind, handicapped by truth grown false with
age.

Politically the human race would still be in the most absolute
slavery, were it not for the John Balls, the Wat Tylers, the Tells,
the innumerable individual giants who fought inch by inch against the
power of kings and tyrants.  But for individual pioneers the world
would have never been shaken to its very roots by that tremendous
wave, the French Revolution.  Great events are usually preceded by
apparently small things.  Thus the eloquence and fire of Camille
Desmoulins was like the trumpet before Jericho, razing to the ground
that emblem of torture, of abuse, of horror, the Bastille.

Always, at every period, the few were the banner bearers of a great
idea, of liberating effort.  Not so the mass, the leaden weight of
which does not let it move.  The truth of this is borne out in Russia
with greater force than elsewhere.  Thousands of lives have already
been consumed by that bloody regime, yet the monster on the throne is
not appeased.  How is such a thing possible when ideas, culture,
literature, when the deepest and finest emotions groan under the iron
yoke?  The majority, that compact, immobile, drowsy mass, the Russian
peasant, after a century of struggle, of sacrifice, of untold misery,
still believes that the rope which strangles "the man with the white
hands"[1] brings luck.

In the American struggle for liberty, the majority was no less of a
stumbling block.  Until this very day the ideas of Jefferson, of
Patrick Henry, of Thomas Paine, are denied and sold by their
posterity.  The mass wants none of them.  The greatness and courage
worshipped in Lincoln have been forgotten in the men who created the
background for the panorama of that time.  The true patron saints of
the black men were represented in that handful of fighters in Boston,
Lloyd Garrison, Wendell Phillips, Thoreau, Margaret Fuller, and
Theodore Parker, whose great courage and sturdiness culminated in
that somber giant, John Brown.  Their untiring zeal, their eloquence
and perseverance undermined the stronghold of the Southern lords.
Lincoln and his minions followed only when abolition had become a
practical issue, recognized as such by all.

About fifty years ago, a meteor-like idea made its appearance on the
social horizon of the world, an idea so far-reaching, so
revolutionary, so all-embracing as to spread terror in the hearts of
tyrants everywhere.  On the other hand, that idea was a harbinger of
joy, of cheer, of hope to the millions.  The pioneers knew the
difficulties in their way, they knew the opposition, the persecution,
the hardships that would meet them, but proud and unafraid they
started on their march onward, ever onward.  Now that idea has become
a popular slogan.  Almost everyone is a Socialist today: the rich
man, as well as his poor victim; the upholders of law and authority,
as well as their unfortunate culprits; the freethinker, as well as
the perpetuator of religious falsehoods; the fashionable lady, as
well as the shirtwaist girl.  Why not?  Now that the truth of fifty
years ago has become a lie, now that it has been clipped of all its
youthful imagination, and been robbed of its vigor, its strength, its
revolutionary ideal--why not? Now that it is no longer a beautiful
vision, but a "practical, workable scheme," resting on the will of
the majority, why not?  With the same political cunning and
shrewdness the mass is petted, pampered, cheated daily.  Its praise
is being sung in many keys: the poor majority, the outraged, the
abused, the giant majority, if only it would follow us.

Who has not heard this litany before?  Who does not know this
never-varying refrain of all politicians?  That the mass bleeds, that
it is being robbed and exploited, I know as well as our vote-baiters.
But I insist that not the handful of parasites, but the mass itself
is responsible for this horrible state of affairs.  It clings to its
masters, loves the whip, and is the first to cry Crucify! the moment
a protesting voice is raised against the sacredness of capitalistic
authority or any other decayed institution.  Yet how long would
authority and private property exist, if not for the willingness of
the mass to become soldiers, policemen, jailers, and hangmen.  The
Socialist demagogues know that as well as I, but they maintain the
myth of the virtues of the majority, because their very scheme of
life means the perpetuation of power.  And how could the latter be
acquired without numbers?  Yes, power, authority, coercion, and
dependence rest on the mass, but never freedom, never the free
unfoldment of the individual, never the birth of a free society.

Not because I do not feel with the oppressed, the disinherited of the
earth; not because I do not know the shame, the horror, the indignity
of the lives the people lead, do I repudiate the majority as a
creative force for good.  Oh, no, no!  But because I know so well
that as a compact mass it has never stood for justice or equality.
It has suppressed the human voice, subdued the human spirit, chained
the human body.  As a mass its aim has always been to make life
uniform, gray, and monotonous as the desert.  As a mass it will
always be the annihilator of individuality, of free initiative, of
originality.  I therefore believe with Emerson that "the masses are
crude, lame, pernicious in their demands and influence, and need not
to be flattered, but to be schooled.  I wish not to concede anything
to them, but to drill, divide, and break them up, and draw
individuals out of them.  Masses!  The calamity are the masses.  I do
not wish any mass at all, but honest men only, lovely, sweet,
accomplished women only."

In other words, the living, vital truth of social and economic
well-being will become a reality only through the zeal, courage, the
non-compromising determination of intelligent minorities, and not
through the mass.


[1] The intellectuals.



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF POLITICAL VIOLENCE


To analyze the psychology of political violence is not only extremely
difficult, but also very dangerous.  If such acts are treated with
understanding, one is immediately accused of eulogizing them.  If, on
the other hand, human sympathy is expressed with the ATTENTATER,[1] one
risks being considered a possible accomplice.  Yet it is only
intelligence and sympathy that can bring us closer to the source of
human suffering, and teach us the ultimate way out of it.

The primitive man, ignorant of natural forces, dreaded their
approach, hiding from the perils they threatened.  As man learned to
understand Nature's phenomena, he realized that though these may
destroy life and cause great loss, they also bring relief.  To the
earnest student it must be apparent that the accumulated forces in
our social and economic life, culminating in a political act of
violence, are similar to the terrors of the atmosphere, manifested in
storm and lightning.

To thoroughly appreciate the truth of this view, one must feel
intensely the indignity of our social wrongs; one's very being must
throb with the pain, the sorrow, the despair millions of people are
daily made to endure.  Indeed, unless we have become a part of
humanity, we cannot even faintly understand the just indignation that
accumulates in a human soul, the burning, surging passion that makes
the storm inevitable.

The ignorant mass looks upon the man who makes a violent protest
against our social and economic iniquities as upon a wild beast, a
cruel, heartless monster, whose joy it is to destroy life and bathe
in blood; or at best, as upon an irresponsible lunatic.  Yet nothing
is further from the truth.  As a matter of fact, those who have
studied the character and personality of these men, or who have come
in close contact with them, are agreed that it is their
super-sensitiveness to the wrong and injustice surrounding them which
compels them to pay the toll of our social crimes.  The most noted
writers and poets, discussing the psychology of political offenders,
have paid them the highest tribute.  Could anyone assume that these
men had advised violence, or even approved of the acts?  Certainly
not.  Theirs was the attitude of the social student, of the man who
knows that beyond every violent act there is a vital cause.

Bjornstjerne Bjornson, in the second part of BEYOND HUMAN POWER,
emphasizes the fact that it is among the Anarchists that we must look
for the modern martyrs who pay for their faith with their blood, and
who welcome death with a smile, because they believe, as truly as
Christ did, that their martyrdom will redeem humanity.

Francois Coppee, the French novelist, thus expresses himself
regarding the psychology of the ATTENTATER:

"The reading of the details of Vaillant's execution left me in a
thoughtful mood.  I imagined him expanding his chest under the ropes,
marching with firm step, stiffening his will, concentrating all his
energy, and, with eyes fixed upon the knife, hurling finally at
society his cry of malediction.  And, in spite of me, another
spectacle rose suddenly before my mind.  I saw a group of men and
women pressing against each other in the middle of the oblong arena
of the circus, under the gaze of thousands of eyes, while from all
the steps of the immense amphitheatre went up the terrible cry, AD
LEONES! and, below, the opening cages of the wild beasts.

"I did not believe the execution would take place.  In the first
place, no victim had been struck with death, and it had long been the
custom not to punish an abortive crime with the last degree of
severity.  Then, this crime, however terrible in intention, was
disinterested, born of an abstract idea.  The man's past, his
abandoned childhood, his life of hardship, pleaded also in his favor.
In the independent press generous voices were raised in his behalf,
very loud and eloquent.  'A purely literary current of opinion' some
have said, with no little scorn.  IT IS, ON THE CONTRARY, AN HONOR TO
THE MEN OF ART AND THOUGHT TO HAVE EXPRESSED ONCE MORE THEIR DISGUST
AT THE SCAFFOLD."

Again Zola, in GERMINAL and PARIS, describes the tenderness and
kindness, the deep sympathy with human suffering, of these men who
close the chapter of their lives with a violent outbreak against our
system.

Last, but not least, the man who probably better than anyone else
understands the psychology of the ATTENTATER is M. Hamon, the author
of the brilliant work, UNE PSYCHOLOGIE DU MILITAIRE PROFESSIONEL, who
has arrived at these suggestive conclusions:

"The positive method confirmed by the rational method enables us to
establish an ideal type of Anarchist, whose mentality is the
aggregate of common psychic characteristics.  Every Anarchist
partakes sufficiently of this ideal type to make it possible to
differentiate him from other men.  The typical Anarchist, then, may
be defined as follows: A man perceptible by the spirit of revolt
under one or more of its forms,--opposition, investigation,
criticism, innovation,--endowed with a strong love of liberty,
egoistic or individualistic, and possessed of great curiosity, a keen
desire to know.  These traits are supplemented by an ardent love of
others, a highly developed moral sensitiveness, a profound sentiment
of justice, and imbued with missionary zeal."

To the above characteristics, says Alvin F. Sanborn, must be added
these sterling qualities: a rare love of animals, surpassing
sweetness in all the ordinary relations of life, exceptional sobriety
of demeanor, frugality and regularity, austerity, even, of living,
and courage beyond compare.[2]

"There is a truism that the man in the street seems always to forget,
when he is abusing the Anarchists, or whatever party happens to be
his BETE NOIRE for the moment, as the cause of some outrage just
perpetrated.  This indisputable fact is that homicidal outrages have,
from time immemorial, been the reply of goaded and desperate classes,
and goaded and desperate individuals, to wrongs from their fellowmen,
which they felt to be intolerable.  Such acts are the violent recoil
from violence, whether aggressive or repressive; they are the last
desperate struggle of outraged and exasperated human nature for
breathing space and life.  And their cause lies not in any special
conviction, but in the depths of that human nature itself.  The whole
course of history, political and social, is strewn with evidence of
this fact.  To go no further, take the three most notorious examples
of political parties goaded into violence during the last fifty
years: the Mazzinians in Italy, the Fenians in Ireland, and the
Terrorists in Russia.  Were these people Anarchists?  No.  Did they
all three even hold the same political opinions?  No.  The Mazzinians
were Republicans, the Fenians political separatists, the Russians
Social Democrats or Constitutionalists.  But all were driven by
desperate circumstances into this terrible form of revolt.  And when
we turn from parties to individuals who have acted in like manner, we
stand appalled by the number of human beings goaded and driven by
sheer desperation into conduct obviously violently opposed to their
social instincts.

"Now that Anarchism has become a living force in society, such deeds
have been sometimes committed by Anarchists, as well as by others.
For no new faith, even the most essentially peaceable and humane the
mind of man has yet accepted, but at its first coming has brought
upon earth not peace, but a sword; not because of anything violent or
anti-social in the doctrine itself; simply because of the ferment any
new and creative idea excites in men's minds, whether they accept or
reject it.  And a conception of Anarchism, which, on one hand,
threatens every vested interest, and, on the other, holds out a
vision of a free and noble life to be won by a struggle against
existing wrongs, is certain to rouse the fiercest opposition, and
bring the whole repressive force of ancient evil into violent contact
with the tumultuous outburst of a new hope.

"Under miserable conditions of life, any vision of the possibility of
better things makes the present misery more intolerable, and spurs
those who suffer to the most energetic struggles to improve their
lot, and if these struggles only immediately result in sharper
misery, the outcome is sheer desperation.  In our present society,
for instance, an exploited wage worker, who catches a glimpse of what
work and life might and ought to be, finds the toilsome routine and
the squalor of his existence almost intolerable; and even when he has
the resolution and courage to continue steadily working his best, and
waiting until new ideas have so permeated society as to pave the way
for better times, the mere fact that he has such ideas and tries to
spread them, brings him into difficulties with his employers.  How
many thousands of Socialists, and above all Anarchists, have lost
work and even the chance of work, solely on the ground of their
opinions.  It is only the specially gifted craftsman, who, if he be a
zealous propagandist, can hope to retain permanent employment.  And
what happens to a man with his brain working actively with a ferment
of new ideas, with a vision before his eyes of a new hope dawning for
toiling and agonizing men, with the knowledge that his suffering and
that of his fellows in misery is not caused by the cruelty of fate,
but by the injustice of other human beings,--what happens to such a
man when he sees those dear to him starving, when he himself is
starved?  Some natures in such a plight, and those by no means the
least social or the least sensitive, will become violent, and will
even feel that their violence is social and not anti-social, that in
striking when and how they can, they are striking, not for
themselves, but for human nature, outraged and despoiled in their
persons and in those of their fellow sufferers.  And are we, who
ourselves are not in this horrible predicament, to stand by and
coldly condemn these piteous victims of the Furies and Fates?  Are we
to decry as miscreants these human beings who act with heroic
self-devotion, sacrificing their lives in protest, where less social
and less energetic natures would lie down and grovel in abject
submission to injustice and wrong?  Are we to join the ignorant and
brutal outcry which stigmatizes such men as monsters of wickedness,
gratuitously running amuck in a harmonious and innocently peaceful
society?  No!  We hate murder with a hatred that may seem absurdly
exaggerated to apologists for Matabele massacres, to callous
acquiescers in hangings and bombardments, but we decline in such
cases of homicide, or attempted homicide, as those of which we are
treating, to be guilty of the cruel injustice of flinging the whole
responsibility of the deed upon the immediate perpetrator.  The guilt
of these homicides lies upon every man and woman who, intentionally
or by cold indifference, helps to keep up social conditions that
drive human beings to despair.  The man who flings his whole life
into the attempt, at the cost of his own life, to protest against the
wrongs of his fellow men, is a saint compared to the active and
passive upholders of cruelty and injustice, even if his protest
destroy other lives besides his own.  Let him who is without sin in
society cast the first stone at such an one."[3]

That every act of political violence should nowadays be attributed to
Anarchists is not at all surprising.  Yet it is a fact known to
almost everyone familiar with the Anarchist movement that a great
number of acts, for which Anarchists had to suffer, either originated
with the capitalist press or were instigated, if not directly
perpetrated, by the police.

For a number of years acts of violence had been committed in Spain,
for which the Anarchists were held responsible, hounded like wild
beasts, and thrown into prison.  Later it was disclosed that the
perpetrators of these acts were not Anarchists, but members of the
police department.  The scandal became so widespread that the
conservative Spanish papers demanded the apprehension and punishment
of the gang-leader, Juan Rull, who was subsequently condemned to
death and executed.  The sensational evidence, brought to light
during the trial, forced Police Inspector Momento to exonerate
completely the Anarchists from any connection with the acts committed
during a long period.  This resulted in the dismissal of a number of
police officials, among them Inspector Tressols, who, in revenge,
disclosed the fact that behind the gang of police bomb throwers were
others of far higher position, who provided them with funds and
protected them.

This is one of the many striking examples of how Anarchist
conspiracies are manufactured.

That the American police can perjure themselves with the same ease,
that they are just as merciless, just as brutal and cunning as their
European colleagues, has been proven on more than one occasion.  We
need only recall the tragedy of the eleventh of November, 1887, known
as the Haymarket Riot.

No one who is at all familiar with the case can possibly doubt that
the Anarchists, judicially murdered in Chicago, died as victims of a
lying, bloodthirsty press and of a cruel police conspiracy.  Has not
Judge Gary himself said: "Not because you have caused the Haymarket
bomb, but because you are Anarchists, you are on trial."

The impartial and thorough analysis by Governor Altgeld of that
blotch on the American escutcheon verified the brutal frankness of
Judge Gary.  It was this that induced Altgeld to pardon the three
Anarchists, thereby earning the lasting esteem of every liberty
loving man and woman in the world.

When we approach the tragedy of September sixth, 1901, we are
confronted by one of the most striking examples of how little social
theories are responsible for an act of political violence.  "Leon
Czolgosz, an Anarchist, incited to commit the act by Emma Goldman."
To be sure, has she not incited violence even before her birth, and
will she not continue to do so beyond death?  Everything is possible
with the Anarchists.

Today, even, nine years after the tragedy, after it was proven a
hundred times that Emma Goldman had nothing to do with the event,
that no evidence whatsoever exists to indicate that Czolgosz ever
called himself an Anarchist, we are confronted with the same lie,
fabricated by the police and perpetuated by the press.  No living
soul ever heard Czolgosz make that statement, nor is there a single
written word to prove that the boy ever breathed the accusation.
Nothing but ignorance and insane hysteria, which have never yet been
able to solve the simplest problem of cause and effect.

The President of a free Republic killed!  What else can be the cause,
except that the ATTENTATER must have been insane, or that he was
incited to the act.

A free Republic!  How a myth will maintain itself, how it will
continue to deceive, to dupe, and blind even the comparatively
intelligent to its monstrous absurdities.  A free Republic!  And yet
within a little over thirty years a small band of parasites have
successfully robbed the American people, and trampled upon the
fundamental principles, laid down by the fathers of this country,
guaranteeing to every man, woman, and child "life, liberty, and the
pursuit of happiness."  For thirty years they have been increasing
their wealth and power at the expense of the vast mass of workers,
thereby enlarging the army of the unemployed, the hungry, homeless,
and friendless portion of humanity, who are tramping the country from
east to west, from north to south, in a vain search for work.  For
many years the home has been left to the care of the little ones,
while the parents are exhausting their life and strength for a mere
pittance.  For thirty years the sturdy sons of America have been
sacrificed on the battlefield of industrial war, and the daughters
outraged in corrupt factory surroundings.  For long and weary years
this process of undermining the nation's health, vigor, and pride,
without much protest from the disinherited and oppressed, has been
going on.  Maddened by success and victory, the money powers of this
"free land of ours" became more and more audacious in their
heartless, cruel efforts to compete with the rotten and decayed
European tyrannies for supremacy of power.

In vain did a lying press repudiate Leon Czolgosz as a foreigner.
The boy was a product of our own free American soil, that lulled him
to sleep with,

     My country, 'tis of thee,
     Sweet land of liberty.

Who can tell how many times this American child had gloried in the
celebration of the Fourth of July, or of Decoration Day, when he
faithfully honored the Nation's dead?  Who knows but that he, too,
was willing to "fight for his country and die for her liberty," until
it dawned upon him that those he belonged to have no country, because
they have been robbed of all that they have produced; until he
realized that the liberty and independence of his youthful dreams
were but a farce.  Poor Leon Czolgosz, your crime consisted of too
sensitive a social consciousness.  Unlike your idealless and
brainless American brothers, your ideals soared above the belly and
the bank account.  No wonder you impressed the one human being among
all the infuriated mob at your trial--a newspaper woman--as a
visionary, totally oblivious to your surroundings.  Your large,
dreamy eyes must have beheld a new and glorious dawn.

Now, to a recent instance of police-manufactured Anarchist plots.
In that bloodstained city, Chicago, the life of Chief of Police
Shippy was attempted by a young man named Averbuch.  Immediately the
cry was sent to the four corners of the world that Averbuch was an
Anarchist, and that Anarchists were responsible for the act.
Everyone who was at all known to entertain Anarchist ideas was
closely watched, a number of people arrested, the library of an
Anarchist group confiscated, and all meetings made impossible.  It
goes without saying that, as on various previous occasions, I must
needs be held responsible for the act.  Evidently the American police
credit me with occult powers.  I did not know Averbuch; in fact, had
never before heard his name, and the only way I could have possibly
"conspired" with him was in my astral body.  But, then, the police
are not concerned with logic or justice.  What they seek is a target,
to mask their absolute ignorance of the cause, of the psychology of a
political act.  Was Averbuch an Anarchist?  There is no positive
proof of it.  He had been but three months in the country, did not
know the language, and, as far as I could ascertain, was quite
unknown to the Anarchists of Chicago.

What led to his act?  Averbuch, like most young Russian immigrants,
undoubtedly believed in the mythical liberty of America.  He received
his first baptism by the policeman's club during the brutal
dispersement of the unemployed parade.  He further experienced
American equality and opportunity in the vain efforts to find an
economic master.  In short, a three months' sojourn in the glorious
land brought him face to face with the fact that the disinherited are
in the same position the world over.  In his native land he probably
learned that necessity knows no law--there was no difference between
a Russian and an American policeman.

The question to the intelligent social student is not whether the
acts of Czolgosz or Averbuch were practical, any more than whether
the thunderstorm is practical.  The thing that will inevitably
impress itself on the thinking and feeling man and woman is that the
sight of brutal clubbing of innocent victims in a so-called free
Republic, and the degrading, soul-destroying economic struggle,
furnish the spark that kindles the dynamic force in the overwrought,
outraged souls of men like Czolgosz or Averbuch.  No amount of
persecution, of hounding, of repression, can stay this social
phenomenon.

But, it is often asked, have not acknowledged Anarchists committed
acts of violence?  Certainly they have, always however ready to
shoulder the responsibility.  My contention is that they were
impelled, not by the teachings of Anarchism, but by the tremendous
pressure of conditions, making life unbearable to their sensitive
natures.  Obviously, Anarchism, or any other social theory, making
man a conscious social unit, will act as a leaven for rebellion.
This is not a mere assertion, but a fact verified by all experience.
A close examination of the circumstances bearing upon this question
will further clarify my position.

Let us consider some of the most important Anarchist acts within the
last two decades.  Strange as it may seem, one of the most
significant deeds of political violence occurred here in America, in
connection with the Homestead strike of 1892.

During that memorable time the Carnegie Steel Company organized a
conspiracy to crush the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel
Workers.  Henry Clay Frick, then Chairman of the Company, was
intrusted with that democratic task.  He lost no time in carrying out
the policy of breaking the Union, the policy which he had so
successfully practiced during his reign of terror in the coke
regions.  Secretly, and while peace negotiations were being purposely
prolonged, Frick supervised the military preparations, the
fortification of the Homestead Steel Works, the erection of a high
board fence, capped with barbed wire and provided with loopholes for
sharpshooters.  And then, in the dead of night, he attempted to
smuggle his army of hired Pinkerton thugs into Homestead, which act
precipitated the terrible carnage of the steel workers.  Not content
with the death of eleven victims, killed in the Pinkerton skirmish,
Henry Clay Frick, good Christian and free American, straightway began
the hounding down of the helpless wives and orphans, by ordering them
out of the wretched Company houses.

The whole country was aroused over these inhuman outrages.  Hundreds
of voices were raised in protest, calling on Frick to desist, not to
go too far.  Yes, hundreds of people protested,--as one objects to
annoying flies.  Only one there was who actively responded to the
outrage at Homestead,--Alexander Berkman.  Yes, he was an Anarchist.
He gloried in that fact, because it was the only force that made the
discord between his spiritual longing and the world without at all
bearable.  Yet not Anarchism, as such, but the brutal slaughter of
the eleven steel workers was the urge for Alexander Berkman's act,
his attempt on the life of Henry Clay Frick.

The record of European acts of political violence affords numerous
and striking instances of the influence of environment upon sensitive
human beings.

The court speech of Vaillant, who, in 1894, exploded a bomb in the
Paris Chamber of Deputies, strikes the true keynote of the psychology
of such acts:

"Gentlemen, in a few minutes you are to deal your blow, but in
receiving your verdict I shall have at least the satisfaction of
having wounded the existing society, that cursed society in which one
may see a single man spending, uselessly, enough to feed thousands of
families; an infamous society which permits a few individuals to
monopolize all the social wealth, while there are hundreds of
thousands of unfortunates who have not even the bread that is not
refused to dogs, and while entire families are committing suicide for
want of the necessities of life.

"Ah, gentlemen, if the governing classes could go down among the
unfortunates!  But no, they prefer to remain deaf to their appeals.
It seems that a fatality impels them, like the royalty of the
eighteenth century, toward the precipice which will engulf them, for
woe be to those who remain deaf to the cries of the starving, woe to
those who, believing themselves of superior essence, assume the right
to exploit those beneath them!  There comes a time when the people no
longer reason; they rise like a hurricane, and pass away like a
torrent.  Then we see bleeding heads impaled on pikes.

"Among the exploited, gentlemen, there are two classes of
individuals: Those of one class, not realizing what they are and what
they might be, take life as it comes, believe that they are born to
be slaves, and content themselves with the little that is given them
in exchange for their labor.  But there are others, on the contrary,
who think, who study, and who, looking about them, discover social
iniquities.  Is it their fault if they see clearly and suffer at
seeing others suffer?  Then they throw themselves into the struggle,
and make themselves the bearers of the popular claims.

"Gentlemen, I am one of these last.  Wherever I have gone, I have
seen unfortunates bent beneath the yoke of capital.  Everywhere I
have seen the same wounds causing tears of blood to flow, even in the
remoter parts of the inhabited districts of South America, where I
had the right to believe that he who was weary of the pains of
civilization might rest in the shade of the palm trees and there
study nature.  Well, there even, more than elsewhere, I have seen
capital come, like a vampire, to suck the last drop of blood of the
unfortunate pariahs.

"Then I came back to France, where it was reserved for me to see my
family suffer atrociously.  This was the last drop in the cup of my
sorrow.  Tired of leading this life of suffering and cowardice, I
carried this bomb to those who are primarily responsible for social
sufferings.

"I am reproached with the wounds of those who were hit by my
projectiles.  Permit me to point out in passing that, if the
bourgeois had not massacred or caused massacres during the
Revolution, it is probable that they would still be under the yoke of
the nobility.  On the other hand, figure up the dead and wounded on
Tonquin, Madagascar, Dahomey, adding thereto the thousands, yes,
millions of unfortunates who die in the factories, the mines, and
wherever the grinding power of capital is felt.  Add also those who
die of hunger, and all this with the assent of our Deputies.  Beside
all this, of how little weight are the reproaches now brought against
me!

"It is true that one does not efface the other; but, after all, are
we not acting on the defensive when we respond to the blows which we
receive from above?  I know very well that I shall be told that I
ought to have confined myself to speech for the vindication of the
people's claims.  But what can you expect!  It takes a loud voice to
make the deaf hear.  Too long have they answered our voices by
imprisonment, the rope, rifle volleys.  Make no mistake; the
explosion of my bomb is not only the cry of the rebel Vaillant, but
the cry of an entire class which vindicates its rights, and which
will soon add acts to words.  For, be sure of it, in vain will they
pass laws.  The ideas of the thinkers will not halt; just as, in the
last century, all the governmental forces could not prevent the
Diderots and the Voltaires from spreading emancipating ideas among
the people, so all the existing governmental forces will not prevent
the Reclus, the Darwins, the Spencers, the Ibsens, the Mirbeaus, from
spreading the ideas of justice and liberty which will annihilate the
prejudices that hold the mass in ignorance.  And these ideas,
welcomed by the unfortunate, will flower in acts of revolt as they
have done in me, until the day when the disappearance of authority
shall permit all men to organize freely according to their choice,
when we shall each be able to enjoy the product of his labor, and
when those moral maladies called prejudices shall vanish, permitting
human beings to live in harmony, having no other desire than to study
the sciences and love their fellows.

"I conclude, gentlemen, by saying that a society in which one sees
such social inequalities as we see all about us, in which we see
every day suicides caused by poverty, prostitution flaring at every
street corner,--a society whose principal monuments are barracks and
prisons,--such a society must be transformed as soon as possible, on
pain of being eliminated, and that speedily, from the human race.
Hail to him who labors, by no matter what means, for this
transformation!  It is this idea that has guided me in my duel with
authority, but as in this duel I have only wounded my adversary, it
is now its turn to strike me.

"Now, gentlemen, to me it matters little what penalty you may
inflict, for, looking at this assembly with the eyes of reason, I can
not help smiling to see you, atoms lost in matter, and reasoning only
because you possess a prolongation of the spinal marrow, assume the
right to judge one of your fellows.

"Ah! gentlemen, how little a thing is your assembly and your verdict
in the history of humanity; and human history, in its turn, is
likewise a very little thing in the whirlwind which bears it through
immensity, and which is destined to disappear, or at least to be
transformed, in order to begin again the same history and the same
facts, a veritably perpetual play of cosmic forces renewing and
transferring themselves forever."

Will anyone say that Vaillant was an ignorant, vicious man, or a
lunatic?  Was not his mind singularly clear, analytic?  No wonder
that the best intellectual forces of France spoke in his behalf, and
signed the petition to President Carnot, asking him to commute
Vaillant's death sentence.

Carnot would listen to no entreaty; he insisted on more than a pound
of flesh, he wanted Vaillant's life, and then--the inevitable
happened: President Carnot was killed.  On the handle of the stiletto
used by the ATTENTATER was engraved, significantly,

                            VAILLANT!


Santa Caserio was an Anarchist.  He could have gotten away, saved
himself; but he remained, he stood the consequences.

His reasons for the act are set forth in so simple, dignified, and
childlike manner that one is reminded of the touching tribute paid
Caserio by his teacher of the little village school, Ada Negri, the
Italian poet, who spoke of him as a sweet, tender plant, of too fine
and sensitive texture to stand the cruel strain of the world.

"Gentlemen of the Jury!  I do not propose to make a defense, but only
an explanation of my deed.

"Since my early youth I began to learn that present society is badly
organized, so badly that every day many wretched men commit suicide,
leaving women and children in the most terrible distress.  Workers,
by thousands, seek for work and can not find it.  Poor families beg
for food and shiver with cold; they suffer the greatest misery; the
little ones ask their miserable mothers for food, and the mothers
can not give them, because they have nothing.  The few things
which the home contained have already been sold or pawned.  All they
can do is beg alms; often they are arrested as vagabonds.

"I went away from my native place because I was frequently moved to
tears at seeing little girls of eight or ten years obliged to work
fifteen hours a day for the paltry pay of twenty centimes.  Young
women of eighteen or twenty also work fifteen hours daily, for a
mockery of remuneration.  And that happens not only to my fellow
countrymen, but to all the workers, who sweat the whole day long for
a crust of bread, while their labor produces wealth in abundance.
The workers are obliged to live under the most wretched conditions,
and their food consists of a little bread, a few spoonfuls of rice,
and water; so by the time they are thirty or forty years old, they
are exhausted, and go to die in the hospitals.  Besides, in
consequence of bad food and overwork, these unhappy creatures are, by
hundreds, devoured by pellagra--a disease that, in my country,
attacks, as the physicians say, those who are badly fed and lead a
life of toil and privation.

"I have observed that there are a great many people who are hungry,
and many children who suffer, whilst bread and clothes abound in the
towns.  I saw many and large shops full of clothing and woolen
stuffs, and I also saw warehouses full of wheat and Indian corn,
suitable for those who are in want.  And, on the other hand, I saw
thousands of people who do not work, who produce nothing and live on
the labor of others; who spend every day thousands of francs for
their amusement; who debauch the daughters of the workers; who own
dwellings of forty or fifty rooms; twenty or thirty horses, many
servants; in a word, all the pleasures of life.

"I believed in God; but when I saw so great an inequality between
men, I acknowledged that it was not God who created man, but man who
created God.  And I discovered that those who want their property to
be respected, have an interest in preaching the existence of paradise
and hell, and in keeping the people in ignorance.

"Not long ago, Vaillant threw a bomb in the Chamber of Deputies, to
protest against the present system of society.  He killed no one,
only wounded some persons; yet bourgeois justice sentenced him to
death.  And not satisfied with the condemnation of the guilty man,
they began to pursue the Anarchists, and arrest not only those who
had known Vaillant, but even those who had merely been present at any
Anarchist lecture.

"The government did not think of their wives and children.  It did
not consider that the men kept in prison were not the only ones who
suffered, and that their little ones cried for bread.  Bourgeois
justice did not trouble itself about these innocent ones, who do not
yet know what society is.  It is no fault of theirs that their
fathers are in prison; they only want to eat.

"The government went on searching private houses, opening private
letters, forbidding lectures and meetings, and practicing the most
infamous oppressions against us.  Even now, hundreds of Anarchists
are arrested for having written an article in a newspaper, or for
having expressed an opinion in public.

"Gentlemen of the Jury, you are representatives of bourgeois society.
If you want my head, take it; but do not believe that in so doing you
will stop the Anarchist propaganda.  Take care, for men reap what
they have sown."

During a religious procession in 1896, at Barcelona, a bomb was
thrown.  Immediately three hundred men and women were arrested.
Some were Anarchists, but the majority were trade unionists and
Socialists.  They were thrown into that terrible bastille, Montjuich,
and subjected to most horrible tortures.  After a number had been
killed, or had gone insane, their cases were taken up by the liberal
press of Europe, resulting in the release of a few survivors.

The man primarily responsible for this revival of the Inquisition was
Canovas del Castillo, Prime Minister of Spain.  It was he who ordered
the torturing of the victims, their flesh burned, their bones
crushed, their tongues cut out.  Practiced in the art of brutality
during his regime in Cuba, Canovas remained absolutely deaf to the
appeals and protests of the awakened civilized conscience.

In 1897 Canovas del Castillo was shot to death by a young Italian,
Angiolillo.  The latter was an editor in his native land, and his
bold utterances soon attracted the attention of the authorities.
Persecution began, and Angiolillo fled from Italy to Spain, thence to
France and Belgium, finally settling in England.  While there he
found employment as a compositor, and immediately became the friend
of all his colleagues.  One of the latter thus described Angiolillo:
"His appearance suggested the journalist rather than the disciple of
Guttenberg.  His delicate hands, moreover, betrayed the fact that he
had not grown up at the 'case.' With his handsome frank face, his
soft dark hair, his alert expression, he looked the very type of the
vivacious Southerner.  Angiolillo spoke Italian, Spanish, and French,
but no English; the little French I knew was not sufficient to carry
on a prolonged conversation.  However, Angiolillo soon began to
acquire the English idiom; he learned rapidly, playfully, and it was
not long until he became very popular with his fellow compositors.
His distinguished and yet modest manner, and his consideration
towards his colleagues, won him the hearts of all the boys."

Angiolillo soon became familiar with the detailed accounts in the
press.  He read of the great wave of human sympathy with the helpless
victims at Montjuich.  On Trafalgar Square he saw with his own eyes
the results of those atrocities, when the few Spaniards, who escaped
Castillo's clutches, came to seek asylum in England.  There, at the
great meeting, these men opened their shirts and showed the horrible
scars of burned flesh.  Angiolillo saw, and the effect surpassed a
thousand theories; the impetus was beyond words, beyond arguments,
beyond himself even.

Senor Antonio Canovas del Castillo, Prime Minister of Spain,
sojourned at Santa Agueda.  As usual in such cases, all strangers
were kept away from his exalted presence.  One exception was made,
however, in the case of a distinguished looking, elegantly dressed
Italian--the representative, it was understood, of an important
journal.  The distinguished gentleman was--Angiolillo.

Senor Canovas, about to leave his house, stepped on the veranda.
Suddenly Angiolillo confronted him.  A shot rang out, and Canovas was
a corpse.

The wife of the Prime Minister rushed upon the scene.  "Murderer!
Murderer!" she cried, pointing at Angiolillo.  The latter bowed.
"Pardon, Madame," he said, "I respect you as a lady, but I regret
that you were the wife of that man."

Calmly Angiolillo faced death.  Death in its most terrible form--for
the man whose soul was as a child's.

He was garroted.  His body lay, sun-kissed, till the day hid in
twilight.  And the people came, and pointing the finger of terror and
fear, they said: "There--the criminal--the cruel murderer."

How stupid, how cruel is ignorance!  It misunderstands always,
condemns always.

A remarkable parallel to the case of Angiolillo is to be found in the
act of Gaetano Bresci, whose ATTENTAT upon King Umberto made an
American city famous.

Bresci came to this country, this land of opportunity, where one has
but to try to meet with golden success.  Yes, he too would try to
succeed.  He would work hard and faithfully.  Work had no terrors
for him, if it would only help him to independence, manhood,
self-respect.

Thus full of hope and enthusiasm he settled in Paterson, New Jersey,
and there found a lucrative job at six dollars per week in one of the
weaving mills of the town.  Six whole dollars per week was, no doubt,
a fortune for Italy, but not enough to breathe on in the new country.
He loved his little home.  He was a good husband and devoted father
to his BAMBINA, Bianca, whom he adored.  He worked and worked for a
number of years.  He actually managed to save one hundred dollars out
of his six dollars per week.

Bresci had an ideal.  Foolish, I know, for a workingman to have an
ideal,--the Anarchist paper published in Paterson, LA QUESTIONE
SOCIALE.

Every week, though tired from work, he would help to set up the
paper.  Until later hours he would assist, and when the little
pioneer had exhausted all resources and his comrades were in despair,
Bresci brought cheer and hope, one hundred dollars, the entire
savings of years.  That would keep the paper afloat.

In his native land people were starving.  The crops had been poor,
and the peasants saw themselves face to face with famine.  They
appealed to their good King Umberto; he would help.  And he did.
The wives of the peasants who had gone to the palace of the King,
held up in mute silence their emaciated infants.  Surely that would
move him.  And then the soldiers fired and killed those poor fools.

Bresci, at work in the weaving mill at Paterson, read of the horrible
massacre.  His mental eye beheld the defenceless women and innocent
infants of his native land, slaughtered right before the good King.
His soul recoiled in horror.  At night he heard the groans of the
wounded.  Some may have been his comrades, his own flesh.  Why, why
these foul murders?

The little meeting of the Italian Anarchist group in Paterson ended
almost in a fight.  Bresci had demanded his hundred dollars.  His
comrades begged, implored him to give them a respite.  The paper
would go down if they were to return him his loan.  But Bresci
insisted on its return.

How cruel and stupid is ignorance.  Bresci got the money, but lost
the good will, the confidence of his comrades.  They would have
nothing more to do with one whose greed was greater than his ideals.

On the twenty-ninth of July, 1900, King Umberto was shot at Monzo.
The young Italian weaver of Paterson, Gaetano Bresci, had taken the
life of the good King.

Paterson was placed under police surveillance, everyone known as an
Anarchist hounded and persecuted, and the act of Bresci ascribed to
the teachings of Anarchism.  As if the teachings of Anarchism in its
extremest form could equal the force of those slain women and
infants, who had pilgrimed to the King for aid.  As if any spoken
word, ever so eloquent, could burn into a human soul with such white
heat as the life blood trickling drop by drop from those dying forms.
The ordinary man is rarely moved either by word or deed; and those
whose social kinship is the greatest living force need no appeal to
respond--even as does steel to the magnet--to the wrongs and horrors
of society.

If a social theory is a strong factor inducing acts of political
violence, how are we to account for the recent violent outbreaks in
India, where Anarchism has hardly been born.  More than any other old
philosophy, Hindu teachings have exalted passive resistance, the
drifting of life, the Nirvana, as the highest spiritual ideal.  Yet
the social unrest in India is daily growing, and has only recently
resulted in an act of political violence, the killing of Sir Curzon
Wyllie by the Hindu, Madar Sol Dhingra.

If such a phenomenon can occur in a country socially and individually
permeated for centuries with the spirit of passivity, can one
question the tremendous, revolutionizing effect on human character
exerted by great social iniquities?  Can one doubt the logic, the
justice of these words:

"Repression, tyranny, and indiscriminate punishment of innocent men
have been the watchwords of the government of the alien domination in
India ever since we began the commercial boycott of English goods.
The tiger qualities of the British are much in evidence now in India.
They think that by the strength of the sword they will keep down
India!  It is this arrogance that has brought about the bomb, and the
more they tyrannize over a helpless and unarmed people, the more
terrorism will grow.  We may deprecate terrorism as outlandish and
foreign to our culture, but it is inevitable as long as this tyranny
continues, for it is not the terrorists that are to be blamed, but
the tyrants who are responsible for it.  It is the only resource for
a helpless and unarmed people when brought to the verge of despair.
It is never criminal on their part.  The crime lies with the
tyrant."[4]

Even conservative scientists are beginning to realize that heredity
is not the sole factor moulding human character.  Climate, food,
occupation; nay, color, light, and sound must be considered in the
study of human psychology.

If that be true, how much more correct is the contention that great
social abuses will and must influence different minds and
temperaments in a different way.  And how utterly fallacious the
stereotyped notion that the teachings of Anarchism, or certain
exponents of these teachings, are responsible for the acts of
political violence.

Anarchism, more than any other social theory, values human life above
things.  All Anarchists agree with Tolstoy in this fundamental truth:
if the production of any commodity necessitates the sacrifice of
human life, society should do without that commodity, but it can not
do without that life.  That, however, nowise indicates that Anarchism
teaches submission.  How can it, when it knows that all suffering,
all misery, all ills, result from the evil of submission?

Has not some American ancestor said, many years ago, that resistance
to tyranny is obedience to God?  And he was not an Anarchist even.
I would say that resistance to tyranny is man's highest ideal.  So
long as tyranny exists, in whatever form, man's deepest aspiration
must resist it as inevitably as man must breathe.

Compared with the wholesale violence of capital and government,
political acts of violence are but a drop in the ocean.  That so few
resist is the strongest proof how terrible must be the conflict
between their souls and unbearable social iniquities.

High strung, like a violin string, they weep and moan for life, so
relentless, so cruel, so terribly inhuman.  In a desperate moment the
string breaks.  Untuned ears hear nothing but discord.  But those who
feel the agonized cry understand its harmony; they hear in it the
fulfillment of the most compelling moment of human nature.

Such is the psychology of political violence.


[1] A revolutionist committing an act of political violence.

[2] PARIS AND THE SOCIAL REVOLUTION.

[3] From a pamphlet issued by the Freedom Group of London.

[4] THE FREE HINDUSTAN.




PRISONS: A SOCIAL CRIME AND FAILURE


In 1849, Feodor Dostoyevsky wrote on the wall of his prison cell the
following story of THE PRIEST AND THE DEVIL:

"'Hello, you little fat father!' the devil said to the priest.
'What made you lie so to those poor, misled people?  What tortures of
hell did you depict?  Don't you know they are already suffering the
tortures of hell in their earthly lives?  Don't you know that you and
the authorities of the State are my representatives on earth?  It is
you that make them suffer the pains of hell with which you threaten
them.  Don't you know this?  Well, then, come with me!'

"The devil grabbed the priest by the collar, lifted him high in the
air, and carried him to a factory, to an iron foundry.  He saw the
workmen there running and hurrying to and fro, and toiling in the
scorching heat.  Very soon the thick, heavy air and the heat are too
much for the priest.  With tears in his eyes, he pleads with the
devil: 'Let me go! Let me leave this hell!'

"'Oh, my dear friend, I must show you many more places.' The devil
gets hold of him again and drags him off to a farm.  There he sees
workmen threshing the grain.  The dust and heat are insufferable.
The overseer carries a knout, and unmercifully beats anyone who falls
to the ground overcome by hard toil or hunger.

"Next the priest is taken to the huts where these same workers live
with their families--dirty, cold, smoky, ill-smelling holes.  The
devil grins.  He points out the poverty and hardships which are at
home here.

"'Well, isn't this enough?' he asks.  And it seems as if even he, the
devil, pities the people.  The pious servant of God can hardly bear
it.  With uplifted hands he begs: 'Let me go away from here.  Yes,
yes!  This is hell on earth!'

"'Well, then, you see.  And you still promise them another hell.
You torment them, torture them to death mentally when they are
already all but dead physically!  Come on!  I will show you one more
hell--one more, the very worst.'

"He took him to a prison and showed him a dungeon, with its foul air
and the many human forms, robbed of all health and energy, lying on
the floor, covered with vermin that were devouring their poor, naked,
emaciated bodies.

"'Take off your silken clothes,' said the devil to the priest, 'put
on your ankles heavy chains such as these unfortunates wear; lie down
on the cold and filthy floor--and then talk to them about a hell that
still awaits them!'

"'No, no!' answered the priest, 'I cannot think of anything more
dreadful than this.  I entreat you, let me go away from here!'

"'Yes, this is hell.  There can be no worse hell than this.  Did you
not know it?  Did you not know that these men and women whom you are
frightening with the picture of a hell hereafter--did you not know
that they are in hell right here, before they die?'"


This was written fifty years ago in dark Russia, on the wall of one
of the most horrible prisons.  Yet who can deny that the same applies
with equal force to the present time, even to American prisons?

With all our boasted reforms, our great social changes, and our
far-reaching discoveries, human beings continue to be sent to the
worst of hells, wherein they are outraged, degraded, and tortured,
that society may be "protected" from the phantoms of its own making.

Prison, a social protection?  What monstrous mind ever conceived such
an idea?  Just as well say that health can be promoted by a
widespread contagion.

After eighteen months of horror in an English prison, Oscar Wilde
gave to the world his great masterpiece, THE BALLAD OF READING GOAL:

          The vilest deeds, like poison weeds,
            Bloom well in prison air;
          It is only what is good in Man
            That wastes and withers there.
          Pale Anguish keeps the heavy gate,
            And the Warder is Despair.

Society goes on perpetuating this poisonous air, not realizing that
out of it can come naught but the most poisonous results.

We are spending at the present $3,500,000 per day, $1,000,095,000 per
year, to maintain prison institutions, and that in a democratic
country,--a sum almost as large as the combined output of wheat,
valued at $750,000,000, and the output of coal, valued at
$350,000,000.  Professor Bushnell of Washington, D.C., estimates the
cost of prisons at $6,000,000,000 annually, and Dr. G. Frank Lydston,
an eminent American writer on crime, gives $5,000,000,000 annually as
a reasonable figure.  Such unheard-of expenditure for the purpose of
maintaining vast armies of human beings caged up like wild beasts![1]

Yet crimes are on the increase.  Thus we learn that in America there
are four and a half times as many crimes to every million population
today as there were twenty years ago.

The most horrible aspect is that our national crime is murder, not
robbery, embezzlement, or rape, as in the South.  London is five
times as large as Chicago, yet there are one hundred and eighteen
murders annually in the latter city, while only twenty in London.
Nor is Chicago the leading city in crime, since it is only seventh on
the list, which is headed by four Southern cities, and San Francisco
and Los Angeles.  In view of such a terrible condition of affairs, it
seems ridiculous to prate of the protection society derives from its
prisons.

The average mind is slow in grasping a truth, but when the most
thoroughly organized, centralized institution, maintained at an
excessive national expense, has proven a complete social failure, the
dullest must begin to question its right to exist.  The time is past
when we can be content with our social fabric merely because it is
"ordained by divine right," or by the majesty of the law.

The widespread prison investigations, agitation, and education during
the last few years are conclusive proof that men are learning to dig
deep into the very bottom of society, down to the causes of the
terrible discrepancy between social and individual life.

Why, then, are prisons a social crime and a failure?  To answer this
vital question it behooves us to seek the nature and cause of crimes,
the methods employed in coping with them, and the effects these
methods produce in ridding society of the curse and horror of crimes.

First, as to the NATURE of crime:

Havelock Ellis divides crime into four phases, the political, the
passional, the insane, and the occasional.  He says that the
political criminal is the victim of an attempt of a more or less
despotic government to preserve its own stability.  He is not
necessarily guilty of an unsocial offense; he simply tries to
overturn a certain political order which may itself be anti-social.
This truth is recognized all over the world, except in America where
the foolish notion still prevails that in a Democracy there is no
place for political criminals.  Yet John Brown was a political
criminal; so were the Chicago Anarchists; so is every striker.
Consequently, says Havelock Ellis, the political criminal of our time
or place may be the hero, martyr, saint of another age.  Lombroso
calls the political criminal the true precursor of the progressive
movement of humanity.

"The criminal by passion is usually a man of wholesome birth and
honest life, who under the stress of some great, unmerited wrong has
wrought justice for himself."[2]

Mr. Hugh C. Weir, in THE MENACE OF THE POLICE, cites the case of Jim
Flaherty, a criminal by passion, who, instead of being saved by
society, is turned into a drunkard and a recidivist, with a ruined
and poverty-stricken family as the result.

A more pathetic type is Archie, the victim in Brand Whitlock's novel,
THE TURN OF THE BALANCE, the greatest American expose of crime in the
making.  Archie, even more than Flaherty, was driven to crime and
death by the cruel inhumanity of his surroundings, and by the
unscrupulous hounding of the machinery of the law.  Archie and
Flaherty are but the types of many thousands, demonstrating how the
legal aspects of crime, and the methods of dealing with it, help to
create the disease which is undermining our entire social life.

"The insane criminal really can no more be considered a criminal than
a child, since he is mentally in the same condition as an infant or
an animal."[3]

The law already recognizes that, but only in rare cases of a very
flagrant nature, or when the culprit's wealth permits the luxury of
criminal insanity.  It has become quite fashionable to be the victim
of paranoia.  But on the whole the "sovereignty of justice" still
continues to punish criminally insane with the whole severity of its
power.  Thus Mr. Ellis quotes from Dr. Richter's statistics showing
that in Germany, one hundred and six madmen, out of one hundred and
forty-four criminal insane, were condemned to severe punishment.

The occasional criminal "represents by far the largest class of our
prison population, hence is the greatest menace to social
well-being."  What is the cause that compels a vast army of the human
family to take to crime, to prefer the hideous life within prison
walls to the life outside?  Certainly that cause must be an iron
master, who leaves its victims no avenue of escape, for the most
depraved human being loves liberty.

This terrific force is conditioned in our cruel social and economic
arrangement.  I do not mean to deny the biologic, physiologic, or
psychologic factors in creating crime; but there is hardly an
advanced criminologist who will not concede that the social and
economic influences are the most relentless, the most poisonous germs
of crime.  Granted even that there are innate criminal tendencies, it
is none the less true that these tendencies find rich nutrition in
our social environment.

There is close relation, says Havelock Ellis, between crimes against
the person and the price of alcohol, between crimes against property
and the price of wheat.  He quotes Quetelet and Lacassagne, the
former looking upon society as the preparer of crime, and the
criminals as instruments that execute them.  The latter find that
"the social environment is the cultivation medium of criminality;
that the criminal is the microbe, an element which only becomes
important when it finds the medium which causes it to ferment; EVERY
SOCIETY HAS THE CRIMINALS IT DESERVES."[4]

The most "prosperous" industrial period makes it impossible for the
worker to earn enough to keep up health and vigor.  And as prosperity
is, at best, an imaginary condition, thousands of people are
constantly added to the host of the unemployed.  From East to West,
from South to North, this vast army tramps in search of work or food,
and all they find is the workhouse or the slums.  Those who have a
spark of self-respect left, prefer open defiance, prefer crime to the
emaciated, degraded position of poverty.

Edward Carpenter estimates that five-sixths of indictable crimes
consist in some violation of property rights; but that is too low a
figure.  A thorough investigation would prove that nine crimes out of
ten could be traced, directly or indirectly, to our economic and
social iniquities, to our system of remorseless exploitation and
robbery.  There is no criminal so stupid but recognizes this terrible
fact, though he may not be able to account for it.

A collection of criminal philosophy, which Havelock Ellis, Lombroso,
and other eminent men have compiled, shows that the criminal feels
only too keenly that it is society that drives him to crime.  A
Milanese thief said to Lombroso: "I do not rob, I merely take from
the rich their superfluities; besides, do not advocates and merchants
rob?"  A murderer wrote: "Knowing that three-fourths of the social
virtues are cowardly vices, I thought an open assault on a rich man
would be less ignoble than the cautious combination of fraud."
Another wrote: "I am imprisoned for stealing a half dozen eggs.
Ministers who rob millions are honored.  Poor Italy!" An educated
convict said to Mr. Davitt: "The laws of society are framed for the
purpose of securing the wealth of the world to power and calculation,
thereby depriving the larger portion of mankind of its rights and
chances.  Why should they punish me for taking by somewhat similar
means from those who have taken more than they had a right to?"  The
same man added: "Religion robs the soul of its independence;
patriotism is the stupid worship of the world for which the
well-being and the peace of the inhabitants were sacrificed by those
who profit by it, while the laws of the land, in restraining natural
desires, were waging war on the manifest spirit of the law of our
beings.  Compared with this," he concluded, "thieving is an honorable
pursuit."[5]

Verily, there is greater truth in this philosophy than in all the
law-and-moral books of society.


The economic, political, moral, and physical factors being the
microbes of crime, how does society meet the situation?

The methods of coping with crime have no doubt undergone several
changes, but mainly in a theoretic sense.  In practice, society has
retained the primitive motive in dealing with the offender; that is,
revenge.  It has also adopted the theologic idea; namely, punishment;
while the legal and "civilized" methods consist of deterrence or
terror, and reform.  We shall presently see that all four modes have
failed utterly, and that we are today no nearer a solution than in
the dark ages.

The natural impulse of the primitive man to strike back, to avenge a
wrong, is out of date.  Instead, the civilized man, stripped of
courage and daring, has delegated to an organized machinery the duty
of avenging his wrongs, in the foolish belief that the State is
justified in doing what he no longer has the manhood or consistency
to do.  The majesty-of-the-law is a reasoning thing; it would not
stoop to primitive instincts.  Its mission is of a "higher" nature.
True, it is still steeped in the theologic muddle, which proclaims
punishment as a means of purification, or the vicarious atonement of
sin.  But legally and socially the statute exercises punishment, not
merely as an infliction of pain upon the offender, but also for its
terrifying effect upon others.

What is the real basis of punishment, however?  The notion of a free
will, the idea that man is at all times a free agent for good or
evil; if he chooses the latter, he must be made to pay the price.
Although this theory has long been exploded, and thrown upon the
dustheap, it continues to be applied daily by the entire machinery of
government, turning it into the most cruel and brutal tormentor of
human life.  The only reason for its continuance is the still more
cruel notion that the greater the terror punishment spreads, the more
certain its preventative effect.

Society is using the most drastic methods in dealing with the social
offender.  Why do they not deter?  Although in America a man is
supposed to be considered innocent until proven guilty, the
instruments of law, the police, carry on a reign of terror, making
indiscriminate arrests, beating, clubbing, bullying people, using the
barbarous method of the "third degree," subjecting their unfortunate
victims to the foul air of the station house, and the still fouler
language of its guardians.  Yet crimes are rapidly multiplying, and
society is paying the price.  On the other hand, it is an open secret
that when the unfortunate citizen has been given the full "mercy" of
the law, and for the sake of safety is hidden in the worst of hells,
his real Calvary begins.  Robbed of his rights as a human being,
degraded to a mere automaton without will or feeling, dependent
entirely upon the mercy of brutal keepers, he daily goes through a
process of dehumanization, compared with which savage revenge was
mere child's play.

There is not a single penal institution or reformatory in the United
States where men are not tortured "to be made good," by means of the
blackjack, the club, the straightjacket, the water-cure, the "humming
bird" (an electrical contrivance run along the human body), the
solitary, the bullring, and starvation diet.  In these institutions
his will is broken, his soul degraded, his spirit subdued by the
deadly monotony and routine of prison life.  In Ohio, Illinois,
Pennsylvania, Missouri, and in the South, these horrors have become
so flagrant as to reach the outside world, while in most other
prisons the same Christian methods still prevail.  But prison walls
rarely allow the agonized shrieks of the victims to escape--prison
walls are thick, they dull the sound.  Society might with greater
immunity abolish all prisons at once, than to hope for protection
from these twentieth century chambers of horrors.

Year after year the gates of prison hells return to the world an
emaciated, deformed, willless, ship-wrecked crew of humanity, with
the Cain mark on their foreheads, their hopes crushed, all their
natural inclinations thwarted.  With nothing but hunger and
inhumanity to greet them, these victims soon sink back into crime as
the only possibility of existence.  It is not at all an unusual thing
to find men and women who have spent half their lives--nay, almost
their entire existence--in prison.  I know a woman on Blackwell's
Island, who had been in and out thirty-eight times; and through a
friend I learn that a young boy of seventeen, whom he had nursed and
cared for in the Pittsburg penitentiary, had never known the meaning
of liberty.  From the reformatory to the penitentiary had been the
path of this boy's life, until, broken in body, he died a victim of
social revenge.  These personal experiences are substantiated by
extensive data giving overwhelming proof of the utter futility of
prisons as a means of deterrence or reform.

Well-meaning persons are now working for a new departure in the
prison question,--reclamation, to restore once more to the prisoner
the possibility of becoming a human being.  Commendable as this is, I
fear it is impossible to hope for good results from pouring good wine
into a musty bottle.  Nothing short of a complete reconstruction of
society will deliver mankind from the cancer of crime.  Still, if the
dull edge of our social conscience would be sharpened, the penal
institutions might be given a new coat of varnish.  But the first
step to be taken is the renovation of the social consciousness, which
is in a rather dilapidated condition.  It is sadly in need to be
awakened to the fact that crime is a question of degree, that we all
have the rudiments of crime in us, more or less, according to our
mental, physical, and social environment; and that the individual
criminal is merely a reflex of the tendencies of the aggregate.


With the social consciousness awakened, the average individual may
learn to refuse the "honor" of being the bloodhound of the law.  He
may cease to persecute, despise, and mistrust the social offender,
and give him a chance to live and breathe among his fellows.
Institutions are, of course, harder to reach.  They are cold,
impenetrable, and cruel; still, with the social consciousness
quickened, it might be possible to free the prison victims from the
brutality of prison officials, guards, and keepers.  Public opinion
is a powerful weapon; keepers of human prey, even, are afraid of it.
They may be taught a little humanity, especially if they realize that
their jobs depend upon it.


But the most important step is to demand for the prisoner the right
to work while in prison, with some monetary recompense that would
enable him to lay aside a little for the day of his release, the
beginning of a new life.

It is almost ridiculous to hope much from present society when we
consider that workingmen, wage slaves themselves, object to convict
labor.  I shall not go into the cruelty of this objection, but merely
consider the impracticability of it.  To begin with, the opposition
so far raised by organized labor has been directed against windmills.
Prisoners have always worked; only the State has been their
exploiter, even as the individual employer has been the robber of
organized labor.  The States have either set the convicts to work for
the government, or they have farmed convict labor to private
individuals.  Twenty-nine of the States pursue the latter plan.  The
Federal government and seventeen States have discarded it, as have
the leading nations of Europe, since it leads to hideous overworking
and abuse of prisoners, and to endless graft.

Rhode Island, the State dominated by Aldrich, offers perhaps the
worst example.  Under a five-year contract, dated July 7th, 1906, and
renewable for five years more at the option of private contractors,
the labor of the inmates of the Rhode Island Penitentiary and the
Providence County Jail is sold to the Reliance-Sterling Mfg. Co. at
the rate of a trifle less than 25 cents a day per man.  This Company
is really a gigantic Prison Labor Trust, for it also leases the
convict labor of Connecticut, Michigan, Indiana, Nebraska, and South
Dakota penitentiaries, and the reformatories of New Jersey, Indiana,
Illinois, and Wisconsin, eleven establishments in all.

The enormity of the graft under the Rhode Island contract may be
estimated from the fact that this same Company pays 62 1/2 cents a
day in Nebraska for the convict's labor, and that Tennessee, for
example, gets $1.10 a day for a convict's work from the Gray-Dudley
Hardware Co.; Missouri gets 70 cents a day from the Star Overall Mfg.
Co.; West Virginia 65 cents a day from the Kraft Mfg. Co., and
Maryland 55 cents a day from Oppenheim, Oberndorf & Co., shirt
manufacturers.  The very difference in prices points to enormous
graft.  For example, the Reliance-Sterling Mfg. Co. manufactures
shirts, the cost of free labor being not less than $1.20 per dozen,
while it pays Rhode Island thirty cents a dozen.  Furthermore, the
State charges this Trust no rent for the use of its huge factory,
charges nothing for power, heat, light, or even drainage, and exacts
no taxes.  What graft!

It is estimated that more than twelve million dollars' worth of
workingmen's shirts and overalls is produced annually in this country
by prison labor.  It is a woman's industry, and the first reflection
that arises is that an immense amount of free female labor is thus
displaced.  The second consideration is that male convicts, who
should be learning trades that would give them some chance of being
self-supporting after their release, are kept at this work at which
they can not possibly make a dollar.  This is the more serious when
we consider that much of this labor is done in reformatories, which
so loudly profess to be training their inmates to become useful
citizens.

The third, and most important, consideration is that the enormous
profits thus wrung from convict labor are a constant incentive to the
contractors to exact from their unhappy victims tasks altogether
beyond their strength, and to punish them cruelly when their work
does not come up to the excessive demands made.

Another word on the condemnation of convicts to tasks at which they
cannot hope to make a living after release.  Indiana, for example, is
a State that has made a great splurge over being in the front rank of
modern penological improvements.  Yet, according to the report
rendered in 1908 by the training school of its "reformatory," 135
were engaged in the manufacture of chains, 207 in that of shirts, and
255 in the foundry--a total of 597 in three occupations.  But at this
so-called reformatory 59 occupations were represented by the inmates,
39 of which were connected with country pursuits.  Indiana, like
other States, professes to be training the inmates of her reformatory
to occupations by which they will be able to make their living when
released.  She actually sets them to work making chains, shirts, and
brooms, the latter for the benefit of the Louisville Fancy Grocery
Co.  Broom making is a trade largely monopolized by the blind, shirt
making is done by women, and there is only one free chain factory in
the State, and at that a released convict can not hope to get
employment.  The whole thing is a cruel farce.

If, then, the States can be instrumental in robbing their helpless
victims of such tremendous profits, is it not high time for organized
labor to stop its idle howl, and to insist on decent remuneration for
the convict, even as labor organizations claim for themselves?  In
that way workingmen would kill the germ which makes of the prisoner
an enemy to the interests of labor.  I have said elsewhere that
thousands of convicts, incompetent and without a trade, without means
of subsistence, are yearly turned back into the social fold.  These
men and women must live, for even an ex-convict has needs.  Prison
life has made them anti-social beings, and the rigidly closed doors
that meet them on their release are not likely to decrease their
bitterness.  The inevitable result is that they form a favorable
nucleus out of which scabs, blacklegs, detectives, and policemen are
drawn, only too willing to do the master's bidding.  Thus organized
labor, by its foolish opposition to work in prison, defeats its own
ends.  It helps to create poisonous fumes that stifle every attempt
for economic betterment.  If the workingman wants to avoid these
effects, he should INSIST on the right of the convict to work, he
should meet him as a brother, take him into his organization, and
WITH HIS AID TURN AGAINST THE SYSTEM WHICH GRINDS THEM BOTH.


Last, but not least, is the growing realization of the barbarity and
the inadequacy of the definite sentence.  Those who believe in, and
earnestly aim at, a change are fast coming to the conclusion that man
must be given an opportunity to make good.  And how is he to do it
with ten, fifteen, or twenty years' imprisonment before him?  The
hope of liberty and of opportunity is the only incentive to life,
especially the prisoner's life.  Society has sinned so long against
him--it ought at least to leave him that.  I am not very sanguine
that it will, or that any real change in that direction can take
place until the conditions that breed both the prisoner and the
jailer will be forever abolished.

     Out of his mouth a red, red rose!
     Out of his heart a white!
     For who can say by what strange way
     Christ brings his will to light,
     Since the barren staff the pilgrim bore
     Bloomed in the great Pope's sight.


[1] CRIME AND CRIMINALS.  W. C. Owen.

[2] THE CRIMINAL, Havelock Ellis.

[3] THE CRIMINAL.

[4] THE CRIMINAL.

[5] THE CRIMINAL.




PATRIOTISM: A MENACE TO LIBERTY


What is patriotism?  Is it love of one's birthplace, the place of
childhood's recollections and hopes, dreams and aspirations?  Is it
the place where, in childlike naivety, we would watch the fleeting
clouds, and wonder why we, too, could not run so swiftly?  The place
where we would count the milliard glittering stars, terror-stricken
lest each one "an eye should be," piercing the very depths of our
little souls?  Is it the place where we would listen to the music of
the birds, and long to have wings to fly, even as they, to distant
lands?  Or the place where we would sit at mother's knee, enraptured
by wonderful tales of great deeds and conquests?  In short, is it
love for the spot, every inch representing dear and precious
recollections of a happy, joyous, and playful childhood?

If that were patriotism, few American men of today could be called
upon to be patriotic, since the place of play has been turned into
factory, mill, and mine, while deafening sounds of machinery have
replaced the music of the birds.  Nor can we longer hear the tales of
great deeds, for the stories our mothers tell today are but those of
sorrow, tears, and grief.

What, then, is patriotism?  "Patriotism, sir, is the last resort of
scoundrels," said Dr. Johnson.  Leo Tolstoy, the greatest
anti-patriot of our times, defines patriotism as the principle that
will justify the training of wholesale murderers; a trade that
requires better equipment for the exercise of man-killing than the
making of such necessities of life as shoes, clothing, and houses; a
trade that guarantees better returns and greater glory than that of
the average workingman.

Gustave Herve, another great anti-patriot, justly calls patriotism a
superstition--one far more injurious, brutal, and inhumane than
religion.  The superstition of religion originated in man's inability
to explain natural phenomena.  That is, when primitive man heard
thunder or saw the lightning, he could not account for either, and
therefore concluded that back of them must be a force greater than
himself.  Similarly he saw a supernatural force in the rain, and in
the various other changes in nature.  Patriotism, on the other hand,
is a superstition artificially created and maintained through a
network of lies and falsehoods; a superstition that robs man of his
self-respect and dignity, and increases his arrogance and conceit.

Indeed, conceit, arrogance, and egotism are the essentials of
patriotism.  Let me illustrate.  Patriotism assumes that our globe is
divided into little spots, each one surrounded by an iron gate.
Those who have had the fortune of being born on some particular spot,
consider themselves better, nobler, grander, more intelligent than
the living beings inhabiting any other spot.  It is, therefore, the
duty of everyone living on that chosen spot to fight, kill, and die
in the attempt to impose his superiority upon all the others.

The inhabitants of the other spots reason in like manner, of course,
with the result that, from early infancy, the mind of the child is
poisoned with blood-curdling stories about the Germans, the French,
the Italians, Russians, etc.  When the child has reached manhood, he
is thoroughly saturated with the belief that he is chosen by the Lord
himself to defend HIS country against the attack or invasion of any
foreigner.  It is for that purpose that we are clamoring for a
greater army and navy, more battleships and ammunition.  It is for
that purpose that America has within a short time spent four hundred
million dollars.  Just think of it--four hundred million dollars
taken from the produce of the PEOPLE.  For surely it is not the rich
who contribute to patriotism.  They are cosmopolitans, perfectly at
home in every land.  We in America know well the truth of this.  Are
not our rich Americans Frenchmen in France, Germans in Germany, or
Englishmen in England?  And do they not squander with cosmopolitan
grace fortunes coined by American factory children and cotton slaves?
Yes, theirs is the patriotism that will make it possible to send
messages of condolence to a despot like the Russian Tsar, when any
mishap befalls him, as President Roosevelt did in the name of HIS
people, when Sergius was punished by the Russian revolutionists.

It is a patriotism that will assist the arch-murderer, Diaz, in
destroying thousands of lives in Mexico, or that will even aid in
arresting Mexican revolutionists on American soil and keep them
incarcerated in American prisons, without the slightest cause or
reason.

But, then, patriotism is not for those who represent wealth and
power.  It is good enough for the people.  It reminds one of the
historic wisdom of Frederic the Great, the bosom friend of Voltaire,
who said: "Religion is a fraud, but it must be maintained for the
masses."

That patriotism is rather a costly institution, no one will doubt
after considering the following statistics.  The progressive increase
of the expenditures for the leading armies and navies of the world
during the last quarter of a century is a fact of such gravity as to
startle every thoughtful student of economic problems.  It may be
briefly indicated by dividing the time from 1881 to 1905 into
five-year periods, and noting the disbursements of several great
nations for army and navy purposes during the first and last of those
periods.  From the first to the last of the periods noted the
expenditures of Great Britain increased from $2,101,848,936 to
$4,143,226,885, those of France from $3,324,500,000 to
$3,455,109,900, those of Germany from $725,000,200 to $2,700,375,600,
those of the United States from $1,275,500,750 to $2,650,900,450,
those of Russia from $1,900,975,500 to $5,250,445,100, those of Italy
from $1,600,975,750 to $1,755,500,100, and those of Japan from
$182,900,500 to $700,925,475.

The military expenditures of each of the nations mentioned increased
in each of the five-year periods under review.  During the entire
interval from 1881 to 1905 Great Britain's outlay for her army
increased fourfold, that of the United States was tripled, Russia's
was doubled, that of Germany increased 35 per cent., that of France
about 15 per cent., and that of Japan nearly 500 per cent.  If we
compare the expenditures of these nations upon their armies with
their total expenditures for all the twenty-five years ending with
1905, the proportion rose as follows:

In Great Britain from 20 per cent. to 37; in the United States from
15 to 23; in France from 16 to 18; in Italy from 12 to 15; in Japan
from 12 to 14.  On the other hand, it is interesting to note that the
proportion in Germany decreased from about 58 per cent. to 25, the
decrease being due to the enormous increase in the imperial
expenditures for other purposes, the fact being that the army
expenditures for the period of 1901-5 were higher than for any
five-year period preceding.  Statistics show that the countries in
which army expenditures are greatest, in proportion to the total
national revenues, are Great Britain, the United States, Japan,
France, and Italy, in the order named.

The showing as to the cost of great navies is equally impressive.
During the twenty-five years ending with 1905 naval expenditures
increased approximately as follows: Great Britain, 300 per cent.;
France 60 per cent.; Germany 600 per cent.; the United States 525 per
cent.; Russia 300 per cent.; Italy 250 per cent.; and Japan, 700 per
cent.  With the exception of Great Britain, the United States spends
more for naval purposes than any other nation, and this expenditure
bears also a larger proportion to the entire national disbursements
than that of any other power.  In the period 1881-5, the expenditure
for the United States navy was $6.20 out of each $100 appropriated
for all national purposes; the amount rose to $6.60 for the next
five-year period, to $8.10 for the next, to $11.70 for the next, and
to $16.40 for 1901-5.  It is morally certain that the outlay for the
current period of five years will show a still further increase.

The rising cost of militarism may be still further illustrated by
computing it as a per capita tax on population.  From the first to
the last of the five-year periods taken as the basis for the
comparisons here given, it has risen as follows: In Great Britain,
from $18.47 to $52.50; in France, from $19.66 to $23.62; in Germany,
from $10.17 to $15.51; in the United States, from $5.62 to $13.64; in
Russia, from $6.14 to $8.37; in Italy, from $9.59 to $11.24, and in
Japan from 86 cents to $3.11.

It is in connection with this rough estimate of cost per capita that
the economic burden of militarism is most appreciable.  The
irresistible conclusion from available data is that the increase of
expenditure for army and navy purposes is rapidly surpassing the
growth of population in each of the countries considered in the
present calculation.  In other words, a continuation of the increased
demands of militarism threatens each of those nations with a
progressive exhaustion both of men and resources.

The awful waste that patriotism necessitates ought to be sufficient
to cure the man of even average intelligence from this disease.  Yet
patriotism demands still more.  The people are urged to be patriotic
and for that luxury they pay, not only by supporting their
"defenders," but even by sacrificing their own children.  Patriotism
requires allegiance to the flag, which means obedience and readiness
to kill father, mother, brother, sister.

The usual contention is that we need a standing army to protect the
country from foreign invasion.  Every intelligent man and woman
knows, however, that this is a myth maintained to frighten and coerce
the foolish.  The governments of the world, knowing each other's
interests, do not invade each other.  They have learned that they can
gain much more by international arbitration of disputes than by war
and conquest.  Indeed, as Carlyle said, "War is a quarrel between two
thieves too cowardly to fight their own battle; therefore they take
boys from one village and another village; stick them into uniforms,
equip them with guns, and let them loose like wild beasts against
each other."

It does not require much wisdom to trace every war back to a similar
cause.  Let us take our own Spanish-American war, supposedly a great
and patriotic event in the history of the United States.  How our
hearts burned with indignation against the atrocious Spaniards!
True, our indignation did not flare up spontaneously.  It was
nurtured by months of newspaper agitation, and long after Butcher
Weyler had killed off many noble Cubans and outraged many Cuban
women.  Still, in justice to the American Nation be it said, it did
grow indignant and was willing to fight, and that it fought bravely.
But when the smoke was over, the dead buried, and the cost of the war
came back to the people in an increase in the price of commodities
and rent--that is, when we sobered up from our patriotic spree--it
suddenly dawned on us that the cause of the Spanish-American war was
the consideration of the price of sugar; or, to be more explicit,
that the lives, blood, and money of the American people were used to
protect the interests of American capitalists, which were threatened
by the Spanish government.  That this is not an exaggeration, but is
based on absolute facts and figures, is best proven by the attitude
of the American government to Cuban labor.  When Cuba was firmly in
the clutches of the United States, the very soldiers sent to liberate
Cuba were ordered to shoot Cuban workingmen during the great
cigarmakers' strike, which took place shortly after the war.

Nor do we stand alone in waging war for such causes.  The curtain is
beginning to be lifted on the motives of the terrible Russo-Japanese
war, which cost so much blood and tears.  And we see again that back
of the fierce Moloch of war stands the still fiercer god of
Commercialism.  Kuropatkin, the Russian Minister of War during the
Russo-Japanese struggle, has revealed the true secret behind the
latter.  The Tsar and his Grand Dukes, having invested money in
Corean concessions, the war was forced for the sole purpose of
speedily accumulating large fortunes.

The contention that a standing army and navy is the best security of
peace is about as logical as the claim that the most peaceful citizen
is he who goes about heavily armed.  The experience of every-day life
fully proves that the armed individual is invariably anxious to try
his strength.  The same is historically true of governments.  Really
peaceful countries do not waste life and energy in war preparations,
with the result that peace is maintained.

However, the clamor for an increased army and navy is not due to any
foreign danger.  It is owing to the dread of the growing discontent
of the masses and of the international spirit among the workers.  It
is to meet the internal enemy that the Powers of various countries
are preparing themselves; an enemy, who, once awakened to
consciousness, will prove more dangerous than any foreign invader.

The powers that have for centuries been engaged in enslaving the
masses have made a thorough study of their psychology.  They know
that the people at large are like children whose despair, sorrow, and
tears can be turned into joy with a little toy.  And the more
gorgeously the toy is dressed, the louder the colors, the more it
will appeal to the million-headed child.

An army and navy represents the people's toys.  To make them more
attractive and acceptable, hundreds and thousands of dollars are
being spent for the display of these toys.  That was the purpose of
the American government in equipping a fleet and sending it along the
Pacific coast, that every American citizen should be made to feel the
pride and glory of the United States.  The city of San Francisco
spent one hundred thousand dollars for the entertainment of the
fleet; Los Angeles, sixty thousand; Seattle and Tacoma, about one
hundred thousand.  To entertain the fleet, did I say?  To dine and
wine a few superior officers, while the "brave boys" had to mutiny to
get sufficient food.  Yes, two hundred and sixty thousand dollars
were spent on fireworks, theatre parties, and revelries, at a time
when men, women, and children through the breadth and length of the
country were starving in the streets; when thousands of unemployed
were ready to sell their labor at any price.

Two hundred and sixty thousand dollars!  What could not have been
accomplished with such an enormous sum?  But instead of bread and
shelter, the children of those cities were taken to see the fleet,
that it may remain, as one of the newspapers said, "a lasting memory
for the child."

A wonderful thing to remember, is it not?  The implements of
civilized slaughter.  If the mind of the child is to be poisoned with
such memories, what hope is there for a true realization of human
brotherhood?

We Americans claim to be a peace-loving people.  We hate bloodshed;
we are opposed to violence.  Yet we go into spasms of joy over the
possibility of projecting dynamite bombs from flying machines upon
helpless citizens.  We are ready to hang, electrocute, or lynch
anyone, who, from economic necessity, will risk his own life in the
attempt upon that of some industrial magnate.  Yet our hearts swell
with pride at the thought that America is becoming the most powerful
nation on earth, and that it will eventually plant her iron foot on
the necks of all other nations.

Such is the logic of patriotism.

Considering the evil results that patriotism is fraught with for the
average man, it is as nothing compared with the insult and injury
that patriotism heaps upon the soldier himself,--that poor, deluded
victim of superstition and ignorance.  He, the savior of his country,
the protector of his nation,--what has patriotism in store for him?
A life of slavish submission, vice, and perversion, during peace; a
life of danger, exposure, and death, during war.

While on a recent lecture tour in San Francisco, I visited the
Presidio, the most beautiful spot overlooking the Bay and Golden Gate
Park.  Its purpose should have been playgrounds for children, gardens
and music for the recreation of the weary.  Instead it is made ugly,
dull, and gray by barracks,--barracks wherein the rich would not
allow their dogs to dwell.  In these miserable shanties soldiers are
herded like cattle; here they waste their young days, polishing the
boots and brass buttons of their superior officers.  Here, too, I saw
the distinction of classes: sturdy sons of a free Republic, drawn up
in line like convicts, saluting every passing shrimp of a lieutenant.
American equality, degrading manhood and elevating the uniform!

Barrack life further tends to develop tendencies of sexual
perversion.  It is gradually producing along this line results
similar to European military conditions.  Havelock Ellis, the noted
writer on sex psychology, has made a thorough study of the subject.
I quote: "Some of the barracks are great centers of male
prostitution....  The number of soldiers who prostitute themselves
is greater than we are willing to believe.  It is no exaggeration to
say that in certain regiments the presumption is in favor of the
venality of the majority of the men....  On summer evenings Hyde
Park and the neighborhood of Albert Gate are full of guardsmen and
others plying a lively trade, and with little disguise, in uniform or
out....  In most cases the proceeds form a comfortable addition to
Tommy Atkins' pocket money."

To what extent this perversion has eaten its way into the army and
navy can best be judged from the fact that special houses exist for
this form of prostitution.  The practice is not limited to England;
it is universal.  "Soldiers are no less sought after in France than
in England or in Germany, and special houses for military
prostitution exist both in Paris and the garrison towns."

Had Mr. Havelock Ellis included America in his investigation of sex
perversion, he would have found that the same conditions prevail in
our army and navy as in those of other countries.  The growth of the
standing army inevitably adds to the spread of sex perversion; the
barracks are the incubators.

Aside from the sexual effects of barrack life, it also tends to unfit
the soldier for useful labor after leaving the army.  Men, skilled in
a trade, seldom enter the army or navy, but even they, after a
military experience, find themselves totally unfitted for their
former occupations.  Having acquired habits of idleness and a taste
for excitement and adventure, no peaceful pursuit can content them.
Released from the army, they can turn to no useful work.  But it is
usually the social riff-raff, discharged prisoners and the like, whom
either the struggle for life or their own inclination drives into the
ranks.  These, their military term over, again turn to their former
life of crime, more brutalized and degraded than before.  It is a
well-known fact that in our prisons there is a goodly number of
ex-soldiers; while on the other hand, the army and navy are to a
great extent supplied with ex-convicts.


Of all the evil results, I have just described, none seems to me so
detrimental to human integrity as the spirit patriotism has produced
in the case of Private William Buwalda.  Because he foolishly
believed that one can be a soldier and exercise his rights as a man
at the same time, the military authorities punished him severely.
True, he had served his country fifteen years, during which time his
record was unimpeachable.  According to Gen. Funston, who reduced
Buwalda's sentence to three years, "the first duty of an officer or
an enlisted man is unquestioned obedience and loyalty to the
government, and it makes no difference whether he approves of that
government or not."  Thus Funston stamps the true character of
allegiance.  According to him, entrance into the army abrogates the
principles of the Declaration of Independence.

What a strange development of patriotism that turns a thinking being
into a loyal machine!

In justification of this most outrageous sentence of Buwalda, Gen.
Funston tells the American people that the soldier's action was a
"serious crime equal to treason."  Now, what did this "terrible
crime" really consist of?  Simply in this: William Buwalda was one of
fifteen hundred people who attended a public meeting in San
Francisco; and, oh, horrors, he shook hands with the speaker, Emma
Goldman.  A terrible crime, indeed, which the General calls "a great
military offense, infinitely worse than desertion."

Can there be a greater indictment against patriotism than that it
will thus brand a man a criminal, throw him into prison, and rob him
of the results of fifteen years of faithful service?

Buwalda gave to his country the best years of his life and his very
manhood.  But all that was as nothing.  Patriotism is inexorable and,
like all insatiable monsters, demands all or nothing.  It does not
admit that a soldier is also a human being, who has a right to his
own feelings and opinions, his own inclinations and ideas.  No,
patriotism can not admit of that.  That is the lesson which Buwalda
was made to learn; made to learn at a rather costly, though not at a
useless, price.  When he returned to freedom, he had lost his
position in the army, but he regained his self-respect.  After all,
that is worth three years of imprisonment.

A writer on the military conditions of America, in a recent article,
commented on the power of the military man over the civilian in
Germany.  He said, among other things, that if our Republic had no
other meaning than to guarantee all citizens equal rights, it would
have just cause for existence.  I am convinced that the writer was
not in Colorado during the patriotic regime of General Bell.  He
probably would have changed his mind had he seen how, in the name of
patriotism and the Republic, men were thrown into bull-pens, dragged
about, driven across the border, and subjected to all kinds of
indignities.  Nor is that Colorado incident the only one in the
growth of military power in the United States.  There is hardly a
strike where troops and militia do not come to the rescue of those in
power, and where they do not act as arrogantly and brutally as do the
men wearing the Kaiser's uniform.  Then, too, we have the Dick
military law.  Had the writer forgotten that?

A great misfortune with most of our writers is that they are
absolutely ignorant on current events, or that, lacking honesty, they
will not speak of these matters.  And so it has come to pass that the
Dick military law was rushed through Congress with little discussion
and still less publicity,--a law which gives the President the power
to turn a peaceful citizen into a bloodthirsty man-killer, supposedly
for the defense of the country, in reality for the protection of the
interests of that particular party whose mouthpiece the President
happens to be.

Our writer claims that militarism can never become such a power in
America as abroad, since it is voluntary with us, while compulsory in
the Old World.  Two very important facts, however, the gentleman
forgets to consider.  First, that conscription has created in Europe
a deep-seated hatred of militarism among all classes of society.
Thousands of young recruits enlist under protest and, once in the
army, they will use every possible means to desert.  Second, that it
is the compulsory feature of militarism which has created a
tremendous anti-militarist movement, feared by European Powers far
more than anything else.  After all, the greatest bulwark of
capitalism is militarism.  The very moment the latter is undermined,
capitalism will totter.  True, we have no conscription; that is, men
are not usually forced to enlist in the army, but we have developed a
far more exacting and rigid force--necessity.  Is it not a fact that
during industrial depressions there is a tremendous increase in the
number of enlistments?  The trade of militarism may not be either
lucrative or honorable, but it is better than tramping the country in
search of work, standing in the bread line, or sleeping in municipal
lodging houses.  After all, it means thirteen dollars per month,
three meals a day, and a place to sleep.  Yet even necessity is not
sufficiently strong a factor to bring into the army an element of
character and manhood.  No wonder our military authorities complain
of the "poor material" enlisting in the army and navy.  This
admission is a very encouraging sign.  It proves that there is still
enough of the spirit of independence and love of liberty left in the
average American to risk starvation rather than don the uniform.

Thinking men and women the world over are beginning to realize that
patriotism is too narrow and limited a conception to meet the
necessities of our time.  The centralization of power has brought
into being an international feeling of solidarity among the oppressed
nations of the world; a solidarity which represents a greater harmony
of interests between the workingman of America and his brothers
abroad than between the American miner and his exploiting compatriot;
a solidarity which fears not foreign invasion, because it is bringing
all the workers to the point when they will say to their masters, "Go
and do your own killing.  We have done it long enough for you."

This solidarity is awakening the consciousness of even the soldiers,
they, too, being flesh of the flesh of the great human family.  A
solidarity that has proven infallible more than once during past
struggles, and which has been the impetus inducing the Parisian
soldiers, during the Commune of 1871, to refuse to obey when ordered
to shoot their brothers.  It has given courage to the men who
mutinied on Russian warships during recent years.  It will eventually
bring about the uprising of all the oppressed and downtrodden against
their international exploiters.

The proletariat of Europe has realized the great force of that
solidarity and has, as a result, inaugurated a war against patriotism
and its bloody spectre, militarism.  Thousands of men fill the
prisons of France, Germany, Russia, and the Scandinavian countries,
because they dared to defy the ancient superstition.  Nor is the
movement limited to the working class; it has embraced
representatives in all stations of life, its chief exponents being
men and women prominent in art, science, and letters.

America will have to follow suit.  The spirit of militarism has
already permeated all walks of life.  Indeed, I am convinced that
militarism is growing a greater danger here than anywhere else,
because of the many bribes capitalism holds out to those whom it
wishes to destroy.

The beginning has already been made in the schools.  Evidently the
government holds to the Jesuitical conception, "Give me the child
mind, and I will mould the man."  Children are trained in military
tactics, the glory of military achievements extolled in the
curriculum, and the youthful minds perverted to suit the government.
Further, the youth of the country is appealed to in glaring posters
to join the army and navy.  "A fine chance to see the world!" cries
the governmental huckster.  Thus innocent boys are morally shanghaied
into patriotism, and the military Moloch strides conquering through
the Nation.

The American workingman has suffered so much at the hands of the
soldier, State, and Federal, that he is quite justified in his
disgust with, and his opposition to, the uniformed parasite.
However, mere denunciation will not solve this great problem.  What
we need is a propaganda of education for the soldier: anti-patriotic
literature that will enlighten him as to the real horrors of his
trade, and that will awaken his consciousness to his true relation to
the man to whose labor he owes his very existence.

It is precisely this that the authorities fear most.  It is already
high treason for a soldier to attend a radical meeting.  No doubt
they will also stamp it high treason for a soldier to read a radical
pamphlet.  But then, has not authority from time immemorial stamped
every step of progress as treasonable?  Those, however, who earnestly
strive for social reconstruction can well afford to face all that;
for it is probably even more important to carry the truth into the
barracks than into the factory.  When we have undermined the
patriotic lie, we shall have cleared the path for that great
structure wherein all nationalities shall be united into a universal
brotherhood,--a truly FREE SOCIETY.




FRANCISCO FERRER AND THE MODERN SCHOOL


Experience has come to be considered the best school of life.  The
man or woman who does not learn some vital lesson in that school is
looked upon as a dunce indeed.  Yet strange to say, that though
organized institutions continue perpetrating errors, though they
learn nothing from experience, we acquiesce, as a matter of course.

There lived and worked in Barcelona a man by the name of Francisco
Ferrer.  A teacher of children he was, known and loved by his people.
Outside of Spain only the cultured few knew of Francisco Ferrer's
work.  To the world at large this teacher was non-existent.

On the first of September, 1909, the Spanish government--at the
behest of the Catholic Church--arrested Francisco Ferrer.  On the
thirteenth of October, after a mock trial, he was placed in the ditch
at Montjuich prison, against the hideous wall of many sighs, and shot
dead.  Instantly Ferrer, the obscure teacher, became a universal
figure, blazing forth the indignation and wrath of the whole
civilized world against the wanton murder.

The killing of Francisco Ferrer was not the first crime committed by
the Spanish government and the Catholic Church.  The history of these
institutions is one long stream of fire and blood.  Still they have
not learned through experience, nor yet come to realize that every
frail being slain by Church and State grows and grows into a mighty
giant, who will some day free humanity from their perilous hold.

Francisco Ferrer was born in 1859, of humble parents.  They were
Catholics, and therefore hoped to raise their son in the same faith.
They did not know that the boy was to become the harbinger of a great
truth, that his mind would refuse to travel in the old path.  At an
early age Ferrer began to question the faith of his fathers.  He
demanded to know how it is that the God who spoke to him of goodness
and love would mar the sleep of the innocent child with dread and awe
of tortures, of suffering, of hell.  Alert and of a vivid and
investigating mind, it did not take him long to discover the
hideousness of that black monster, the Catholic Church.  He would
have none of it.

Francisco Ferrer was not only a doubter, a searcher for truth; he was
also a rebel.  His spirit would rise in just indignation against the
iron regime of his country, and when a band of rebels, led by the
brave patriot, General Villacampa, under the banner of the Republican
ideal, made an onslaught on that regime, none was more ardent a
fighter than young Francisco Ferrer.  The Republican ideal,--I hope
no one will confound it with the Republicanism of this country.
Whatever objection I, as an Anarchist, have to the Republicans of
Latin countries, I know they tower high above the corrupt and
reactionary party which, in America, is destroying every vestige of
liberty and justice.  One has but to think of the Mazzinis, the
Garibaldis, the scores of others, to realize that their efforts were
directed, not merely towards the overthrow of despotism, but
particularly against the Catholic Church, which from its very
inception has been the enemy of all progress and liberalism.

In America it is just the reverse.  Republicanism stands for vested
rights, for imperialism, for graft, for the annihilation of every
semblance of liberty.  Its ideal is the oily, creepy respectability
of a McKinley, and the brutal arrogance of a Roosevelt.

The Spanish republican rebels were subdued.  It takes more than one
brave effort to split the rock of ages, to cut off the head of that
hydra monster, the Catholic Church and the Spanish throne.  Arrest,
persecution, and punishment followed the heroic attempt of the little
band.  Those who could escape the bloodhounds had to flee for safety
to foreign shores.  Francisco Ferrer was among the latter.  He went
to France.

How his soul must have expanded in the new land!  France, the cradle
of liberty, of ideas, of action.  Paris, the ever young, intense
Paris, with her pulsating life, after the gloom of his own belated
country,--how she must have inspired him.  What opportunities, what a
glorious chance for a young idealist.

Francisco Ferrer lost no time.  Like one famished he threw himself
into the various liberal movements, met all kinds of people, learned,
absorbed, and grew.  While there, he also saw in operation the Modern
School, which was to play such an important and fatal part in his
life.

The Modern School in France was founded long before Ferrer's time.
Its originator, though on a small scale, was that sweet spirit,
Louise Michel.  Whether consciously or unconsciously, our own great
Louise felt long ago that the future belongs to the young generation;
that unless the young be rescued from that mind and soul destroying
institution, the bourgeois school, social evils will continue to
exist.  Perhaps she thought, with Ibsen, that the atmosphere is
saturated with ghosts, that the adult man and woman have so many
superstitions to overcome.  No sooner do they outgrow the deathlike
grip of one spook, lo! they find themselves in the thralldom of
ninety-nine other spooks.  Thus but a few reach the mountain peak of
complete regeneration.

The child, however, has no traditions to overcome.  Its mind is not
burdened with set ideas, its heart has not grown cold with class and
caste distinctions.  The child is to the teacher what clay is to the
sculptor.  Whether the world will receive a work of art or a wretched
imitation, depends to a large extent on the creative power of the
teacher.

Louise Michel was pre-eminently qualified to meet the child's soul
cravings.  Was she not herself of a childlike nature, so sweet and
tender, unsophisticated and generous.  The soul of Louise burned
always at white heat over every social injustice.  She was invariably
in the front ranks whenever the people of Paris rebelled against some
wrong.  And as she was made to suffer imprisonment for her great
devotion to the oppressed, the little school on Montmartre was soon
no more.  But the seed was planted, and has since borne fruit in many
cities of France.

The most important venture of a Modern School was that of the great,
young old man, Paul Robin.  Together with a few friends he
established a large school at Cempuis, a beautiful place near Paris.
Paul Robin aimed at a higher ideal than merely modern ideas in
education.  He wanted to demonstrate by actual facts that the
bourgeois conception of heredity is but a mere pretext to exempt
society from its terrible crimes against the young.  The contention
that the child must suffer for the sins of the fathers, that it must
continue in poverty and filth, that it must grow up a drunkard or
criminal, just because its parents left it no other legacy, was too
preposterous to the beautiful spirit of Paul Robin.  He believed that
whatever part heredity may play, there are other factors equally
great, if not greater, that may and will eradicate or minimize the
so-called first cause.  Proper economic and social environment, the
breath and freedom of nature, healthy exercise, love and sympathy,
and, above all, a deep understanding for the needs of the
child--these would destroy the cruel, unjust, and criminal stigma
imposed on the innocent young.

Paul Robin did not select his children; he did not go to the
so-called best parents: he took his material wherever he could find
it.  From the street, the hovels, the orphan and foundling asylums,
the reformatories, from all those gray and hideous places where a
benevolent society hides its victims in order to pacify its guilty
conscience.  He gathered all the dirty, filthy, shivering little
waifs his place would hold, and brought them to Cempuis.  There,
surrounded by nature's own glory, free and unrestrained, well fed,
clean kept, deeply loved and understood, the little human plants
began to grow, to blossom, to develop beyond even the expectations of
their friend and teacher, Paul Robin.

The children grew and developed into self-reliant, liberty loving men
and women.  What greater danger to the institutions that make the
poor in order to perpetuate the poor.  Cempuis was closed by the
French government on the charge of co-education, which is prohibited
in France.  However, Cempuis had been in operation long enough to
prove to all advanced educators its tremendous possibilities, and to
serve as an impetus for modern methods of education, that are slowly
but inevitably undermining the present system.

Cempuis was followed by a great number of other educational
attempts,--among them, by Madelaine Vernet, a gifted writer and poet,
author of L'AMOUR LIBRE, and Sebastian Faure, with his LA RUCHE,[1]
which I visited while in Paris, in 1907.

Several years ago Comrade Faure bought the land on which he built his
LA RUCHE.  In a comparatively short time he succeeded in transforming
the former wild, uncultivated country into a blooming spot, having
all the appearance of a well kept farm.  A large, square court,
enclosed by three buildings, and a broad path leading to the garden
and orchards, greet the eye of the visitor.  The garden, kept as only
a Frenchman knows how, furnishes a large variety of vegetables for LA
RUCHE.

Sebastian Faure is of the opinion that if the child is subjected to
contradictory influences, its development suffers in consequence.
Only when the material needs, the hygiene of the home, and
intellectual environment are harmonious, can the child grow into a
healthy, free being.

Referring to his school, Sebastian Faure has this to say:

"I have taken twenty-four children of both sexes, mostly orphans, or
those whose parents are too poor to pay.  They are clothed, housed,
and educated at my expense.  Till their twelfth year they will
receive a sound, elementary education. Between the age of twelve and
fifteen--their studies still continuing--they are to be taught some
trade, in keeping with their individual disposition and abilities.
After that they are at liberty to leave LA RUCHE to begin life in the
outside world, with the assurance that they may at any time return to
LA RUCHE, where they will be received with open arms and welcomed as
parents do their beloved children.  Then, if they wish to work at our
place, they may do so under the following conditions: One third of
the product to cover his or her expenses of maintenance, another
third to go towards the general fund set aside for accommodating new
children, and the last third to be devoted to the personal use of the
child, as he or she may see fit.

"The health of the children who are now in my care is perfect.  Pure
air, nutritious food, physical exercise in the open, long walks,
observation of hygienic rules, the short and interesting method of
instruction, and, above all, our affectionate understanding and care
of the children, have produced admirable physical and mental results.

"It would be unjust to claim that our pupils have accomplished
wonders; yet, considering that they belong to the average, having had
no previous opportunities, the results are very gratifying indeed.
The most important thing they have acquired--a rare trait with
ordinary school children--is the love of study, the desire to know,
to be informed.  They have learned a new method of work, one that
quickens the memory and stimulates the imagination.  We make a
particular effort to awaken the child's interest in his surroundings,
to make him realize the importance of observation, investigation, and
reflection, so that when the children reach maturity, they would not
be deaf and blind to the things about them.  Our children never
accept anything in blind faith, without inquiry as to why and
wherefore; nor do they feel satisfied until their questions are
thoroughly answered.  Thus their minds are free from doubts and fear
resultant from incomplete or untruthful replies; it is the latter
which warp the growth of the child, and create a lack of confidence
in himself and those about him.

"It is surprising how frank and kind and affectionate our little ones
are to each other.  The harmony between themselves and the adults at
LA RUCHE is highly encouraging.  We should feel at fault if the
children were to fear or honor us merely because we are their elders.
We leave nothing undone to gain their confidence and love; that
accomplished, understanding will replace duty; confidence, fear; and
affection, severity.

"No one has yet fully realized the wealth of sympathy, kindness, and
generosity hidden in the soul of the child.  The effort of every true
educator should be to unlock that treasure--to stimulate the child's
impulses, and call forth the best and noblest tendencies.  What
greater reward can there be for one whose life-work is to watch over
the growth of the human plant, than to see its nature unfold its
petals, and to observe it develop into a true individuality.  My
comrades at LA RUCHE look for no greater reward, and it is due to
them and their efforts, even more than to my own, that our human
garden promises to bear beautiful fruit."[2]

Regarding the subject of history and the prevailing old methods of
instruction, Sebastian Faure said:

"We explain to our children that true history is yet to be
written,--the story of those who have died, unknown, in the effort to
aid humanity to greater achievement."[3]

Francisco Ferrer could not escape this great wave of Modern School
attempts.  He saw its possibilities, not merely in theoretic form,
but in their practical application to every-day needs.  He must have
realized that Spain, more than any other country, stands in need of
just such schools, if it is ever to throw off the double yoke of
priest and soldier.

When we consider that the entire system of education in Spain is in
the hands of the Catholic Church, and when we further remember the
Catholic formula, "To inculcate Catholicism in the mind of the child
until it is nine years of age is to ruin it forever for any other
idea," we will understand the tremendous task of Ferrer in bringing
the new light to his people.  Fate soon assisted him in realizing his
great dream.

Mlle. Meunier, a pupil of Francisco Ferrer, and a lady of wealth,
became interested in the Modern School project.  When she died, she
left Ferrer some valuable property and twelve thousand francs yearly
income for the School.

It is said that mean souls can conceive of naught but mean ideas.
If so, the contemptible methods of the Catholic Church to blackguard
Ferrer's character, in order to justify her own black crime, can
readily be explained.  Thus the lie was spread in American Catholic
papers, that Ferrer used his intimacy with Mlle. Meunier to get
possession of her money.

Personally, I hold that the intimacy, of whatever nature, between a
man and a woman, is their own affair, their sacred own.  I would
therefore not lose a word in referring to the matter, if it were not
one of the many dastardly lies circulated about Ferrer.  Of course,
those who know the purity of the Catholic clergy will understand the
insinuation.  Have the Catholic priests ever looked upon woman as
anything but a sex commodity?  The historical data regarding the
discoveries in the cloisters and monasteries will bear me out in
that.  How, then, are they to understand the co-operation of a man
and a woman, except on a sex basis?

As a matter of fact, Mlle. Meunier was considerably Ferrer's senior.
Having spent her childhood and girlhood with a miserly father and a
submissive mother, she could easily appreciate the necessity of love
and joy in child life.  She must have seen that Francisco Ferrer was
a teacher, not college, machine, or diploma-made, but one endowed
with genius for that calling.

Equipped with knowledge, with experience, and with the necessary
means; above all, imbued with the divine fire of his mission, our
Comrade came back to Spain, and there began his life's work.  On the
ninth of September, 1901, the first Modern School was opened.  It was
enthusiastically received by the people of Barcelona, who pledged
their support.  In a short address at the opening of the School,
Ferrer submitted his program to his friends.  He said: "I am not a
speaker, not a propagandist, not a fighter.  I am a teacher; I love
children above everything.  I think I understand them.  I want my
contribution to the cause of liberty to be a young generation ready
to meet a new era."

He was cautioned by his friends to be careful in his opposition to
the Catholic Church.  They knew to what lengths she would go to
dispose of an enemy.  Ferrer, too, knew.  But, like Brand, he
believed in all or nothing.  He would not erect the Modern School on
the same old lie.  He would be frank and honest and open with the
children.

Francisco Ferrer became a marked man.  From the very first day of the
opening of the School, he was shadowed.  The school building was
watched, his little home in Mangat was watched.  He was followed
every step, even when he went to France or England to confer with his
colleagues.  He was a marked man, and it was only a question of time
when the lurking enemy would tighten the noose.

It succeeded, almost, in 1906, when Ferrer was implicated in the
attempt on the life of Alfonso.  The evidence exonerating him was too
strong even for the black crows;[4] they had to let him go--not for
good, however.  They waited.  Oh, they can wait, when they have set
themselves to trap a victim.

The moment came at last, during the anti-military uprising in Spain,
in July, 1909.  One will have to search in vain the annals of
revolutionary history to find a more remarkable protest against
militarism.  Having been soldier-ridden for centuries, the people of
Spain could stand the yoke no longer.  They would refuse to
participate in useless slaughter.  They saw no reason for aiding a
despotic government in subduing and oppressing a small people
fighting for their independence, as did the brave Riffs.  No, they
would not bear arms against them.

For eighteen hundred years the Catholic Church has preached the
gospel of peace.  Yet, when the people actually wanted to make this
gospel a living reality, she urged the authorities to force them to
bear arms.  Thus the dynasty of Spain followed the murderous methods
of the Russian dynasty,--the people were forced to the battlefield.

Then, and not until then, was their power of endurance at an end.
Then, and not until then, did the workers of Spain turn against their
masters, against those who, like leeches, had drained their strength,
their very life-blood.  Yes, they attacked the churches and the
priests, but if the latter had a thousand lives, they could not
possibly pay for the terrible outrages and crimes perpetrated upon
the Spanish people.

Francisco Ferrer was arrested on the first of September, 1909.
Until October first, his friends and comrades did not even know what
had become of him.  On that day a letter was received by L'HUMANITE,
from which can be learned the whole mockery of the trial.  And the
next day his companion, Soledad Villafranca, received the following
letter:

"No reason to worry; you know I am absolutely innocent.  Today I am
particularly hopeful and joyous.  It is the first time I can write to
you, and the first time since my arrest that I can bathe in the rays
of the sun, streaming generously through my cell window.  You, too,
must be joyous."

How pathetic that Ferrer should have believed, as late as October
fourth, that he would not be condemned to death.  Even more pathetic
that his friends and comrades should once more have made the blunder
in crediting the enemy with a sense of justice.  Time and again they
had placed faith in the judicial powers, only to see their brothers
killed before their very eyes.  They made no preparation to rescue
Ferrer, not even a protest of any extent; nothing.  "Why, it is
impossible to condemn Ferrer; he is innocent."  But everything is
possible with the Catholic Church.  Is she not a practiced henchman,
whose trials of her enemies are the worst mockery of justice?

On October fourth Ferrer sent the following letter to L'HUMANITE:


                                     The Prison Cell, Oct. 4, 1909.

     My dear Friends--Notwithstanding most absolute innocence, the
     prosecutor demands the death penalty, based on denunciations of
     the police, representing me as the chief of the world's
     Anarchists, directing the labor syndicates of France, and guilty
     of conspiracies and insurrections everywhere, and declaring that
     my voyages to London and Paris were undertaken with no other
     object.

     With such infamous lies they are trying to kill me.

     The messenger is about to depart and I have not time for more.
     All the evidence presented to the investigating judge by the
     police is nothing but a tissue of lies and calumnious
     insinuations.  But no proofs against me, having done nothing at
     all.

                                                     FERRER.


October thirteenth, 1909, Ferrer's heart, so brave, so staunch, so
loyal, was stilled.  Poor fools!  The last agonized throb of that
heart had barely died away when it began to beat a hundredfold in the
hearts of the civilized world, until it grew into terrific thunder,
hurling forth its malediction upon the instigators of the black
crime.  Murderers of black garb and pious mien, to the bar of
justice!

Did Francisco Ferrer participate in the anti-military uprising?
According to the first indictment, which appeared in a Catholic paper
in Madrid, signed by the Bishop and all the prelates of Barcelona, he
was not even accused of participation.  The indictment was to the
effect that Francisco Ferrer was guilty of having organized godless
schools, and having circulated godless literature.  But in the
twentieth century men can not be burned merely for their godless
beliefs.  Something else had to be devised; hence the charge of
instigating the uprising.

In no authentic source so far investigated could a single proof be
found to connect Ferrer with the uprising.  But then, no proofs were
wanted, or accepted, by the authorities.  There were seventy-two
witnesses, to be sure, but their testimony was taken on paper.  They
never were confronted with Ferrer, or he with them.

Is it psychologically possible that Ferrer should have participated?
I do not believe it is, and here are my reasons.  Francisco Ferrer
was not only a great teacher, but he was also undoubtedly a marvelous
organizer.  In eight years, between 1901-1909, he had organized in
Spain one hundred and nine schools, besides inducing the liberal
element of his country to organize three hundred and eight other
schools.  In connection with his own school work, Ferrer had equipped
a modern printing plant, organized a staff of translators, and spread
broadcast one hundred and fifty thousand copies of modern scientific
and sociologic works, not to forget the large quantity of rationalist
text books.  Surely none but the most methodical and efficient
organizer could have accomplished such a feat.

On the other hand, it was absolutely proven that the anti-military
uprising was not at all organized; that it came as a surprise to the
people themselves, like a great many revolutionary waves on previous
occasions.  The people of Barcelona, for instance, had the city in
their control for four days, and, according to the statement of
tourists, greater order and peace never prevailed.  Of course, the
people were so little prepared that when the time came, they did not
know what to do.  In this regard they were like the people of Paris
during the Commune of 1871.  They, too, were unprepared.  While they
were starving, they protected the warehouses, filled to the brim with
provisions.  They placed sentinels to guard the Bank of France, where
the bourgeoisie kept the stolen money.  The workers of Barcelona,
too, watched over the spoils of their masters.

How pathetic is the stupidity of the underdog; how terribly tragic!
But, then, have not his fetters been forged so deeply into his flesh,
that he would not, even if he could, break them?  The awe of
authority, of law, of private property, hundredfold burned into his
soul,--how is he to throw it off unprepared, unexpectedly?

Can anyone assume for a moment that a man like Ferrer would affiliate
himself with such a spontaneous, unorganized effort?  Would he not
have known that it would result in a defeat, a disastrous defeat for
the people?  And is it not more likely that if he would have taken
part, he, the experienced ENTREPRENEUR, would have thoroughly
organized the attempt?  If all other proofs were lacking, that one
factor would be sufficient to exonerate Francisco Ferrer.  But there
are others equally convincing.

For the very date of the outbreak, July twenty-fifth, Ferrer had
called a conference of his teachers and members of the League of
Rational Education.  It was to consider the autumn work, and
particularly the publication of Elisee Reclus' great book, L'HOMME ET
LA TERRE, and Peter Kropotkin's GREAT FRENCH REVOLUTION.  Is it at
all likely, is it at all plausible that Ferrer, knowing of the
uprising, being a party to it, would in cold blood invite his friends
and colleagues to Barcelona for the day on which he realized their
lives would be endangered?  Surely, only the criminal, vicious mind
of a Jesuit could credit such deliberate murder.

Francisco Ferrer had his life-work mapped out; he had everything to
lose and nothing to gain, except ruin and disaster, were he to lend
assistance to the outbreak.  Not that he doubted the justice of the
people's wrath; but his work, his hope, his very nature was directed
toward another goal.

In vain are the frantic efforts of the Catholic Church, her lies,
falsehoods, calumnies.  She stands condemned by the awakened human
conscience of having once more repeated the foul crimes of the past.

Francisco Ferrer is accused of teaching the children the most
blood-curdling ideas,--to hate God, for instance.  Horrors!
Francisco Ferrer did not believe in the existence of a God.  Why
teach the child to hate something which does not exist?  Is it not
more likely that he took the children out into the open, that he
showed them the splendor of the sunset, the brilliancy of the starry
heavens, the awe-inspiring wonder of the mountains and seas; that he
explained to them in his simple, direct way the law of growth, of
development, of the interrelation of all life?  In so doing he made
it forever impossible for the poisonous weeds of the Catholic Church
to take root in the child's mind.

It has been stated that Ferrer prepared the children to destroy the
rich.  Ghost stories of old maids.  Is it not more likely that he
prepared them to succor the poor?  That he taught them the
humiliation, the degradation, the awfulness of poverty, which is a
vice and not a virtue; that he taught the dignity and importance of
all creative efforts, which alone sustain life and build character.
Is it not the best and most effective way of bringing into the proper
light the absolute uselessness and injury of parasitism?

Last, but not least, Ferrer is charged with undermining the army by
inculcating anti-military ideas.  Indeed?  He must have believed with
Tolstoy that war is legalized slaughter, that it perpetuates hatred
and arrogance, that it eats away the heart of nations, and turns them
into raving maniacs.

However, we have Ferrer's own word regarding his ideas of modern
education:

"I would like to call the attention of my readers to this idea: All
the value of education rests in the respect for the physical,
intellectual, and moral will of the child.  Just as in science no
demonstration is possible save by facts, just so there is no real
education save that which is exempt from all dogmatism, which leaves
to the child itself the direction of its effort, and confines itself
to the seconding of its effort.  Now, there is nothing easier than to
alter this purpose, and nothing harder than to respect it.
Education is always imposing, violating, constraining; the real
educator is he who can best protect the child against his (the
teacher's) own ideas, his peculiar whims; he who can best appeal to
the child's own energies.

"We are convinced that the education of the future will be of an
entirely spontaneous nature; certainly we can not as yet realize it,
but the evolution of methods in the direction of a wider
comprehension of the phenomena of life, and the fact that all
advances toward perfection mean the overcoming of restraint,--all
this indicates that we are in the right when we hope for the
deliverance of the child through science.

"Let us not fear to say that we want men capable of evolving without
stopping, capable of destroying and renewing their environments
without cessation, of renewing themselves also;  men, whose
intellectual independence will be their greatest force, who will
attach themselves to nothing, always ready to accept what is best,
happy in the triumph of new ideas, aspiring to live multiple lives in
one life.  Society fears such men; we therefore must not hope that it
will ever want an education able to give them to us.

"We shall follow the labors of the scientists who study the child
with the greatest attention, and we shall eagerly seek for means of
applying their experience to the education which we want to build up,
in the direction of an ever fuller liberation of the individual.
But how can we attain our end?  Shall it not be by putting ourselves
directly to the work favoring the foundation of new schools, which
shall be ruled as much as possible by this spirit of liberty, which
we forefeel will dominate the entire work of education in the future?

"A trial has been made, which, for the present, has already given
excellent results.  We can destroy all which in the present school
answers to the organization of constraint, the artificial
surroundings by which children are separated from nature and life,
the intellectual and moral discipline made use of to impose
ready-made ideas upon them, beliefs which deprave and annihilate
natural bent.  Without fear of deceiving ourselves, we can restore
the child to the environment which entices it, the environment of
nature in which he will be in contact with all that he loves, and in
which impressions of life will replace fastidious book-learning.  If
we did no more than that, we should already have prepared in great
part the deliverance of the child.

"In such conditions we might already freely apply the data of science
and labor most fruitfully.

"I know very well we could not thus realize all our hopes, that we
should often be forced, for lack of knowledge, to employ undesirable
methods; but a certitude would sustain us in our efforts--namely,
that even without reaching our aim completely we should do more and
better in our still imperfect work than the present school
accomplishes.  I like the free spontaneity of a child who knows
nothing, better than the world-knowledge and intellectual deformity
of a child who has been subjected to our present education."[5]

Had Ferrer actually organized the riots, had he fought on the
barricades, had he hurled a hundred bombs, he could not have been so
dangerous to the Catholic Church and to despotism, as with his
opposition to discipline and restraint.  Discipline and
restraint--are they not back of all the evils in the world?
Slavery, submission, poverty, all misery, all social iniquities
result from discipline and restraint.  Indeed, Ferrer was dangerous.
Therefore he had to die, October thirteenth, 1909, in the ditch of
Montjuich.  Yet who dare say his death was in vain?  In view of the
tempestuous rise of universal indignation: Italy naming streets in
memory of Francisco Ferrer, Belgium inaugurating a movement to erect
a memorial; France calling to the front her most illustrious men to
resume the heritage of the martyr; England being the first to issue a
biography:--all countries uniting in perpetuating the great work of
Francisco Ferrer; America, even, tardy always in progressive ideas,
giving birth to a Francisco Ferrer Association, its aim being to
publish a complete life of Ferrer and to organize Modern Schools all
over the country; in the face of this international revolutionary
wave, who is there to say Ferrer died in vain?

That death at Montjuich,--how wonderful, how dramatic it was, how it
stirs the human soul.  Proud and erect, the inner eye turned toward
the light, Francisco Ferrer needed no lying priests to give him
courage, nor did he upbraid a phantom for forsaking him.  The
consciousness that his executioners represented a dying age, and that
his was the living truth, sustained him in the last heroic moments.

          A dying age and a living truth,
          The living burying the dead.


[1] THE BEEHIVE.

[2] MOTHER EARTH, 1907.

[3] Ibid.

[4] Black crows: The Catholic clergy.

[5] MOTHER EARTH, December, 1909.




THE HYPOCRISY OF PURITANISM


Speaking of Puritanism in relation to American art, Mr. Gutzen
Burglum said: "Puritanism has made us self-centered and hypocritical
for so long, that sincerity and reverence for what is natural in our
impulses have been fairly bred out of us, with the result that there
can be neither truth nor individuality in our art."

Mr. Burglum might have added that Puritanism has made life itself
impossible.  More than art, more than estheticism, life represents
beauty in a thousand variations; it is, indeed, a gigantic panorama
of eternal change.  Puritanism, on the other hand, rests on a fixed
and immovable conception of life; it is based on the Calvinistic idea
that life is a curse, imposed upon man by the wrath of God.  In order
to redeem himself man must do constant penance, must repudiate every
natural and healthy impulse, and turn his back on joy and beauty.

Puritanism celebrated its reign of terror in England during the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, destroying and crushing every
manifestation of art and culture.  It was the spirit of Puritanism
which robbed Shelley of his children, because he would not bow to the
dicta of religion.  It was the same narrow spirit which alienated
Byron from his native land, because that great genius rebelled
against the monotony, dullness, and pettiness of his country.  It was
Puritanism, too, that forced some of England's freest women into the
conventional lie of marriage: Mary Wollstonecraft and, later, George
Eliot.  And recently Puritanism has demanded another toll--the life
of Oscar Wilde.  In fact, Puritanism has never ceased to be the most
pernicious factor in the domain of John Bull, acting as censor of the
artistic expression of his people, and stamping its approval only on
the dullness of middle-class respectability.

It is therefore sheer British jingoism which points to America as the
country of Puritanic provincialism.  It is quite true that our life
is stunted by Puritanism, and that the latter is killing what is
natural and healthy in our impulses.  But it is equally true that it
is to England that we are indebted for transplanting this spirit on
American soil.  It was bequeathed to us by the Pilgrim fathers.
Fleeing from persecution and oppression, the Pilgrims of Mayflower
fame established in the New World a reign of Puritanic tyranny and
crime.  The history of New England, and especially of Massachusetts,
is full of the horrors that have turned life into gloom, joy into
despair, naturalness into disease, honesty and truth into hideous
lies and hypocrisies.  The ducking-stool and whipping post, as well
as numerous other devices of torture, were the favorite English
methods for American purification.

Boston, the city of culture, has gone down in the annals of
Puritanism as the "Bloody Town."  It rivaled Salem, even, in her
cruel persecution of unauthorized religious opinions.  On the now
famous Common a half-naked woman, with a baby in her arms, was
publicly whipped for the crime of free speech; and on the same spot
Mary Dyer, another Quaker woman, was hanged in 1659.  In fact, Boston
has been the scene of more than one wanton crime committed by
Puritanism.  Salem, in the summer of 1692, killed eighteen people for
witchcraft.  Nor was Massachusetts alone in driving out the devil by
fire and brimstone.  As Canning justly said: "The Pilgrim fathers
infested the New World to redress the balance of the Old."  The
horrors of that period have found their most supreme expression in
the American classic, THE SCARLET LETTER.

Puritanism no longer employs the thumbscrew and lash; but it still
has a most pernicious hold on the minds and feelings of the American
people.  Naught else can explain the power of a Comstock.  Like the
Torquemadas of ante-bellum days, Anthony Comstock is the autocrat of
American morals; he dictates the standards of good and evil, of
purity and vice.  Like a thief in the night he sneaks into the
private lives of the people, into their most intimate relations.
The system of espionage established by this man Comstock puts to
shame the infamous Third Division of the Russian secret police.  Why
does the public tolerate such an outrage on its liberties?  Simply
because Comstock is but the loud expression of the Puritanism bred in
the Anglo-Saxon blood, and from whose thraldom even liberals have not
succeeded in fully emancipating themselves.  The visionless and
leaden elements of the old Young Men's and Women's Christian
Temperance Unions, Purity Leagues, American Sabbath Unions, and the
Prohibition Party, with Anthony Comstock as their patron saint, are
the grave diggers of American art and culture.

Europe can at least boast of a bold art and literature which delve
deeply into the social and sexual problems of our time, exercising a
severe critique of all our shams.  As with a surgeon's knife every
Puritanic carcass is dissected, and the way thus cleared for man's
liberation from the dead weights of the past.  But with Puritanism as
the constant check upon American life, neither truth nor sincerity is
possible.  Nothing but gloom and mediocrity to dictate human conduct,
curtail natural expression, and stifle our best impulses.
Puritanism in this the twentieth century is as much the enemy of
freedom and beauty as it was when it landed on Plymouth Rock.  It
repudiates, as something vile and sinful, our deepest feelings; but
being absolutely ignorant as to the real functions of human emotions,
Puritanism is itself the creator of the most unspeakable vices.

The entire history of asceticism proves this to be only too true.
The Church, as well as Puritanism, has fought the flesh as something
evil; it had to be subdued and hidden at all cost.  The result of
this vicious attitude is only now beginning to be recognized by
modern thinkers and educators.  They realize that "nakedness has a
hygienic value as well as a spiritual significance, far beyond its
influences in allaying the natural inquisitiveness of the young or
acting as a preventative of morbid emotion.  It is an inspiration to
adults who have long outgrown any youthful curiosities.  The vision
of the essential and eternal human form, the nearest thing to us in
all the world, with its vigor and its beauty and its grace, is one of
the prime tonics of life."[1] But the spirit of purism has so perverted
the human mind that it has lost the power to appreciate the beauty of
nudity, forcing us to hide the natural form under the plea of
chastity.  Yet chastity itself is but an artificial imposition upon
nature, expressive of a false shame of the human form.  The modern
idea of chastity, especially in reference to woman, its greatest
victim, is but the sensuous exaggeration of our natural impulses.
"Chastity varies with the amount of clothing," and hence Christians
and purists forever hasten to cover the "heathen" with tatters, and
thus convert him to goodness and chastity.

Puritanism, with its perversion of the significance and functions of
the human body, especially in regard to woman, has condemned her to
celibacy, or to the indiscriminate breeding of a diseased race, or to
prostitution.  The enormity of this crime against humanity is
apparent when we consider the results.  Absolute sexual continence is
imposed upon the unmarried woman, under pain of being considered
immoral or fallen, with the result of producing neurasthenia,
impotence, depression, and a great variety of nervous complaints
involving diminished power of work, limited enjoyment of life,
sleeplessness, and preoccupation with sexual desires and imaginings.
The arbitrary and pernicious dictum of total continence probably also
explains the mental inequality of the sexes.  Thus Freud believes
that the intellectual inferiority of so many women is due to the
inhibition of thought imposed upon them for the purpose of sexual
repression.  Having thus suppressed the natural sex desires of the
unmarried woman, Puritanism, on the other hand, blesses her married
sister for incontinent fruitfulness in wedlock.  Indeed, not merely
blesses her, but forces the woman, oversexed by previous repression,
to bear children, irrespective of weakened physical condition or
economic inability to rear a large family.  Prevention, even by
scientifically determined safe methods, is absolutely prohibited;
nay, the very mention of the subject is considered criminal.


Thanks to this Puritanic tyranny, the majority of women soon find
themselves at the ebb of their physical resources.  Ill and worn,
they are utterly unable to give their children even elementary care.
That, added to economic pressure, forces many women to risk utmost
danger rather than continue to bring forth life.  The custom of
procuring abortions has reached such vast proportions in America as
to be almost beyond belief.  According to recent investigations along
this line, seventeen abortions are committed in every hundred
pregnancies.  This fearful percentage represents only cases which
come to the knowledge of physicians.  Considering the secrecy in
which this practice is necessarily shrouded, and the consequent
professional inefficiency and neglect, Puritanism continuously exacts
thousands of victims to its own stupidity and hypocrisy.

Prostitution, although hounded, imprisoned, and chained, is
nevertheless the greatest triumph of Puritanism.  It is its most
cherished child, all hypocritical sanctimoniousness notwithstanding.
The prostitute is the fury of our century, sweeping across the
"civilized" countries like a hurricane, and leaving a trail of
disease and disaster.  The only remedy Puritanism offers for this
ill-begotten child is greater repression and more merciless
persecution.  The latest outrage is represented by the Page Law,
which imposes upon New York the terrible failure and crime of Europe;
namely, registration and segregation of the unfortunate victims of
Puritanism.  In equally stupid manner purism seeks to check the
terrible scourge of its own creation--venereal diseases.  Most
disheartening it is that this spirit of obtuse narrow-mindedness has
poisoned even our so-called liberals, and has blinded them into
joining the crusade against the very things born of the hypocrisy of
Puritanism--prostitution and its results.  In wilful blindness
Puritanism refuses to see that the true method of prevention is the
one which makes it clear to all that "venereal diseases are not a
mysterious or terrible thing, the penalty of the sin of the flesh, a
sort of shameful evil branded by purist malediction, but an ordinary
disease which may be treated and cured."  By its methods of
obscurity, disguise, and concealment, Puritanism has furnished
favorable conditions for the growth and spread of these diseases.
Its bigotry is again most strikingly demonstrated by the senseless
attitude in regard to the great discovery of Prof. Ehrlich, hypocrisy
veiling the important cure for syphilis with vague allusions to a
remedy for "a certain poison."

The almost limitless capacity of Puritanism for evil is due to its
intrenchment behind the State and the law.  Pretending to safeguard
the people against "immorality," it has impregnated the machinery of
government and added to its usurpation of moral guardianship the
legal censorship of our views, feelings, and even of our conduct.

Art, literature, the drama, the privacy of the mails, in fact, our
most intimate tastes, are at the mercy of this inexorable tyrant.
Anthony Comstock, or some other equally ignorant policeman, has been
given power to desecrate genius, to soil and mutilate the sublimest
creation of nature--the human form.  Books dealing with the most
vital issues of our lives, and seeking to shed light upon dangerously
obscured problems, are legally treated as criminal offenses, and their
helpless authors thrown into prison or driven to destruction and
death.

Not even in the domain of the Tsar is personal liberty daily outraged
to the extent it is in America, the stronghold of the Puritanic
eunuchs.  Here the only day of recreation left to the masses, Sunday,
has been made hideous and utterly impossible.  All writers on
primitive customs and ancient civilization agree that the Sabbath was
a day of festivities, free from care and duties, a day of general
rejoicing and merry-making.  In every European country this tradition
continues to bring some relief from the humdrum and stupidity of our
Christian era.  Everywhere concert halls, theaters, museums, and
gardens are filled with men, women, and children, particularly
workers with their families, full of life and joy, forgetful of the
ordinary rules and conventions of their every-day existence.  It is
on that day that the masses demonstrate what life might really mean
in a sane society, with work stripped of its profit-making,
soul-destroying purpose.

Puritanism has robbed the people even of that one day.  Naturally,
only the workers are affected: our millionaires have their luxurious
homes and elaborate clubs.  The poor, however, are condemned to the
monotony and dullness of the American Sunday.  The sociability and
fun of European outdoor life is here exchanged for the gloom of the
church, the stuffy, germ-saturated country parlor, or the brutalizing
atmosphere of the back-room saloon.  In Prohibition States the people
lack even the latter, unless they can invest their meager earnings in
quantities of adulterated liquor.  As to Prohibition, every one knows
what a farce it really is.  Like all other achievements of Puritanism
it, too, has but driven the "devil" deeper into the human system.
Nowhere else does one meet so many drunkards as in our Prohibition
towns.  But so long as one can use scented candy to abate the foul
breath of hypocrisy, Puritanism is triumphant.  Ostensibly
Prohibition is opposed to liquor for reasons of health and economy,
but the very spirit of Prohibition being itself abnormal, it succeeds
but in creating an abnormal life.

Every stimulus which quickens the imagination and raises the spirits,
is as necessary to our life as air.  It invigorates the body, and
deepens our vision of human fellowship.  Without stimuli, in one form
or another, creative work is impossible, nor indeed the spirit of
kindliness and generosity.  The fact that some great geniuses have
seen their reflection in the goblet too frequently, does not justify
Puritanism in attempting to fetter the whole gamut of human emotions.
A Byron and a Poe have stirred humanity deeper than all the Puritans
can ever hope to do.  The former have given to life meaning and
color; the latter are turning red blood into water, beauty into
ugliness, variety into uniformity and decay.  Puritanism, in whatever
expression, is a poisonous germ.  On the surface everything may look
strong and vigorous; yet the poison works its way persistently, until
the entire fabric is doomed.  With Hippolyte Taine, every truly free
spirit has come to realize that "Puritanism is the death of culture,
philosophy, humor, and good fellowship; its characteristics are
dullness, monotony, and gloom."


[1] THE PSYCHOLOGY OF SEX.  Havelock Ellis.




THE TRAFFIC IN WOMEN


Our reformers have suddenly made a great discovery--the white slave
traffic.  The papers are full of these "unheard of conditions," and
lawmakers are already planning a new set of laws to check the horror.

It is significant that whenever the public mind is to be diverted
from a great social wrong, a crusade is inaugurated against
indecency, gambling, saloons, etc.  And what is the result of such
crusades?  Gambling is increasing, saloons are doing a lively
business through back entrances, prostitution is at its height, and
the system of pimps and cadets is but aggravated.

How is it that an institution, known almost to every child, should
have been discovered so suddenly?  How is it that this evil, known to
all sociologists, should now be made such an important issue?

To assume that the recent investigation of the white slave traffic
(and, by the way, a very superficial investigation) has discovered
anything new, is, to say the least, very foolish.  Prostitution has
been, and is, a widespread evil, yet mankind goes on its business,
perfectly indifferent to the sufferings and distress of the victims
of prostitution.  As indifferent, indeed, as mankind has remained to
our industrial system, or to economic prostitution.

Only when human sorrows are turned into a toy with glaring colors
will baby people become interested--for a while at least.  The people
are a very fickle baby that must have new toys every day.  The
"righteous" cry against the white slave traffic is such a toy.  It
serves to amuse the people for a little while, and it will help to
create a few more fat political jobs--parasites who stalk about the
world as inspectors, investigators, detectives, and so forth.

What is really the cause of the trade in women?  Not merely white
women, but yellow and black women as well.  Exploitation, of course;
the merciless Moloch of capitalism that fattens on underpaid labor,
thus driving thousands of women and girls into prostitution.  With
Mrs. Warren these girls feel, "Why waste your life working for a few
shillings a week in a scullery, eighteen hours a day?"

Naturally our reformers say nothing about this cause.  They know it
well enough, but it doesn't pay to say anything about it.  It is much
more profitable to play the Pharisee, to pretend an outraged
morality, than to go to the bottom of things.

However, there is one commendable exception among the young writers:
Reginald Wright Kauffman, whose work, THE HOUSE OF BONDAGE, is the
first earnest attempt to treat the social evil, not from a
sentimental Philistine viewpoint.  A journalist of wide experience,
Mr. Kauffman proves that our industrial system leaves most women no
alternative except prostitution.  The women portrayed in THE HOUSE OF
BONDAGE belong to the working class.  Had the author portrayed the
life of women in other spheres, he would have been confronted with
the same state of affairs.

Nowhere is woman treated according to the merit of her work, but
rather as a sex.  It is therefore almost inevitable that she should
pay for her right to exist, to keep a position in whatever line, with
sex favors.  Thus it is merely a question of degree whether she sells
herself to one man, in or out of marriage, or to many men.  Whether
our reformers admit it or not, the economic and social inferiority of
woman is responsible for prostitution.

Just at present our good people are shocked by the disclosures that
in New York City alone, one out of every ten women works in a
factory, that the average wage received by women is six dollars per
week for forty-eight to sixty hours of work, and that the majority of
female wage workers face many months of idleness which leaves the
average wage about $280 a year.  In view of these economic horrors,
is it to be wondered at that prostitution and the white slave trade
have become such dominant factors?

Lest the preceding figures be considered an exaggeration, it is well
to examine what some authorities on prostitution have to say:

"A prolific cause of female depravity can be found in the several
tables, showing the description of the employment pursued, and the
wages received, by the women previous to their fall, and it will be a
question for the political economist to decide how far mere business
consideration should be an apology on the part of employers for a
reduction in their rates of remuneration, and whether the savings of
a small percentage on wages is not more than counter-balanced by the
enormous amount of taxation enforced on the public at large to defray
the expenses incurred on account of a system of vice, WHICH IS THE
DIRECT RESULT, IN MANY CASES, OF INSUFFICIENT COMPENSATION OF HONEST
LABOR."[1]

Our present-day reformers would do well to look into Dr. Sanger's
book.  There they will find that out of 2,000 cases under his
observation, but few came from the middle classes, from well-ordered
conditions, or pleasant homes.  By far the largest majority were
working girls and working women; some driven into prostitution
through sheer want, others because of a cruel, wretched life at home,
others again because of thwarted and crippled physical natures (of
which I shall speak later on).  Also it will do the maintainers of
purity and morality good to learn that out of two thousand cases, 490
were married women, women who lived with their husbands.  Evidently
there was not much of a guaranty for their "safety and purity" in the
sanctity of marriage.[2]

Dr. Alfred Blaschko, in PROSTITUTION IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY, is
even more emphatic in characterizing economic conditions as one of
the most vital factors of prostitution.

"Although prostitution has existed in all ages, it was left to the
nineteenth century to develop it into a gigantic social institution.
The development of industry with vast masses of people in the
competitive market, the growth and congestion of large cities, the
insecurity and uncertainty of employment, has given prostitution an
impetus never dreamed of at any period in human history."

And again Havelock Ellis, while not so absolute in dealing with the
economic cause, is nevertheless compelled to admit that it is
indirectly and directly the main cause.  Thus he finds that a large
percentage of prostitutes is recruited from the servant class,
although the latter have less care and greater security.  On the
other hand, Mr. Ellis does not deny that the daily routine, the
drudgery, the monotony of the servant girl's lot, and especially the
fact that she may never partake of the companionship and joy of a
home, is no mean factor in forcing her to seek recreation and
forgetfulness in the gaiety and glimmer of prostitution.  In other
words, the servant girl, being treated as a drudge, never having the
right to herself, and worn out by the caprices of her mistress, can
find an outlet, like the factory or shopgirl, only in prostitution.

The most amusing side of the question now before the public is the
indignation of our "good, respectable people," especially the various
Christian gentlemen, who are always to be found in the front ranks of
every crusade.  Is it that they are absolutely ignorant of the
history of religion, and especially of the Christian religion?  Or is
it that they hope to blind the present generation to the part played
in the past by the Church in relation to prostitution?  Whatever
their reason, they should be the last to cry out against the
unfortunate victims of today, since it is known to every intelligent
student that prostitution is of religious origin, maintained and
fostered for many centuries, not as a shame but as a virtue, hailed
as such by the Gods themselves.

"It would seem that the origin of prostitution is to be found
primarily in a religious custom, religion, the great conserver of
social tradition, preserving in a transformed shape a primitive
freedom that was passing out of the general social life.  The typical
example is that recorded by Herodotus, in the fifth century before
Christ, at the Temple of Mylitta, the Babylonian Venus, where every
woman, once in her life, had to come and give herself to the first
stranger, who threw a coin in her lap, to worship the goddess.  Very
similar customs existed in other parts of Western Asia, in North
Africa, in Cyprus, and other islands of the Eastern Mediterranean,
and also in Greece, where the temple of Aphrodite on the fort at
Corinth possessed over a thousand hierodules, dedicated to the
service of the goddess.

"The theory that religious prostitution developed, as a general rule,
out of the belief that the generative activity of human beings
possessed a mysterious and sacred influence in promoting the
fertility of Nature, is maintained by all authoritative writers on
the subject.  Gradually, however, and when prostitution became an
organized institution under priestly influence, religious
prostitution developed utilitarian sides, thus helping to increase
public revenue.

"The rise of Christianity to political power produced little change
in policy.  The leading fathers of the Church tolerated prostitution.
Brothels under municipal protection are found in the thirteenth
century.  They constituted a sort of public service, the directors of
them being considered almost as public servants."[3]

To this must be added the following from Dr. Sanger's work:

"Pope Clement II. issued a bull that prostitutes would be tolerated
if they pay a certain amount of their earnings to the Church.

"Pope Sixtus IV. was more practical; from one single brothel, which
he himself had built, he received an income of 20,000 ducats."

In modern times the Church is a little more careful in that
direction.  At least she does not openly demand tribute from
prostitutes.  She finds it much more profitable to go in for real
estate, like Trinity Church, for instance, to rent out death traps at
an exorbitant price to those who live off and by prostitution.

Much as I should like to, my space will not admit speaking of
prostitution in Egypt, Greece, Rome, and during the Middle Ages.  The
conditions in the latter period are particularly interesting,
inasmuch as prostitution was organized into guilds, presided over by
a brothel Queen.  These guilds employed strikes as a medium of
improving their condition and keeping a standard price.  Certainly
that is more practical a method than the one used by the modern wage
slave in society.

It would be one-sided and extremely superficial to maintain that the
economic factor is the only cause of prostitution.  There are others
no less important and vital.  That, too, our reformers know, but dare
discuss even less than the institution that saps the very life out of
both men and women.  I refer to the sex question, the very mention of
which causes most people moral spasms.

It is a conceded fact that woman is being reared as a sex commodity,
and yet she is kept in absolute ignorance of the meaning and
importance of sex.  Everything dealing with the subject is
suppressed, and persons who attempt to bring light into this terrible
darkness are persecuted and thrown into prison.  Yet it is
nevertheless true that so long as a girl is not to know how to take
care of herself, not to know the function of the most important part
of her life, we need not be surprised if she becomes an easy prey to
prostitution, or to any other form of a relationship which degrades
her to the position of an object for mere sex gratification.

It is due to this ignorance that the entire life and nature of the
girl is thwarted and crippled.  We have long ago taken it as a
self-evident fact that the boy may follow the call of the wild; that
is to say, that the boy may, as soon has his sex nature asserts
itself, satisfy that nature; but our moralists are scandalized at the
very thought that the nature of a girl should assert itself.  To the
moralist prostitution does not consist so much in the fact that the
woman sells her body, but rather that she sells it out of wedlock.
That this is no mere statement is proved by the fact that marriage
for monetary considerations is perfectly legitimate, sanctified by
law and public opinion, while any other union is condemned and
repudiated.  Yet a prostitute, if properly defined, means nothing
else than "any person for whom sexual relationships are subordinated
to gain."[4]

"Those women are prostitutes who sell their bodies for the exercise
of the sexual act and make of this a profession."[5]

In fact, Banger goes further; he maintains that the act of
prostitution is "intrinsically equal to that of a man or woman who
contracts a marriage for economic reasons."

Of course, marriage is the goal of every girl, but as thousands of
girls cannot marry, our stupid social customs condemn them either to
a life of celibacy or prostitution.  Human nature asserts itself
regardless of all laws, nor is there any plausible reason why nature
should adapt itself to a perverted conception of morality.

Society considers the sex experiences of a man as attributes of his
general development, while similar experiences in the life of a woman
are looked upon as a terrible calamity, a loss of honor and of all
that is good and noble in a human being.  This double standard of
morality has played no little part in the creation and perpetuation
of prostitution.  It involves the keeping of the young in absolute
ignorance on sex matters, which alleged "innocence," together with an
overwrought and stifled sex nature, helps to bring about a state of
affairs that our Puritans are so anxious to avoid or prevent.

Not that the gratification of sex must needs lead to prostitution; it
is the cruel, heartless, criminal persecution of those who dare
divert from the beaten paths, which is responsible for it.

Girls, mere children, work in crowded, over-heated rooms ten to
twelve hours daily at a machine, which tends to keep them in a
constant over-excited sex state.  Many of these girls have no home or
comforts of any kind; therefore the street or some place of cheap
amusement is the only means of forgetting their daily routine.  This
naturally brings them into close proximity with the other sex.  It is
hard to say which of the two factors brings the girl's over-sexed
condition to a climax, but it is certainly the most natural thing
that a climax should result.  That is the first step toward
prostitution.  Nor is the girl to be held responsible for it.  On the
contrary, it is altogether the fault of society, the fault of our
lack of understanding, of our lack of appreciation of life in the
making; especially is it the criminal fault of our moralists, who
condemn a girl for all eternity, because she has gone from the "path
of virtue"; that is, because her first sex experience has taken place
without the sanction of the Church.

The girl feels herself a complete outcast, with the doors of home and
society closed in her face.  Her entire training and tradition is
such that the girl herself feels depraved and fallen, and therefore
has no ground to stand upon, or any hold that will lift her up,
instead of dragging her down.  Thus society creates the victims that
it afterwards vainly attempts to get rid of.  The meanest, most
depraved and decrepit man still considers himself too good to take as
his wife the woman whose grace he was quite willing to buy, even
though he might thereby save her from a life of horror.  Nor can she
turn to her own sister for help.  In her stupidity the latter deems
herself too pure and chaste, not realizing that her own position is
in many respects even more deplorable than her sister's of the
street.


"The wife who married for money, compared with the prostitute," says
Havelock Ellis, "is the true scab.  She is paid less, gives much more
in return in labor and care, and is absolutely bound to her master.
The prostitute never signs away the right over her own person, she
retains her freedom and personal rights, nor is she always compelled
to submit to a man's embrace."


Nor does the better-than-thou woman realize the apologist claim of
Lecky that "though she may be the supreme type of vice, she is also
the most efficient guardian of virtue.  But for her, happy homes
would be polluted, unnatural and harmful practice would abound."

Moralists are ever ready to sacrifice one-half of the human race for
the sake of some miserable institution which they can not outgrow.
As a matter of fact, prostitution is no more a safeguard for the
purity of the home than rigid laws are a safeguard against
prostitution.  Fully fifty per cent. of married men are patrons of
brothels.  It is through this virtuous element that the married
women--nay, even the children--are infected with venereal diseases.
Yet society has not a word of condemnation for the man, while no law
is too monstrous to be set in motion against the helpless victim.
She is not only preyed upon by those who use her, but she is also
absolutely at the mercy of every policeman and miserable detective on
the beat, the officials at the station house, the authorities in
every prison.


In a recent book by a woman who was for twelve years the mistress of
a "house," are to be found the following figures: "The authorities
compelled me to pay every month fines between $14.70 to $29.70, the
girls would pay from $5.70 to $9.70 to the police."  Considering that
the writer did her business in a small city, that the amounts she
gives do not include extra bribes and fines, one can readily see the
tremendous revenue the police department derives from the blood money
of its victims, whom it will not even protect.  Woe to those who
refuse to pay their toll; they would be rounded up like cattle, "if
only to make a favorable impression upon the good citizens of the
city, or if the powers needed extra money on the side.  For the
warped mind who believes that a fallen woman is incapable of human
emotion it would be impossible to realize the grief, the disgrace,
the tears, the wounded pride that was ours every time we were pulled
in."

Strange, isn't it, that a woman who has a kept a "house" should be
able to feel that way?  But stranger still that a good Christian
world should bleed and fleece such women, and give them nothing in
return except obloquy and persecution.  Oh, for the charity of a
Christian world!

Much stress is laid on white slaves being imported into America.  How
would America ever retain her virtue if Europe did not help her out?
I will not deny that this may be the case in some instances, any more
than I will deny that there are emissaries of Germany and other
countries luring economic slaves into America; but I absolutely deny
that prostitution is recruited to any appreciable extent from Europe.
It may be true that the majority of prostitutes in New York City are
foreigners, but that is because the majority of the population is
foreign.  The moment we go to any other American city, to Chicago or
the Middle West, we shall find that the number of foreign
prostitutes is by far a minority.

Equally exaggerated is the belief that the majority of street girls
in this city were engaged in this business before they came to
America.  Most of the girls speak excellent English, are Americanized
in habits and appearance,--a thing absolutely impossible unless they
had lived in this country many years.  That is, they were driven into
prostitution by American conditions, by the thoroughly American
custom for excessive display of finery and clothes, which, of course,
necessitates money,--money that cannot be earned in shops or
factories.

In other words, there is no reason to believe that any set of men
would go to the risk and expense of getting foreign products, when
American conditions are overflooding the market with thousands of
girls.  On the other hand, there is sufficient evidence to prove that
the export of American girls for the purpose of prostitution is by no
means a small factor.

Thus Clifford G. Roe, ex-Assistant State Attorney of Cook County,
Ill., makes the open charge that New England girls are shipped to
Panama for the express use of men in the employ of Uncle Sam.  Mr.
Roe adds that "there seems to be an underground railroad between
Boston and Washington which many girls travel."  Is it not
significant that the railroad should lead to the very seat of Federal
authority?  That Mr. Roe said more than was desired in certain
quarters is proved by the fact that he lost his position.  It is not
practical for men in office to tell tales from school.

The excuse given for the conditions in Panama is that there are no
brothels in the Canal Zone.  That is the usual avenue of escape for a
hypocritical world that dares not face the truth.  Not in the Canal
Zone, not in the city limits,--therefore prostitution does not exist.

Next to Mr. Roe, there is James Bronson Reynolds, who has made a
thorough study of the white slave traffic in Asia.  As a staunch
American citizen and friend of the future Napoleon of America,
Theodore Roosevelt, he is surely the last to discredit the virtue of
his country.  Yet we are informed by him that in Hong Kong, Shanghai,
and Yokohama, the Augean stables of American vice are located.  There
American prostitutes have made themselves so conspicuous that in the
Orient "American girl" is synonymous with prostitute.  Mr. Reynolds
reminds his countrymen that while Americans in China are under the
protection of our consular representatives, the Chinese in America
have no protection at all.  Every one who knows the brutal and
barbarous persecution Chinese and Japanese endure on the Pacific
Coast, will agree with Mr. Reynolds.

In view of the above facts it is rather absurd to point to Europe as
the swamp whence come all the social diseases of America.  Just as
absurd is it to proclaim the myth that the Jews furnish the largest
contingent of willing prey.  I am sure that no one will accuse me of
nationalistic tendencies.  I am glad to say that I have developed out
of them, as out of many other prejudices.  If, therefore, I resent
the statement that Jewish prostitutes are imported, it is not because
of any Judaistic sympathies, but because of the facts inherent in the
lives of these people.  No one but the most superficial will claim
that Jewish girls migrate to strange lands, unless they have some tie
or relation that brings them there.  The Jewish girl is not
adventurous.  Until recent years she had never left home, not even so
far as the next village or town, except it were to visit some
relative.  Is it then credible that Jewish girls would leave their
parents or families, travel thousands of miles to strange lands,
through the influence and promises of strange forces?  Go to any of
the large incoming steamers and see for yourself if these girls do
not come either with their parents, brothers, aunts, or other
kinsfolk.  There may be exceptions, of course, but to state that
large numbers of Jewish girls are imported for prostitution, or any
other purpose, is simply not to know Jewish psychology.

Those who sit in a glass house do wrong to throw stones about them;
besides, the American glass house is rather thin, it will break
easily, and the interior is anything but a gainly sight.

To ascribe the increase in prostitution to alleged importation, to
the growth of the cadet system, or similar causes, is highly
superficial.  I have already referred to the former.  As to the cadet
system, abhorrent as it is, we must not ignore the fact that it is
essentially a phase of modern prostitution,--a phase accentuated by
suppression and graft, resulting from sporadic crusades against the
social evil.

The procurer is no doubt a poor specimen of the human family, but in
what manner is he more despicable than the policeman who takes the
last cent from the street walker, and then locks her up in the
station house?  Why is the cadet more criminal, or a greater menace
to society, than the owners of department stores and factories, who
grow fat on the sweat of their victims, only to drive them to the
streets?  I make no plea for the cadet, but I fail to see why he
should be mercilessly hounded, while the real perpetrators of all
social iniquity enjoy immunity and respect.  Then, too, it is well to
remember that it is not the cadet who makes the prostitute.  It is
our sham and hypocrisy that create both the prostitute and the cadet.

Until 1894 very little was known in America of the procurer.  Then we
were attacked by an epidemic of virtue.  Vice was to be abolished,
the country purified at all cost.  The social cancer was therefore
driven out of sight, but deeper into the body.  Keepers of brothels,
as well as their unfortunate victims, were turned over to the tender
mercies of the police.  The inevitable consequence of exorbitant
bribes, and the penitentiary, followed.

While comparatively protected in the brothels, where they represented
a certain monetary value, the girls now found themselves on the
street, absolutely at the mercy of the graft-greedy police.
Desperate, needing protection and longing for affection, these girls
naturally proved an easy prey for cadets, themselves the result of
the spirit of our commercial age.  Thus the cadet system was the
direct outgrowth of police persecution, graft, and attempted
suppression of prostitution.  It were sheer folly to confound this
modern phase of the social evil with the causes of the latter.

Mere suppression and barbaric enactments can serve but to embitter,
and further degrade, the unfortunate victims of ignorance and
stupidity.  The latter has reached its highest expression in the
proposed law to make humane treatment of prostitutes a crime,
punishing any one sheltering a prostitute with five years'
imprisonment and $10,000 fine.  Such an attitude merely exposes the
terrible lack of understanding of the true causes of prostitution, as
a social factor, as well as manifesting the Puritanic spirit of the
Scarlet Letter days.

There is not a single modern writer on the subject who does not refer
to the utter futility of legislative methods in coping with the
issue.  Thus Dr. Blaschko finds that governmental suppression and
moral crusades accomplish nothing save driving the evil into secret
channels, multiplying its dangers to society.  Havelock Ellis, the
most thorough and humane student of prostitution, proves by a wealth
of data that the more stringent the methods of persecution the worse
the condition becomes.  Among other data we learn that in France, "in
1560, Charles IX. abolished brothels through an edict, but the
numbers of prostitutes were only increased, while many new brothels
appeared in unsuspected shapes, and were more dangerous.  In spite of
all such legislation, OR BECAUSE OF IT, there has been no country in
which prostitution has played a more conspicuous part."[6]

An educated public opinion, freed from the legal and moral hounding
of the prostitute, can alone help to ameliorate present conditions.
Wilful shutting of eyes and ignoring of the evil as a social factor
of modern life, can but aggravate matters.  We must rise above our
foolish notions of "better than thou," and learn to recognize in the
prostitute a product of social conditions.  Such a realization will
sweep away the attitude of hypocrisy, and insure a greater
understanding and more humane treatment.  As to a thorough
eradication of prostitution, nothing can accomplish that save a
complete transvaluation of all accepted values--especially the moral
ones--coupled with the abolition of industrial slavery.


[1] Dr. Sanger, THE HISTORY OF PROSTITUTION.

[2] It is a significant fact that Dr. Sanger's book has been excluded
from the U. S. mails.  Evidently the authorities are not anxious that
the public be informed as to the true cause of prostitution.

[3] Havelock Ellis, SEX AND SOCIETY.

[4] Guyot, LA PROSTITUTION.

[5] Banger, CRIMINALITE ET CONDITION ECONOMIQUE.

[6] SEX AND SOCIETY.




WOMAN SUFFRAGE


We boast of the age of advancement, of science, and progress.  Is it
not strange, then, that we still believe in fetich worship?  True,
our fetiches have different form and substance, yet in their power
over the human mind they are still as disastrous as were those of
old.

Our modern fetich is universal suffrage.  Those who have not yet
achieved that goal fight bloody revolutions to obtain it, and those
who have enjoyed its reign bring heavy sacrifice to the altar of this
omnipotent deity.  Woe to the heretic who dare question that
divinity!

Woman, even more than man, is a fetich worshipper, and though her
idols may change, she is ever on her knees, ever holding up her
hands, ever blind to the fact that her god has feet of clay.  Thus
woman has been the greatest supporter of all deities from time
immemorial.  Thus, too, she has had to pay the price that only gods
can exact,--her freedom, her heart's blood, her very life.

Nietzsche's memorable maxim, "When you go to woman, take the whip
along," is considered very brutal, yet Nietzsche expressed in one
sentence the attitude of woman towards her gods.

Religion, especially the Christian religion, has condemned woman to
the life of an inferior, a slave.  It has thwarted her nature and
fettered her soul, yet the Christian religion has no greater
supporter, none more devout, than woman.  Indeed, it is safe to say
that religion would have long ceased to be a factor in the lives of
the people, if it were not for the support it receives from woman.
The most ardent churchworkers, the most tireless missionaries the
world over, are women, always sacrificing on the altar of the gods
that have chained her spirit and enslaved her body.

The insatiable monster, war, robs woman of all that is dear and
precious to her.  It exacts her brothers, lovers, sons, and in return
gives her a life of loneliness and despair.  Yet the greatest
supporter and worshiper of war is woman.  She it is who instills the
love of conquest and power into her children; she it is who whispers
the glories of war into the ears of her little ones, and who rocks
her baby to sleep with the tunes of trumpets and the noise of guns.
It is woman, too, who crowns the victor on his return from the
battlefield.  Yes, it is woman who pays the highest price to that
insatiable monster, war.

Then there is the home.  What a terrible fetich it is!  How it saps
the very life-energy of woman,--this modern prison with golden bars.
Its shining aspect blinds woman to the price she would have to pay as
wife, mother, and housekeeper.  Yet woman clings tenaciously to the
home, to the power that holds her in bondage.

It may be said that because woman recognizes the awful toll she is
made to pay to the Church, State, and the home, she wants suffrage to
set herself free.  That may be true of the few; the majority of
suffragists repudiate utterly such blasphemy.  On the contrary, they
insist always that it is woman suffrage which will make her a better
Christian and homekeeper, a staunch citizen of the State.  Thus
suffrage is only a means of strengthening the omnipotence of the very
Gods that woman has served from time immemorial.

What wonder, then, that she should be just as devout, just as
zealous, just as prostrate before the new idol, woman suffrage.  As
of old, she endures persecution, imprisonment, torture, and all forms
of condemnation, with a smile on her face.  As of old, the most
enlightened, even, hope for a miracle from the twentieth century
deity,--suffrage.  Life, happiness, joy, freedom, independence,--all
that, and more, is to spring from suffrage.  In her blind devotion
woman does not see what people of intellect perceived fifty years
ago: that suffrage is an evil, that it has only helped to enslave
people, that it has but closed their eyes that they may not see how
craftily they were made to submit.

Woman's demand for equal suffrage is based largely on the contention
that woman must have the equal right in all affairs of society.  No
one could, possibly, refute that, if suffrage were a right.  Alas,
for the ignorance of the human mind, which can see a right in an
imposition.  Or is it not the most brutal imposition for one set of
people to make laws that another set is coerced by force to obey?
Yet woman clamors for that "golden opportunity" that has wrought so
much misery in the world, and robbed man of his integrity and
self-reliance; an imposition which has thoroughly corrupted the
people, and made them absolute prey in the hands of unscrupulous
politicians.

The poor, stupid, free American citizen!  Free to starve, free to
tramp the highways of this great country, he enjoys universal
suffrage, and, by that right, he has forged chains about his limbs.
The reward that he receives is stringent labor laws prohibiting the
right of boycott, of picketing, in fact, of everything, except the
right to be robbed of the fruits of his labor.  Yet all these
disastrous results of the twentieth century fetich have taught woman
nothing.  But, then, woman will purify politics, we are assured.

Needless to say, I am not opposed to woman suffrage on the
conventional ground that she is not equal to it.  I see neither
physical, psychological, nor mental reasons why woman should not have
the equal right to vote with man.  But that can not possibly blind me
to the absurd notion that woman will accomplish that wherein man has
failed.  If she would not make things worse, she certainly could not
make them better.  To assume, therefore, that she would succeed in
purifying something which is not susceptible of purification, is to
credit her with supernatural powers.  Since woman's greatest
misfortune has been that she was looked upon as either angel or
devil, her true salvation lies in being placed on earth; namely, in
being considered human, and therefore subject to all human follies
and mistakes.  Are we, then, to believe that two errors will make a
right?  Are we to assume that the poison already inherent in politics
will be decreased, if women were to enter the political arena?  The
most ardent suffragists would hardly maintain such a folly.

As a matter of fact, the most advanced students of universal suffrage
have come to realize that all existing systems of political power are
absurd, and are completely inadequate to meet the pressing issues of
life.  This view is also borne out by a statement of one who is
herself an ardent believer in woman suffrage, Dr. Helen L. Sumner.
In her able work on EQUAL SUFFRAGE, she says: "In Colorado, we find
that equal suffrage serves to show in the most striking way the
essential rottenness and degrading character of the existing system."
Of course, Dr. Sumner has in mind a particular system of voting, but
the same applies with equal force to the entire machinery of the
representative system.  With such a basis, it is difficult to
understand how woman, as a political factor, would benefit either
herself or the rest of mankind.

But, say our suffrage devotees, look at the countries and States
where female suffrage exists.  See what woman has accomplished--in
Australia, New Zealand, Finland, the Scandinavian countries, and in
our own four States, Idaho, Colorado, Wyoming, and Utah.  Distance
lends enchantment--or, to quote a Polish formula--"it is well where
we are not."  Thus one would assume that those countries and States
are unlike other countries or States, that they have greater
freedom, greater social and economic equality, a finer appreciation
of human life, deeper understanding of the great social struggle,
with all the vital questions it involves for the human race.

The women of Australia and New Zealand can vote, and help make the
laws.  Are the labor conditions better there than they are in
England, where the suffragettes are making such a heroic struggle?
Does there exist a greater motherhood, happier and freer children
than in England?  Is woman there no longer considered a mere sex
commodity?  Has she emancipated herself from the Puritanical double
standard of morality for men and women?  Certainly none but the
ordinary female stump politician will dare answer these questions in
the affirmative.  If that be so, it seems ridiculous to point to
Australia and New Zealand as the Mecca of equal suffrage
accomplishments.

On the other hand, it is a fact to those who know the real political
conditions in Australia, that politics have gagged labor by enacting
the most stringent labor laws, making strikes without the sanction of
an arbitration committee a crime equal to treason.

Not for a moment do I mean to imply that woman suffrage is
responsible for this state of affairs.  I do mean, however, that
there is no reason to point to Australia as a wonder-worker of
woman's accomplishment, since her influence has been unable to free
labor from the thralldom of political bossism.

Finland has given woman equal suffrage; nay, even the right to sit in
Parliament.  Has that helped to develop a greater heroism, an
intenser zeal than that of the women of Russia?  Finland, like
Russia, smarts under the terrible whip of the bloody Tsar.  Where are
the Finnish Perovskaias, Spiridonovas, Figners, Breshkovskaias?
Where are the countless numbers of Finnish young girls who cheerfully
go to Siberia for their cause?  Finland is sadly in need of heroic
liberators.  Why has the ballot not created them?  The only Finnish
avenger of his people was a man, not a woman, and he used a more
effective weapon than the ballot.

As to our own States where women vote, and which are constantly being
pointed out as examples of marvels, what has been accomplished there
through the ballot that women do not to a large extent enjoy in other
States; or that they could not achieve through energetic efforts
without the ballot?

True, in the suffrage States women are guaranteed equal rights to
property; but of what avail is that right to the mass of women
without property, the thousands of wage workers, who live from hand
to mouth?  That equal suffrage did not, and cannot, affect their
condition is admitted even by Dr. Sumner, who certainly is in a
position to know.  As an ardent suffragist, and having been sent to
Colorado by the Collegiate Equal Suffrage League of New York State to
collect material in favor of suffrage, she would be the last to say
anything derogatory; yet we are informed that "equal suffrage has but
slightly affected the economic conditions of women.  That women do
not receive equal pay for equal work, and that, though woman in
Colorado has enjoyed school suffrage since 1876, women teachers are
paid less than in California."  On the other hand, Miss Sumner fails
to account for the fact that although women have had school suffrage
for thirty-four years, and equal suffrage since 1894, the census in
Denver alone a few months ago disclosed the fact of fifteen thousand
defective school children.  And that, too, with mostly women in the
educational department, and also notwithstanding that women in
Colorado have passed the "most stringent laws for child and animal
protection."  The women of Colorado "have taken great interest in the
State institutions for the care of dependent, defective, and
delinquent children."  What a horrible indictment against woman's
care and interest, if one city has fifteen thousand defective
children.  What about the glory of woman suffrage, since it has
failed utterly in the most important social issue, the child?  And
where is the superior sense of justice that woman was to bring into
the political field?  Where was it in 1903, when the mine owners
waged a guerilla war against the Western Miners' Union; when General
Bell established a reign of terror, pulling men out of beds at night,
kidnapping them across the border line, throwing them into bull pens,
declaring "to hell with the Constitution, the club is the
Constitution"?  Where were the women politicians then, and why did
they not exercise the power of their vote?  But they did.  They
helped to defeat the most fair-minded and liberal man, Governor
Waite.  The latter had to make way for the tool of the mine kings,
Governor Peabody, the enemy of labor, the Tsar of Colorado.
"Certainly male suffrage could have done nothing worse."  Granted.
Wherein, then, are the advantages to woman and society from woman
suffrage?  The oft-repeated assertion that woman will purify politics
is also but a myth.  It is not borne out by the people who know the
political conditions of Idaho, Colorado, Wyoming, and Utah.

Woman, essentially a purist, is naturally bigotted and relentless in
her effort to make others as good as she thinks they ought to be.
Thus, in Idaho, she has disfranchised her sister of the street, and
declared all women of "lewd character" unfit to vote.  "Lewd" not
being interpreted, of course, as prostitution IN marriage.  It goes
without saying that illegal prostitution and gambling have been
prohibited.  In this regard the law must needs be of feminine nature:
it always prohibits.  Therein all laws are wonderful.  They go no
further, but their very tendencies open all the floodgates of hell.
Prostitution and gambling have never done a more flourishing business
than since the law has been set against them.

In Colorado, the Puritanism of woman has expressed itself in a more
drastic form.  "Men of notoriously unclean lives, and men connected
with saloons, have been dropped from politics since women have the
vote."[1]  Could brother Comstock do more?  Could all the Puritan
fathers have done more?  I wonder how many women realize the gravity
of this would-be feat.  I wonder if they understand that it is the
very thing which, instead of elevating woman, has made her a
political spy, a contemptible pry into the private affairs of people,
not so much for the good of the cause, but because, as a Colorado
woman said, "they like to get into houses they have never been in,
and find out all they can, politically and otherwise."[2]  Yes, and
into the human soul and its minutest nooks and corners.  For nothing
satisfies the craving of most women so much as scandal.  And when did
she ever enjoy such opportunities as are hers, the politician's?

"Notoriously unclean lives, and men connected with the saloons."
Certainly, the lady vote gatherers can not be accused of much sense
of proportion.  Granting even that these busybodies can decide whose
lives are clean enough for that eminently clean atmosphere, politics,
must it follow that saloon-keepers belong to the same category?
Unless it be American hypocrisy and bigotry, so manifest in the
principle of Prohibition, which sanctions the spread of drunkenness
among men and women of the rich class, yet keeps vigilant watch on
the only place left to the poor man.  If no other reason, woman's
narrow and purist attitude toward life makes her a greater danger to
liberty wherever she has political power.  Man has long overcome the
superstitions that still engulf woman.  In the economic competitive
field, man has been compelled to exercise efficiency, judgment,
ability, competency.  He therefore had neither time nor inclination
to measure everyone's morality with a Puritanic yardstick.  In his
political activities, too, he has not gone about blindfolded.  He
knows that quantity and not quality is the material for the political
grinding mill, and, unless he is a sentimental reformer or an old
fossil, he knows that politics can never be anything but a swamp.

Women who are at all conversant with the process of politics, know
the nature of the beast, but in their self-sufficiency and egotism
they make themselves believe that they have but to pet the beast, and
he will become as gentle as a lamb, sweet and pure.  As if women have
not sold their votes, as if women politicians can not be bought!  If
her body can be bought in return for material consideration, why not
her vote?  That it is being done in Colorado and in other States, is
not denied even by those in favor of woman suffrage.

As I have said before, woman's narrow view of human affairs is not
the only argument against her as a politician superior to man.  There
are others.  Her life-long economic parasitism has utterly blurred
her conception of the meaning of equality.  She clamors for equal
rights with men, yet we learn that "few women care to canvas in
undesirable districts."[3]  How little equality means to them compared
with the Russian women, who face hell itself for their ideal!

Woman demands the same rights as man, yet she is indignant that her
presence does not strike him dead: he smokes, keeps his hat on, and
does not jump from his seat like a flunkey.  These may be trivial
things, but they are nevertheless the key to the nature of American
suffragists.  To be sure, their English sisters have outgrown these
silly notions.  They have shown themselves equal to the greatest
demands on their character and power of endurance.  All honor to the
heroism and sturdiness of the English suffragettes.  Thanks to their
energetic, aggressive methods, they have proved an inspiration to some
of our own lifeless and spineless ladies.  But after all, the
suffragettes, too, are still lacking in appreciation of real
equality.  Else how is one to account for the tremendous, truly
gigantic effort set in motion by those valiant fighters for a
wretched little bill which will benefit a handful of propertied
ladies, with absolutely no provision for the vast mass of
workingwomen?  True, as politicians they must be opportunists, must
take half measures if they can not get all.  But as intelligent and
liberal women they ought to realize that if the ballot is a weapon,
the disinherited need it more than the economically superior class,
and that the latter already enjoy too much power by virtue of their
economic superiority.

The brilliant leader of the English suffragettes, Mrs. Emmeline
Pankhurst, herself admitted, when on her American lecture tour, that
there can be no equality between political superiors and inferiors.
If so, how will the workingwoman of England, already inferior
economically to the ladies who are benefited by the Shackleton bill,[4]
be able to work with their political superiors, should the bill pass?
Is it not probable that the class of Annie Keeney, so full of zeal,
devotion, and martyrdom, will be compelled to carry on their backs
their female political bosses, even as they are carrying their
economic masters.  They would still have to do it, were universal
suffrage for men and women established in England.  No matter what
the workers do, they are made to pay, always.  Still, those who
believe in the power of the vote show little sense of justice when
they concern themselves not at all with those whom, as they claim, it
might serve most.

The American suffrage movement has been, until very recently,
altogether a parlor affair, absolutely detached from the economic
needs of the people.  Thus Susan B. Anthony, no doubt an exceptional
type of woman, was not only indifferent but antagonistic to labor;
nor did she hesitate to manifest her antagonism when, in 1869, she
advised women to take the places of striking printers in New York.[5]
I do not know whether her attitude had changed before her death.

There are, of course, some suffragists who are affiliated with
workingwomen--the Women's Trade Union League, for instance; but they
are a small minority, and their activities are essentially economic.
The rest look upon toil as a just provision of Providence.  What
would become of the rich, if not for the poor?  What would become of
these idle, parasitic ladies, who squander more in a week than their
victims earn in a year, if not for the eighty million wage workers?
Equality, who ever heard of such a thing?

Few countries have produced such arrogance and snobbishness as
America.  Particularly this is true of the American woman of the
middle class.  She not only considers herself the equal of man, but
his superior, especially in her purity, goodness, and morality.
Small wonder that the American suffragist claims for her vote the
most miraculous powers.  In her exalted conceit she does not see how
truly enslaved she is, not so much by man, as by her own silly
notions and traditions.  Suffrage can not ameliorate that sad fact;
it can only accentuate it, as indeed it does.

One of the great American women leaders claims that woman is entitled
not only to equal pay, but that she ought to be legally entitled even
to the pay of her husband.  Failing to support her, he should be put
in convict stripes, and his earnings in prison be collected by his
equal wife.  Does not another brilliant exponent of the cause claim
for woman that her vote will abolish the social evil, which has been
fought in vain by the collective efforts of the most illustrious
minds the world over?  It is indeed to be regretted that the alleged
creator of the universe has already presented us with his wonderful
scheme of things, else woman suffrage would surely enable woman to
outdo him completely.

Nothing is so dangerous as the dissection of a fetich.  If we have
outlived the time when such heresy was punishable at the stake, we
have not outlived the narrow spirit of condemnation of those who dare
differ with accepted notions.  Therefore I shall probably be put down
as an opponent of woman.  But that can not deter me from looking the
question squarely in the face.  I repeat what I have said in the
beginning: I do not believe that woman will make politics worse; nor
can I believe that she could make it better.  If, then, she cannot
improve on man's mistakes, why perpetuate the latter?

History may be a compilation of lies; nevertheless, it contains a few
truths, and they are the only guide we have for the future.  The
history of the political activities of men proves that they have
given him absolutely nothing that he could not have achieved in a
more direct, less costly, and more lasting manner.  As a matter of
fact, every inch of ground he has gained has been through a constant
fight, a ceaseless struggle for self-assertion, and not through
suffrage.  There is no reason whatever to assume that woman, in her
climb to emancipation, has been, or will be, helped by the ballot.

In the darkest of all countries, Russia, with her absolute despotism,
woman has become man's equal, not through the ballot, but by her will
to be and to do.  Not only has she conquered for herself every avenue
of learning and vocation, but she has won man's esteem, his respect,
his comradeship; aye, even more than that: she has gained the
admiration, the respect of the whole world.  That, too, not through
suffrage, but by her wonderful heroism, her fortitude, her ability,
will power, and her endurance in the struggle for liberty.  Where are
the women in any suffrage country or State that can lay claim to such
a victory?  When we consider the accomplishments of woman in America,
we find also that something deeper and more powerful than suffrage
has helped her in the march to emancipation.

It is just sixty-two years ago since a handful of women at the Seneca
Falls Convention set forth a few demands for their right to equal
education with men, and access to the various professions, trades,
etc.  What wonderful accomplishment, what wonderful triumphs!  Who
but the most ignorant dare speak of woman as a mere domestic drudge?
Who dare suggest that this or that profession should not be open to
her?  For over sixty years she has molded a new atmosphere and a new
life for herself.  She has become a world power in every domain of
human thought and activity.  And all that without suffrage, without
the right to make laws, without the "privilege" of becoming a judge,
a jailer, or an executioner.

Yes, I may be considered an enemy of woman; but if I can help her see
the light, I shall not complain.

The misfortune of woman is not that she is unable to do the work of
man, but that she is wasting her life force to outdo him, with a
tradition of centuries which has left her physically incapable of
keeping pace with him.  Oh, I know some have succeeded, but at what
cost, at what terrific cost!  The import is not the kind of work
woman does, but rather the quality of the work she furnishes.  She
can give suffrage or the ballot no new quality, nor can she receive
anything from it that will enhance her own quality.  Her development,
her freedom, her independence, must come from and through herself.
First, by asserting herself as a personality, and not as a sex
commodity.  Second, by refusing the right to anyone over her body; by
refusing to bear children, unless she wants them; by refusing to be a
servant to God, the State, society, the husband, the family, etc.; by
making her life simpler, but deeper and richer.  That is, by trying
to learn the meaning and substance of life in all its complexities,
by freeing herself from the fear of public opinion and public
condemnation.  Only that, and not the ballot, will set woman free,
will make her a force hitherto unknown in the world, a force for real
love, for peace, for harmony; a force of divine fire, of life giving;
a creator of free men and women.


[1] EQUAL SUFFRAGE.  Dr. Helen Sumner.

[2] EQUAL SUFFRAGE.

[3] Dr. Helen A. Sumner.

[4] Mr. Shackleton was a labor leader.  It is therefore self-evident
that he should introduce a bill excluding his own constituents.  The
English Parliament is full of such Judases.

[5] EQUAL SUFFRAGE.  Dr. Helen A. Sumner.




THE TRAGEDY OF WOMAN'S EMANCIPATION


I begin with an admission: Regardless of all political and economic
theories, treating of the fundamental differences between various
groups within the human race, regardless of class and race
distinctions, regardless of all artificial boundary lines between
woman's rights and man's rights, I hold that there is a point where
these differentiations may meet and grow into one perfect whole.

With this I do not mean to propose a peace treaty.  The general
social antagonism which has taken hold of our entire public life
today, brought about through the force of opposing and contradictory
interests, will crumble to pieces when the reorganization of our
social life, based upon the principles of economic justice, shall
have become a reality.

Peace or harmony between the sexes and individuals does not
necessarily depend on a superficial equalization of human beings; nor
does it call for the elimination of individual traits and
peculiarities.  The problem that confronts us today, and which the
nearest future is to solve, is how to be one's self and yet in
oneness with others, to feel deeply with all human beings and still
retain one's own characteristic qualities.  This seems to me to be
the basis upon which the mass and the individual, the true democrat
and the true individuality, man and woman, can meet without
antagonism and opposition.  The motto should not be: Forgive one
another; rather, Understand one another.  The oft-quoted sentence of
Madame de Stael: "To understand everything means to forgive
everything," has never particularly appealed to me; it has the odor
of the confessional; to forgive one's fellow-being conveys the idea
of pharisaical superiority.  To understand one's fellow-being
suffices.  The admission partly represents the fundamental aspect of
my views on the emancipation of woman and its effect upon the entire
sex.

Emancipation should make it possible for woman to be human in the
truest sense.  Everything within her that craves assertion and
activity should reach its fullest expression; all artificial barriers
should be broken, and the road towards greater freedom cleared of
every trace of centuries of submission and slavery.

This was the original aim of the movement for woman's emancipation.
But the results so far achieved have isolated woman and have robbed
her of the fountain springs of that happiness which is so essential
to her.  Merely external emancipation has made of the modern woman an
artificial being, who reminds one of the products of French
arboriculture with its arabesque trees and shrubs, pyramids, wheels,
and wreaths; anything, except the forms which would be reached by the
expression of her own inner qualities.  Such artificially grown
plants of the female sex are to be found in large numbers, especially
in the so-called intellectual sphere of our life.

Liberty and equality for woman!  What hopes and aspirations these
words awakened when they were first uttered by some of the noblest
and bravest souls of those days.  The sun in all his light and glory
was to rise upon a new world; in this world woman was to be free to
direct her own destiny--an aim certainly worthy of the great
enthusiasm, courage, perseverance, and ceaseless effort of the
tremendous host of pioneer men and women, who staked everything
against a world of prejudice and ignorance.

My hopes also move towards that goal, but I hold that the
emancipation of woman, as interpreted and practically applied today,
has failed to reach that great end.  Now, woman is confronted with
the necessity of emancipating herself from emancipation, if she
really desires to be free.  This may sound paradoxical, but is,
nevertheless, only too true.

What has she achieved through her emancipation?  Equal suffrage in a
few States.  Has that purified our political life, as many
well-meaning advocates predicted?  Certainly not.  Incidentally, it
is really time that persons with plain, sound judgment should cease
to talk about corruption in politics in a boarding-school tone.
Corruption of politics has nothing to do with the morals, or the
laxity of morals, of various political personalities.  Its cause is
altogether a material one.  Politics is the reflex of the business
and industrial world, the mottos of which are: "To take is more
blessed than to give"; "buy cheap and sell dear"; "one soiled hand
washes the other."  There is no hope even that woman, with her right
to vote, will ever purify politics.

Emancipation has brought woman economic equality with man; that is,
she can choose her own profession and trade; but as her past and
present physical training has not equipped her with the necessary
strength to compete with man, she is often compelled to exhaust all
her energy, use up her vitality, and strain every nerve in order to
reach the market value.  Very few ever succeed, for it is a fact that
women teachers, doctors, lawyers, architects, and engineers are
neither met with the same confidence as their male colleagues, nor
receive equal remuneration.  And those that do reach that enticing
equality, generally do so at the expense of their physical and
psychical well-being.  As to the great mass of working girls and
women, how much independence is gained if the narrowness and lack of
freedom of the home is exchanged for the narrowness and lack of
freedom of the factory, sweat-shop, department store, or office?  In
addition is the burden which is laid on many women of looking after a
"home, sweet home"--cold, dreary, disorderly, uninviting--after a
day's hard work.  Glorious independence!  No wonder that hundreds of
girls are willing to accept the first offer of marriage, sick and
tired of their "independence" behind the counter, at the sewing or
typewriting machine.  They are just as ready to marry as girls of the
middle class, who long to throw off the yoke of parental supremacy.
A so-called independence which leads only to earning the merest
subsistence is not so enticing, not so ideal, that one could expect
woman to sacrifice everything for it.  Our highly praised
independence is, after all, but a slow process of dulling and
stifling woman's nature, her love instinct, and her mother instinct.

Nevertheless, the position of the working girl is far more natural
and human than that of her seemingly more fortunate sister in the
more cultured professional walks of life--teachers, physicians,
lawyers, engineers, etc., who have to make a dignified, proper
appearance, while the inner life is growing empty and dead.

The narrowness of the existing conception of woman's independence and
emancipation; the dread of love for a man who is not her social
equal; the fear that love will rob her of her freedom and
independence; the horror that love or the joy of motherhood will only
hinder her in the full exercise of her profession--all these together
make of the emancipated modern woman a compulsory vestal, before whom
life, with its great clarifying sorrows and its deep, entrancing
joys, rolls on without touching or gripping her soul.

Emancipation, as understood by the majority of its adherents and
exponents, is of too narrow a scope to permit the boundless love and
ecstasy contained in the deep emotion of the true woman, sweetheart,
mother, in freedom.

The tragedy of the self-supporting or economically free woman does
not lie in too many but in too few experiences.  True, she surpasses
her sister of past generations in knowledge of the world and human
nature; it is just because of this that she feels deeply the lack of
life's essence, which alone can enrich the human soul, and without
which the majority of women have become mere professional automatons.

That such a state of affairs was bound to come was foreseen by those
who realized that, in the domain of ethics, there still remained many
decaying ruins of the time of the undisputed superiority of man;
ruins that are still considered useful.  And, what is more important,
a goodly number of the emancipated are unable to get along without
them.  Every movement that aims at the destruction of existing
institutions and the replacement thereof with something more
advanced, more perfect, has followers who in theory stand for the
most radical ideas, but who, nevertheless, in their every-day
practice, are like the average Philistine, feigning respectability
and clamoring for the good opinion of their opponents.  There are,
for example, Socialists, and even Anarchists, who stand for the idea
that property is robbery, yet who will grow indignant if anyone owe
them the value of a half-dozen pins.

The same Philistine can be found in the movement for woman's
emancipation.  Yellow journalists and milk-and-water litterateurs
have painted pictures of the emancipated woman that make the hair of
the good citizen and his dull companion stand up on end.  Every
member of the woman's rights movement was pictured as a George Sand
in her absolute disregard of morality.  Nothing was sacred to her.
She had no respect for the ideal relation between man and woman.  In
short, emancipation stood only for a reckless life of lust and sin;
regardless of society, religion, and morality.  The exponents of
woman's rights were highly indignant at such representation, and,
lacking humor, they exerted all their energy to prove that they were
not at all as bad as they were painted, but the very reverse.  Of
course, as long as woman was the slave of man, she could not be good
and pure, but now that she was free and independent she would prove
how good she could be and that her influence would have a purifying
effect on all institutions in society.  True, the movement for
woman's rights has broken many old fetters, but it has also forged
new ones.  The great movement of TRUE emancipation has not met with a
great race of women who could look liberty in the face.  Their
narrow, Puritanical vision banished man, as a disturber and doubtful
character, out of their emotional life.  Man was not to be tolerated
at any price, except perhaps as the father of a child, since a child
could not very well come to life without a father.  Fortunately, the
most rigid Puritans never will be strong enough to kill the innate
craving for motherhood.  But woman's freedom is closely allied with
man's freedom, and many of my so-called emancipated sisters seem to
overlook the fact that a child born in freedom needs the love and
devotion of each human being about him, man as well as woman.
Unfortunately, it is this narrow conception of human relations that
has brought about a great tragedy in the lives of the modern man and
woman.

About fifteen years ago appeared a work from the pen of the brilliant
Norwegian, Laura Marholm, called WOMAN, A CHARACTER STUDY.  She was
one of the first to call attention to the emptiness and narrowness of
the existing conception of woman's emancipation, and its tragic
effect upon the inner life of woman.  In her work Laura Marholm
speaks of the fate of several gifted women of international fame: the
genius, Eleonora Duse; the great mathematician and writer, Sonya
Kovalevskaia; the artist and poet-nature, Marie Bashkirtzeff, who
died so young.  Through each description of the lives of these women
of such extraordinary mentality runs a marked trail of unsatisfied
craving for a full, rounded, complete, and beautiful life, and the
unrest and loneliness resulting from the lack of it.  Through these
masterly psychological sketches, one cannot help but see that the
higher the mental development of woman, the less possible it is for
her to meet a congenial mate who will see in her, not only sex, but
also the human being, the friend, the comrade and strong
individuality, who cannot and ought not lose a single trait of her
character.

The average man with his self-sufficiency, his ridiculously superior
airs of patronage towards the female sex, is an impossibility for
woman as depicted in the CHARACTER STUDY by Laura Marholm.  Equally
impossible for her is the man who can see in her nothing more than
her mentality and her genius, and who fails to awaken her woman
nature.

A rich intellect and a fine soul are usually considered necessary
attributes of a deep and beautiful personality.  In the case of the
modern woman, these attributes serve as a hindrance to the complete
assertion of her being.  For over a hundred years the old form of
marriage, based on the Bible, "till death doth part," has been
denounced as an institution that stands for the sovereignty of the
man over the woman, of her complete submission to his whims and
commands, and absolute dependence on his name and support.  Time and
again it has been conclusively proved that the old matrimonial
relation restricted woman to the function of a man's servant and the
bearer of his children.  And yet we find many emancipated women who
prefer marriage, with all its deficiencies, to the narrowness of an
unmarried life; narrow and unendurable because of the chains of moral
and social prejudice that cramp and bind her nature.

The explanation of such inconsistency on the part of many advanced
women is to be found in the fact that they never truly understood the
meaning of emancipation.  They thought that all that was needed was
independence from external tyrannies; the internal tyrants, far more
harmful to life and growth--ethical and social conventions--were left
to take care of themselves; and they have taken care of themselves.
They seem to get along as beautifully in the heads and hearts of the
most active exponents of woman's emancipation, as in the heads and
hearts of our grandmothers.

These internal tyrants, whether they be in the form of public opinion
or what will mother say, or brother, father, aunt, or relative of any
sort; what will Mrs. Grundy, Mr. Comstock, the employer, the Board of
Education say?  All these busybodies, moral detectives, jailers of
the human spirit, what will they say?  Until woman has learned to
defy them all, to stand firmly on her own ground and to insist upon
her own unrestricted freedom, to listen to the voice of her nature,
whether it call for life's greatest treasure, love for a man, or her
most glorious privilege, the right to give birth to a child, she
cannot call herself emancipated.  How many emancipated women are
brave enough to acknowledge that the voice of love is calling, wildly
beating against their breasts, demanding to be heard, to be
satisfied.

The French writer, Jean Reibrach, in one of his novels, NEW BEAUTY,
attempts to picture the ideal, beautiful, emancipated woman.  This
ideal is embodied in a young girl, a physician.  She talks very
cleverly and wisely of how to feed infants; she is kind, and
administers medicines free to poor mothers.  She converses with a
young man of her acquaintance about the sanitary conditions of the
future, and how various bacilli and germs shall be exterminated by
the use of stone walls and floors, and by the doing away with rugs
and hangings.  She is, of course, very plainly and practically
dressed, mostly in black.  The young man, who, at their first
meeting, was overawed by the wisdom of his emancipated friend,
gradually learns to understand her, and recognizes one fine day that
he loves her.  They are young, and she is kind and beautiful, and
though always in rigid attire, her appearance is softened by a
spotlessly clean white collar and cuffs.  One would expect that he
would tell her of his love, but he is not one to commit romantic
absurdities.  Poetry and the enthusiasm of love cover their blushing
faces before the pure beauty of the lady.  He silences the voice of
his nature, and remains correct.  She, too, is always exact, always
rational, always well behaved.  I fear if they had formed a union,
the young man would have risked freezing to death.  I must confess
that I can see nothing beautiful in this new beauty, who is as cold
as the stone walls and floors she dreams of.  Rather would I have the
love songs of romantic ages, rather Don Juan and Madame Venus, rather
an elopement by ladder and rope on a moonlight night, followed by the
father's curse, mother's moans, and the moral comments of neighbors,
than correctness and propriety measured by yardsticks.  If love does
not know how to give and take without restrictions, it is not love,
but a transaction that never fails to lay stress on a plus and a
minus.

The greatest shortcoming of the emancipation of the present day lies
in its artificial stiffness and its narrow respectabilities, which
produce an emptiness in woman's soul that will not let her drink from
the fountain of life.  I once remarked that there seemed to be a
deeper relationship between the old-fashioned mother and hostess,
ever on the alert for the happiness of her little ones and the
comfort of those she loved, and the truly new woman, than between
the latter and her average emancipated sister.  The disciples of
emancipation pure and simple declared me a heathen, fit only for the
stake.  Their blind zeal did not let them see that my comparison
between the old and the new was merely to prove that a goodly number
of our grandmothers had more blood in their veins, far more humor and
wit, and certainly a greater amount of naturalness, kind-heartedness,
and simplicity, than the majority of our emancipated professional
women who fill the colleges, halls of learning, and various offices.
This does not mean a wish to return to the past, nor does it condemn
woman to her old sphere, the kitchen and the nursery.

Salvation lies in an energetic march onward towards a brighter and
clearer future.  We are in need of unhampered growth out of old
traditions and habits.  The movement for woman's emancipation has so
far made but the first step in that direction.  It is to be hoped
that it will gather strength to make another.  The right to vote, or
equal civil rights, may be good demands, but true emancipation begins
neither at the polls nor in courts.  It begins in woman's soul.
History tells us that every oppressed class gained true liberation
from its masters through its own efforts.  It is necessary that woman
learn that lesson, that she realize that her freedom will reach as
far as her power to achieve her freedom reaches.  It is, therefore,
far more important for her to begin with her inner regeneration, to
cut loose from the weight of prejudices, traditions, and customs.
The demand for equal rights in every vocation of life is just and
fair; but, after all, the most vital right is the right to love and
be loved.  Indeed, if partial emancipation is to become a complete
and true emancipation of woman, it will have to do away with the
ridiculous notion that to be loved, to be sweetheart and mother, is
synonymous with being slave or subordinate.  It will have to do away
with the absurd notion of the dualism of the sexes, or that man and
woman represent two antagonistic worlds.

Pettiness separates; breadth unites.  Let us be broad and big.  Let
us not overlook vital things because of the bulk of trifles
confronting us.  A true conception of the relation of the sexes will
not admit of conqueror and conquered; it knows of but one great
thing: to give of one's self boundlessly, in order to find one's self
richer, deeper, better.  That alone can fill the emptiness, and
transform the tragedy of woman's emancipation into joy, limitless
joy.




MARRIAGE AND LOVE


The popular notion about marriage and love is that they are
synonymous, that they spring from the same motives, and cover the
same human needs.  Like most popular notions this also rests not on
actual facts, but on superstition.

Marriage and love have nothing in common; they are as far apart as
the poles; are, in fact, antagonistic to each other.  No doubt some
marriages have been the result of love.  Not, however, because love
could assert itself only in marriage; much rather is it because few
people can completely outgrow a convention.  There are today large
numbers of men and women to whom marriage is naught but a farce, but
who submit to it for the sake of public opinion.  At any rate, while
it is true that some marriages are based on love, and while it is
equally true that in some cases love continues in married life, I
maintain that it does so regardless of marriage, and not because of
it.

On the other hand, it is utterly false that love results from
marriage.  On rare occasions one does hear of a miraculous case of a
married couple falling in love after marriage, but on close
examination it will be found that it is a mere adjustment to the
inevitable.  Certainly the growing-used to each other is far away
from the spontaneity, the intensity, and beauty of love, without
which the intimacy of marriage must prove degrading to both the woman
and the man.

Marriage is primarily an economic arrangement, an insurance pact.  It
differs from the ordinary life insurance agreement only in that it is
more binding, more exacting.  Its returns are insignificantly small
compared with the investments.  In taking out an insurance policy one
pays for it in dollars and cents, always at liberty to discontinue
payments.  If, however, woman's premium is her husband, she pays for
it with her name, her privacy, her self-respect, her very life,
"until death doth part."  Moreover, the marriage insurance condemns
her to life-long dependency, to parasitism, to complete uselessness,
individual as well as social.  Man, too, pays his toll, but as his
sphere is wider, marriage does not limit him as much as woman.  He
feels his chains more in an economic sense.

Thus Dante's motto over Inferno applies with equal force to marriage.
"Ye who enter here leave all hope behind."

That marriage is a failure none but the very stupid will deny.  One
has but to glance over the statistics of divorce to realize how
bitter a failure marriage really is.  Nor will the stereotyped
Philistine argument that the laxity of divorce laws and the growing
looseness of woman account for the fact that: first, every twelfth
marriage ends in divorce; second, that since 1870 divorces have
increased from 28 to 73 for every hundred thousand population; third,
that adultery, since 1867, as ground for divorce, has increased 270.8
per cent.; fourth, that desertion increased 369.8 per cent.

Added to these startling figures is a vast amount of material,
dramatic and literary, further elucidating this subject.  Robert
Herrick, in TOGETHER; Pinero, in MID-CHANNEL; Eugene Walter, in PAID
IN FULL, and scores of other writers are discussing the barrenness,
the monotony, the sordidness, the inadequacy of marriage as a factor
for harmony and understanding.

The thoughtful social student will not content himself with the
popular superficial excuse for this phenomenon.  He will have to dig
deeper into the very life of the sexes to know why marriage proves so
disastrous.

Edward Carpenter says that behind every marriage stands the life-long
environment of the two sexes; an environment so different from each
other that man and woman must remain strangers.  Separated by an
insurmountable wall of superstition, custom, and habit, marriage has
not the potentiality of developing knowledge of, and respect for,
each other, without which every union is doomed to failure.

Henrik Ibsen, the hater of all social shams, was probably the first
to realize this great truth.  Nora leaves her husband, not--as the
stupid critic would have it--because she is tired of her
responsibilities or feels the need of woman's rights, but because she
has come to know that for eight years she had lived with a stranger
and borne him children.  Can there be anything more humiliating, more
degrading than a life-long proximity between two strangers?  No need
for the woman to know anything of the man, save his income.  As to
the knowledge of the woman--what is there to know except that she has
a pleasing appearance?  We have not yet outgrown the theologic myth
that woman has no soul, that she is a mere appendix to man, made out
of his rib just for the convenience of the gentleman who was so
strong that he was afraid of his own shadow.

Perchance the poor quality of the material whence woman comes is
responsible for her inferiority.  At any rate, woman has no
soul--what is there to know about her?  Besides, the less soul a
woman has the greater her asset as a wife, the more readily will she
absorb herself in her husband.  It is this slavish acquiescence to
man's superiority that has kept the marriage institution seemingly
intact for so long a period.  Now that woman is coming into her own,
now that she is actually growing aware of herself as being outside
of the master's grace, the sacred institution of marriage is
gradually being undermined, and no amount of sentimental lamentation
can stay it.

From infancy, almost, the average girl is told that marriage is her
ultimate goal; therefore her training and education must be directed
towards that end.  Like the mute beast fattened for slaughter, she is
prepared for that.  Yet, strange to say, she is allowed to know much
less about her function as wife and mother than the ordinary artisan
of his trade.  It is indecent and filthy for a respectable girl to
know anything of the marital relation.  Oh, for the inconsistency of
respectability, that needs the marriage vow to turn something which
is filthy into the purest and most sacred arrangement that none dare
question or criticize.  Yet that is exactly the attitude of the
average upholder of marriage.  The prospective wife and mother is
kept in complete ignorance of her only asset in the competitive
field--sex.  Thus she enters into life-long relations with a man only
to find herself shocked, repelled, outraged beyond measure by the
most natural and healthy instinct, sex.  It is safe to say that a
large percentage of the unhappiness, misery, distress, and physical
suffering of matrimony is due to the criminal ignorance in sex
matters that is being extolled as a great virtue.  Nor is it at all
an exaggeration when I say that more than one home has been broken up
because of this deplorable fact.


If, however, woman is free and big enough to learn the mystery of sex
without the sanction of State or Church, she will stand condemned as
utterly unfit to become the wife of a "good" man, his goodness
consisting of an empty brain and plenty of money.  Can there be
anything more outrageous than the idea that a healthy, grown woman,
full of life and passion, must deny nature's demand, must subdue her
most intense craving, undermine her health and break her spirit, must
stunt her vision, abstain from the depth and glory of sex experience
until a "good" man comes along to take her unto himself as a wife?
That is precisely what marriage means.  How can such an arrangement
end except in failure?  This is one, though not the least important,
factor of marriage, which differentiates it from love.

Ours is a practical age.  The time when Romeo and Juliet risked the
wrath of their fathers for love, when Gretchen exposed herself to the
gossip of her neighbors for love, is no more.  If, on rare occasions,
young people allow themselves the luxury of romance, they are taken
in care by the elders, drilled and pounded until they become
"sensible."

The moral lesson instilled in the girl is not whether the man has
aroused her love, but rather is it, "How much?"  The important and
only God of practical American life: Can the man make a living? can
he support a wife?  That is the only thing that justifies marriage.
Gradually this saturates every thought of the girl; her dreams are
not of moonlight and kisses, of laughter and tears; she dreams of
shopping tours and bargain counters.  This soul poverty and
sordidness are the elements inherent in the marriage institution.
The State and Church approve of no other ideal, simply because it is
the one that necessitates the State and Church control of men and
women.

Doubtless there are people who continue to consider love above
dollars and cents.  Particularly this is true of that class whom
economic necessity has forced to become self-supporting.  The
tremendous change in woman's position, wrought by that mighty factor,
is indeed phenomenal when we reflect that it is but a short time
since she has entered the industrial arena.  Six million women wage
workers; six million women, who have equal right with men to be
exploited, to be robbed, to go on strike; aye, to starve even.
Anything more, my lord?  Yes, six million wage workers in every walk
of life, from the highest brain work to the mines and railroad
tracks; yes, even detectives and policemen.  Surely the emancipation
is complete.

Yet with all that, but a very small number of the vast army of women
wage workers look upon work as a permanent issue, in the same light
as does man.  No matter how decrepit the latter, he has been taught
to be independent, self-supporting.  Oh, I know that no one is really
independent in our economic treadmill; still, the poorest specimen of
a man hates to be a parasite; to be known as such, at any rate.

The woman considers her position as worker transitory, to be thrown
aside for the first bidder.  That is why it is infinitely harder to
organize women than men.  "Why should I join a union?  I am going to
get married, to have a home."  Has she not been taught from infancy
to look upon that as her ultimate calling?  She learns soon enough
that the home, though not so large a prison as the factory, has more
solid doors and bars.  It has a keeper so faithful that naught can
escape him.  The most tragic part, however, is that the home no
longer frees her from wage slavery; it only increases her task.

According to the latest statistics submitted before a Committee "on
labor and wages, and congestion of population," ten per cent. of the
wage workers in New York City alone are married, yet they must
continue to work at the most poorly paid labor in the world.  Add to
this horrible aspect the drudgery of housework, and what remains of
the protection and glory of the home?  As a matter of fact, even the
middle-class girl in marriage can not speak of her home, since it is
the man who creates her sphere.  It is not important whether the
husband is a brute or a darling.  What I wish to prove is that
marriage guarantees woman a home only by the grace of her husband.
There she moves about in HIS home, year after year, until her aspect
of life and human affairs becomes as flat, narrow, and drab as her
surroundings.  Small wonder if she becomes a nag, petty, quarrelsome,
gossipy, unbearable, thus driving the man from the house.  She could
not go, if she wanted to; there is no place to go.  Besides, a short
period of married life, of complete surrender of all faculties,
absolutely incapacitates the average woman for the outside world.
She becomes reckless in appearance, clumsy in her movements,
dependent in her decisions, cowardly in her judgment, a weight and a
bore, which most men grow to hate and despise.  Wonderfully inspiring
atmosphere for the bearing of life, is it not?

But the child, how is it to be protected, if not for marriage?  After
all, is not that the most important consideration?  The sham, the
hypocrisy of it!  Marriage protecting the child, yet thousands of
children destitute and homeless.  Marriage protecting the child, yet
orphan asylums and reformatories overcrowded, the Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Children keeping busy in rescuing the little
victims from "loving" parents, to place them under more loving care,
the Gerry Society.  Oh, the mockery of it!

Marriage may have the power to bring the horse to water, but has it
ever made him drink?  The law will place the father under arrest, and
put him in convict's clothes; but has that ever stilled the hunger of
the child?  If the parent has no work, or if he hides his identity,
what does marriage do then?  It invokes the law to bring the man to
"justice," to put him safely behind closed doors; his labor, however,
goes not to the child, but to the State.  The child receives but a
blighted memory of his father's stripes.

As to the protection of the woman,--therein lies the curse of
marriage.  Not that it really protects her, but the very idea is so
revolting, such an outrage and insult on life, so degrading to human
dignity, as to forever condemn this parasitic institution.

It is like that other paternal arrangement--capitalism.  It robs man
of his birthright, stunts his growth, poisons his body, keeps him in
ignorance, in poverty, and dependence, and then institutes charities
that thrive on the last vestige of man's self-respect.

The institution of marriage makes a parasite of woman, an absolute
dependent.  It incapacitates her for life's struggle, annihilates her
social consciousness, paralyzes her imagination, and then imposes its
gracious protection, which is in reality a snare, a travesty on human
character.

If motherhood is the highest fulfillment of woman's nature, what
other protection does it need, save love and freedom?  Marriage but
defiles, outrages, and corrupts her fulfillment.  Does it not say to
woman, Only when you follow me shall you bring forth life?  Does it
not condemn her to the block, does it not degrade and shame her if
she refuses to buy her right to motherhood by selling herself?  Does
not marriage only sanction motherhood, even though conceived in
hatred, in compulsion?  Yet, if motherhood be of free choice, of
love, of ecstasy, of defiant passion, does it not place a crown of
thorns upon an innocent head and carve in letters of blood the
hideous epithet, Bastard?  Were marriage to contain all the virtues
claimed for it, its crimes against motherhood would exclude it
forever from the realm of love.

Love, the strongest and deepest element in all life, the harbinger of
hope, of joy, of ecstasy; love, the defier of all laws, of all
conventions; love, the freest, the most powerful moulder of human
destiny; how can such an all-compelling force be synonymous with that
poor little State and Church-begotten weed, marriage?

Free love?  As if love is anything but free!  Man has bought brains,
but all the millions in the world have failed to buy love.  Man has
subdued bodies, but all the power on earth has been unable to subdue
love.  Man has conquered whole nations, but all his armies could not
conquer love.  Man has chained and fettered the spirit, but he has
been utterly helpless before love.  High on a throne, with all the
splendor and pomp his gold can command, man is yet poor and desolate,
if love passes him by.  And if it stays, the poorest hovel is radiant
with warmth, with life and color.  Thus love has the magic power to
make of a beggar a king.  Yes, love is free; it can dwell in no other
atmosphere.  In freedom it gives itself unreservedly, abundantly,
completely.  All the laws on the statutes, all the courts in the
universe, cannot tear it from the soil, once love has taken root.
If, however, the soil is sterile, how can marriage make it bear
fruit?  It is like the last desperate struggle of fleeting life
against death.

Love needs no protection; it is its own protection.  So long as love
begets life no child is deserted, or hungry, or famished for the want
of affection.  I know this to be true.  I know women who became
mothers in freedom by the men they loved.  Few children in wedlock
enjoy the care, the protection, the devotion free motherhood is
capable of bestowing.

The defenders of authority dread the advent of a free motherhood,
lest it will rob them of their prey.  Who would fight wars?  Who
would create wealth?  Who would make the policeman, the jailer, if
woman were to refuse the indiscriminate breeding of children?  The
race, the race! shouts the king, the president, the capitalist, the
priest.  The race must be preserved, though woman be degraded to a
mere machine,--and the marriage institution is our only safety valve
against the pernicious sex awakening of woman.  But in vain these
frantic efforts to maintain a state of bondage.  In vain, too, the
edicts of the Church, the mad attacks of rulers, in vain even the arm
of the law.  Woman no longer wants to be a party to the production of
a race of sickly, feeble, decrepit, wretched human beings, who have
neither the strength nor moral courage to throw off the yoke of
poverty and slavery.  Instead she desires fewer and better children,
begotten and reared in love and through free choice; not by
compulsion, as marriage imposes.  Our pseudo-moralists have yet to
learn the deep sense of responsibility toward the child, that love in
freedom has awakened in the breast of woman.  Rather would she forego
forever the glory of motherhood than bring forth life in an
atmosphere that breathes only destruction and death.  And if she does
become a mother, it is to give to the child the deepest and best her
being can yield.  To grow with the child is her motto; she knows that
in that manner alone can she help build true manhood and womanhood.

Ibsen must have had a vision of a free mother, when, with a master
stroke, he portrayed Mrs. Alving.  She was the ideal mother because
she had outgrown marriage and all its horrors, because she had broken
her chains, and set her spirit free to soar until it returned a
personality, regenerated and strong.  Alas, it was too late to rescue
her life's joy, her Oswald; but not too late to realize that love in
freedom is the only condition of a beautiful life.  Those who, like
Mrs. Alving, have paid with blood and tears for their spiritual
awakening, repudiate marriage as an imposition, a shallow, empty
mockery.  They know, whether love last but one brief span of time or
for eternity, it is the only creative, inspiring, elevating basis for
a new race, a new world.

In our present pygmy state love is indeed a stranger to most people.
Misunderstood and shunned, it rarely takes root; or if it does, it
soon withers and dies.  Its delicate fiber can not endure the stress
and strain of the daily grind.  Its soul is too complex to adjust
itself to the slimy woof of our social fabric.  It weeps and moans
and suffers with those who have need of it, yet lack the capacity to
rise to love's summit.

Some day, some day men and women will rise, they will reach the
mountain peak, they will meet big and strong and free, ready to
receive, to partake, and to bask in the golden rays of love.  What
fancy, what imagination, what poetic genius can foresee even
approximately the potentialities of such a force in the life of men
and women.  If the world is ever to give birth to true companionship
and oneness, not marriage, but love will be the parent.




THE MODERN DRAMA: A POWERFUL DISSEMINATOR OF RADICAL THOUGHT


So long as discontent and unrest make themselves but dumbly felt
within a limited social class, the powers of reaction may often
succeed in suppressing such manifestations.  But when the dumb unrest
grows into conscious expression and becomes almost universal, it
necessarily affects all phases of human thought and action, and seeks
its individual and social expression in the gradual transvaluation of
existing values.

An adequate appreciation of the tremendous spread of the modern,
conscious social unrest cannot be gained from merely propagandistic
literature.  Rather must we become conversant with the larger phases
of human expression manifest in art, literature, and, above all, the
modern drama--the strongest and most far-reaching interpreter of our
deep-felt dissatisfaction.

What a tremendous factor for the awakening of conscious discontent
are the simple canvasses of a Millet!  The figures of his
peasants--what terrific indictment against our social wrongs; wrongs
that condemn the Man With the Hoe to hopeless drudgery, himself
excluded from Nature's bounty.

The vision of a Meunier conceives the growing solidarity and defiance
of labor in the group of miners carrying their maimed brother to
safety.  His genius thus powerfully portrays the interrelation of the
seething unrest among those slaving in the bowels of the earth, and
the spiritual revolt that seeks artistic expression.

No less important is the factor for rebellious awakening in modern
literature--Turgeniev, Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, Andreiev, Gorki,
Whitman, Emerson, and scores of others embodying the spirit of
universal ferment and the longing for social change.

Still more far-reaching is the modern drama, as the leaven of radical
thought and the disseminator of new values.

It might seem an exaggeration to ascribe to the modern drama such an
important role.  But a study of the development of modern ideas in
most countries will prove that the drama has succeeded in driving
home great social truths, truths generally ignored when presented in
other forms.  No doubt there are exceptions, as Russia and France.

Russia, with its terrible political pressure, has made people think
and has awakened their social sympathies, because of the tremendous
contrast which exists between the intellectual life of the people and
the despotic regime that is trying to crush that life.  Yet while the
great dramatic works of Tolstoy, Tchechov, Gorki, and Andreiev
closely mirror the life and the struggle, the hopes and aspirations
of the Russian people, they did not influence radical thought to the
extent the drama has done in other countries.

Who can deny, however, the tremendous influence exerted by THE POWER
OF DARKNESS or NIGHT LODGING.  Tolstoy, the real, true Christian, is
yet the greatest enemy of organized Christianity.  With a master hand
he portrays the destructive effects upon the human mind of the power
of darkness, the superstitions of the Christian Church.

What other medium could express, with such dramatic force, the
responsibility of the Church for crimes committed by its deluded
victims; what other medium could, in consequence, rouse the
indignation of man's conscience?

Similarly direct and powerful is the indictment contained in Gorki's
NIGHT LODGING.  The social pariahs, forced into poverty and crime,
yet desperately clutch at the last vestiges of hope and aspiration.
Lost existences these, blighted and crushed by cruel, unsocial
environment.

France, on the other hand, with her continuous struggle for liberty,
is indeed the cradle of radical thought; as such she, too, did not
need the drama as a means of awakening.  And yet the works of
Brieux--as ROBE ROUGE, portraying the terrible corruption of the
judiciary--and Mirbeau's LES AFFAIRES SONT LES AFFAIRES--picturing
the destructive influence of wealth on the human soul--have
undoubtedly reached wider circles than most of the articles and books
which have been written in France on the social question.

In countries like Germany, Scandinavia, England, and even in
America--though in a lesser degree--the drama is the vehicle which is
really making history, disseminating radical thought in ranks not
otherwise to be reached.

Let us take Germany, for instance.  For nearly a quarter of a century
men of brains, of ideas, and of the greatest integrity, made it their
life-work to spread the truth of human brotherhood, of justice, among
the oppressed and downtrodden.  Socialism, that tremendous
revolutionary wave, was to the victims of a merciless and inhumane
system like water to the parched lips of the desert traveler.  Alas!
The cultured people remained absolutely indifferent; to them that
revolutionary tide was but the murmur of dissatisfied, discontented
men, dangerous, illiterate troublemakers, whose proper place was
behind prison bars.

Self-satisfied as the "cultured" usually are, they could not
understand why one should fuss about the fact that thousands of
people were starving, though they contributed towards the wealth of
the world. Surrounded by beauty and luxury, they could not believe
that side by side with them lived human beings degraded to a position
lower than a beast's, shelterless and ragged, without hope or
ambition.

This condition of affairs was particularly pronounced in Germany
after the Franco-German war.  Full to the bursting point with its
victory, Germany thrived on a sentimental, patriotic literature,
thereby poisoning the minds of the country's youth by the glory of
conquest and bloodshed.

Intellectual Germany had to take refuge in the literature of other
countries, in the works of Ibsen, Zola, Daudet, Maupassant, and
especially in the great works of Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, and Turgeniev.
But as no country can long maintain a standard of culture without a
literature and drama related to its own soil, so Germany gradually
began to develop a drama reflecting the life and the struggles of its
own people.

Arno Holz, one of the youngest dramatists of that period, startled
the Philistines out of their ease and comfort with his FAMILIE
SELICKE.  The play deals with society's refuse, men and women of the
alleys, whose only subsistence consists of what they can pick out of
the garbage barrels.  A gruesome subject, is it not?  And yet what
other method is there to break through the hard shell of the minds
and souls of people who have never known want, and who therefore
assume that all is well in the world?

Needless to say, the play aroused tremendous indignation.  The truth
is bitter, and the people living on the Fifth Avenue of Berlin hated
to be confronted with the truth.

Not that FAMILIE SELICKE represented anything that had not been
written about for years without any seeming result.  But the dramatic
genius of Holz, together with the powerful interpretation of the
play, necessarily made inroads into the widest circles, and forced
people to think about the terrible inequalities around them.

Sudermann's EHRE[1] and HEIMAT[2] deal with vital subjects.  I have
already referred to the sentimental patriotism so completely turning
the head of the average German as to create a perverted conception of
honor.  Duelling became an every-day affair, costing innumerable
lives.  A great cry was raised against the fad by a number of leading
writers.  But nothing acted as such a clarifier and exposer of that
national disease as the EHRE.

Not that the play merely deals with duelling; it analyzes the real
meaning of honor, proving that it is not a fixed, inborn feeling, but
that it varies with every people and every epoch, depending
particularly on one's economic and social station in life.  We
realize from this play that the man in the brownstone mansion will
necessarily define honor differently from his victims.

The family Heinecke enjoys the charity of the millionaire Muhling,
being permitted to occupy a dilapidated shanty on his premises in the
absence of their son, Robert.  The latter, as Muhling's
representative, is making a vast fortune for his employer in India.
On his return Robert discovers that his sister had been seduced by
young Muhling, whose father graciously offers to straighten matters
with a check for 40,000 marks.  Robert, outraged and indignant,
resents the insult to his family's honor, and is forthwith dismissed
from his position for impudence.  Robert finally throws this
accusation into the face of the philanthropist millionaire:

"We slave for you, we sacrifice our heart's blood for you, while you
seduce our daughters and sisters and kindly pay for their disgrace
with the gold we have earned for you.  That is what you call honor."

An incidental side-light upon the conception of honor is given by
Count Trast, the principal character in the EHRE, a man widely
conversant with the customs of various climes, who relates that in
his many travels he chanced across a savage tribe whose honor he
mortally offended by refusing the hospitality which offered him the
charms of the chieftain's wife.

The theme of HEIMAT treats of the struggle between the old and the
young generations.  It holds a permanent and important place in
dramatic literature.

Magda, the daughter of Lieutenant Colonel Schwartz, has committed an
unpardonable sin: she refused the suitor selected by her father.  For
daring to disobey the parental commands she is driven from home.
Magda, full of life and the spirit of liberty, goes out into the
world to return to her native town, twelve years later, a celebrated
singer.  She consents to visit her parents on condition that they
respect the privacy of her past.  But her martinet father immediately
begins to question her, insisting on his "paternal rights."  Magda is
indignant, but gradually his persistence brings to light the tragedy
of her life.  He learns that the respected Councillor Von Keller had
in his student days been Magda's lover, while she was battling for
her economic and social independence.  The consequence of the
fleeting romance was a child, deserted by the man even before birth.
The rigid military father of Magda demands as retribution from
Councillor Von Keller that he legalize the love affair.  In view of
Magda's social and professional success, Keller willingly consents,
but on condition that she forsake the stage, and place the child in
an institution.  The struggle between the Old and the New culminates
in Magda's defiant words of the woman grown to conscious independence
of thought and action: "...I'll say what I think of you--of you
and your respectable society.  Why should I be worse than you that I
must prolong my existence among you by a lie!  Why should this gold
upon my body, and the lustre which surrounds my name, only increase
my infamy?  Have I not worked early and late for ten long years?
Have I not woven this dress with sleepless nights?  Have I not built
up my career step by step, like thousands of my kind?  Why should I
blush before anyone?  I am myself, and through myself I have become
what I am."

The general theme of HEIMAT was not original.  It had been previously
treated by a master hand in FATHERS AND SONS.  Partly because
Turgeniev's great work was typical rather of Russian than universal
conditions, and still more because it was in the form of fiction, the
influence of FATHERS AND SONS was limited to Russia.  But HEIMAT,
especially because of its dramatic expression, became almost a world
factor.

The dramatist who not only disseminated radicalism, but literally
revolutionized the thoughtful Germans, is Gerhardt Hauptmann.  His
first play VOR SONNENAUFGANG[3], refused by every leading German
theatre and first performed in a wretched little playhouse behind a
beer garden, acted like a stroke of lightning, illuminating the
entire social horizon.  Its subject matter deals with the life of an
extensive landowner, ignorant, illiterate, and brutalized, and his
economic slaves of the same mental calibre.  The influence of wealth,
both on the victims who created it and the possessor thereof, is
shown in the most vivid colors, as resulting in drunkenness, idiocy,
and decay.  But the most striking feature of VOR SONNENAUFGANG, the
one which brought a shower of abuse on Hauptmann's head, was the
question as to the indiscriminate breeding of children by unfit
parents.

During the second performance of the play a leading Berlin surgeon
almost caused a panic in the theatre by swinging a pair of forceps
over his head and screaming at the top of his voice: "The decency and
morality of Germany are at stake if childbirth is to be discussed
openly from the stage."  The surgeon is forgotten, and Hauptmann
stands a colossal figure before the world.

When DIE WEBER[4] first saw the light, pandemonium broke out in the
land of thinkers and poets.  "What," cried the moralists,
"workingmen, dirty, filthy slaves, to be put on the stage!  Poverty
in all its horrors and ugliness to be dished out as an after-dinner
amusement?  That is too much!"

Indeed, it was too much for the fat and greasy bourgeoisie to be
brought face to face with the horrors of the weaver's existence.  It
was too much because of the truth and reality that rang like thunder
in the deaf ears of self-satisfied society, J'ACCUSE!

Of course, it was generally known even before the appearance of this
drama that capital can not get fat unless it devours labor, that
wealth can not be hoarded except through the channels of poverty,
hunger, and cold; but such things are better kept in the dark, lest
the victims awaken to a realization of their position.  But it is the
purpose of the modern drama to rouse the consciousness of the
oppressed; and that, indeed, was the purpose of Gerhardt Hauptmann in
depicting to the world the conditions of the weavers in Silesia.
Human beings working eighteen hours daily, yet not earning enough for
bread and fuel; human beings living in broken, wretched huts half
covered with snow, and nothing but tatters to protect them from the
cold; infants covered with scurvy from hunger and exposure; pregnant
women in the last stages of consumption.  Victims of a benevolent
Christian era, without life, without hope, without warmth.  Ah, yes,
it was too much!

Hauptmann's dramatic versatility deals with every stratum of social
life.  Besides portraying the grinding effect of economic conditions,
he also treats of the struggle of the individual for his mental and
spiritual liberation from the slavery of convention and tradition.
Thus Heinrich, the bell-forger, in the dramatic prose-poem, DIE
VERSUNKENE GLOCKE[5], fails to reach the mountain peaks of liberty
because, as Rautendelein said, he had lived in the valley too long.
Similarly Dr. Vockerath and Anna Maar remain lonely souls because
they, too, lack the strength to defy venerated traditions.  Yet their
very failure must awaken the rebellious spirit against a world
forever hindering individual and social emancipation.

Max Halbe's JUGEND[6] and Wedekind's FRUHLING'S ERWACHEN[7] are dramas
which have disseminated radical thought in an altogether different
direction.  They treat of the child and the dense ignorance and
narrow Puritanism that meet the awakening of nature.  Particularly
this is true of FRUHLING'S ERWACHEN.  Young boys and girls sacrificed
on the altar of false education and of our sickening morality that
prohibits the enlightenment of youth as to questions so imperative to
the health and well-being of society,--the origin of life, and its
functions.  It shows how a mother--and a truly good mother, at
that--keeps her fourteen-year-old daughter in absolute ignorance as
to all matters of sex, and when finally the young girl falls a victim
to her own ignorance, the same mother sees her daughter killed by
quack medicines.  The inscription on her grave states that she died
of anaemia, and morality is satisfied.

The fatality of our Puritanic hypocrisy in these matters is
especially illumined by Wedekind in so far as our most promising
children fall victims to sex ignorance and the utter lack of
appreciation on the part of the teachers of the child's awakening.

Wendla, unusually developed and alert for her age, pleads with her
mother to explain the mystery of life:

"I have a sister who has been married for two and a half years.  I
myself have been made an aunt for the third time, and I haven't the
least idea how it all comes about....  Don't be cross, Mother,
dear!  Whom in the world should I ask but you?  Don't scold me for
asking about it.  Give me an answer.--How does it happen?--You cannot
really deceive yourself that I, who am fourteen years old, still
believe in the stork."

Were her mother herself not a victim of false notions of morality, an
affectionate and sensible explanation might have saved her daughter.
But the conventional mother seeks to hide her "moral" shame and
embarrassment in this evasive reply:

"In order to have a child--one must love--the man--to whom one is
married....  One must love him, Wendla, as you at your age are
still unable to love.--Now you know it!"

How much Wendla "knew" the mother realized too late.  The pregnant
girl imagines herself ill with dropsy.  And when her mother cries in
desperation, "You haven't the dropsy, you have a child, girl," the
agonized Wendla exclaims in bewilderment: "But it's not possible,
Mother, I am not married yet....  Oh, Mother, why didn't you tell
me everything?"

With equal stupidity the boy Morris is driven to suicide because he
fails in his school examinations.  And Melchior, the youthful father
of Wendla's unborn child, is sent to the House of Correction, his
early sexual awakening stamping him a degenerate in the eyes of
teachers and parents.

For years thoughtful men and women in Germany had advocated the
compelling necessity of sex enlightenment.  MUTTERSCHUTZ, a
publication specially devoted to frank and intelligent discussion of
the sex problem, has been carrying on its agitation for a
considerable time.  But it remained for the dramatic genius of
Wedekind to influence radical thought to the extent of forcing the
introduction of sex physiology in many schools of Germany.

Scandinavia, like Germany, was advanced through the drama much more
than through any other channel.  Long before Ibsen appeared on the
scene, Bjornson, the great essayist, thundered against the
inequalities and injustice prevalent in those countries.  But his was
a voice in the wilderness, reaching but the few.  Not so with Ibsen.
His BRAND, DOLL'S HOUSE, PILLARS OF SOCIETY, GHOSTS, and AN ENEMY OF
THE PEOPLE have considerably undermined the old conceptions, and
replaced them by a modern and real view of life.  One has but to read
BRAND to realize the modern conception, let us say, of
religion,--religion, as an ideal to be achieved on earth; religion as
a principle of human brotherhood, of solidarity, and kindness.

Ibsen, the supreme hater of all social shams, has torn the veil of
hypocrisy from their faces.  His greatest onslaught, however, is on
the four cardinal points supporting the flimsy network of society.
First, the lie upon which rests the life of today; second, the
futility of sacrifice as preached by our moral codes; third, petty
material consideration, which is the only god the majority worships;
and fourth, the deadening influence of provincialism.  These four
recur as the LEITMOTIF in Ibsen's plays, but particularly in PILLARS
OF SOCIETY, DOLL'S HOUSE, GHOSTS, and AN ENEMY OF THE PEOPLE.

Pillars of Society!  What a tremendous indictment against the social
structure that rests on rotten and decayed pillars,--pillars nicely
gilded and apparently intact, yet merely hiding their true condition.
And what are these pillars?

Consul Bernick, at the very height of his social and financial
career, the benefactor of his town and the strongest pillar of the
community, has reached the summit through the channel of lies,
deception, and fraud.  He has robbed his bosom friend, Johann, of his
good name, and has betrayed Lona Hessel, the woman he loved, to marry
her step-sister for the sake of her money.  He has enriched himself
by shady transactions, under cover of "the community's good," and
finally even goes to the extent of endangering human life by
preparing the INDIAN GIRL, a rotten and dangerous vessel, to go to
sea.

But the return of Lona brings him the realization of the emptiness
and meanness of his narrow life.  He seeks to placate the waking
conscience by the hope that he has cleared the ground for the better
life of his son, of the new generation.  But even this last hope soon
falls to the ground, as he realizes that truth cannot be built on a
lie.  At the very moment when the whole town is prepared to celebrate
the great benefactor of the community with banquet praise, he
himself, now grown to full spiritual manhood, confesses to the
assembled townspeople:

"I have no right to this homage-- ... My fellow-citizens must know
me to the core.  Then let everyone examine himself, and let us
realize the prediction that from this event we begin a new time.  The
old, with its tinsel, its hypocrisy, its hollowness, its lying
propriety, and its pitiful cowardice, shall lie behind us like a
museum, open for instruction."

With A DOLL'S HOUSE Ibsen has paved the way for woman's emancipation.
Nora awakens from her doll's role to the realization of the injustice
done her by her father and her husband, Helmer Torvald.

"While I was at home with father, he used to tell me all his
opinions, and I held the same opinions.  If I had others I concealed
them, because he would not have approved.  He used to call me his
doll child, and play with me as I played with my dolls.  Then I came
to live in your house.  You settled everything according to your
taste, and I got the same taste as you, or I pretended to.  When I
look back on it now, I seem to have been living like a beggar, from
hand to mouth.  I lived by performing tricks for you, Torvald, but
you would have it so.  You and father have done me a great wrong."

In vain Helmer uses the old philistine arguments of wifely duty and
social obligations.  Nora has grown out of her doll's dress into full
stature of conscious womanhood.  She is determined to think and judge
for herself.  She has realized that, before all else, she is a human
being, owing the first duty to herself.  She is undaunted even by the
possibility of social ostracism.  She has become sceptical of the
justice of the law, the wisdom of the constituted.  Her rebelling
soul rises in protest against the existing.  In her own words: "I
must make up my mind which is right, society or I."

In her childlike faith in her husband she had hoped for the great
miracle.  But it was not the disappointed hope that opened her vision
to the falsehoods of marriage.  It was rather the smug contentment of
Helmer with a safe lie--one that would remain hidden and not endanger
his social standing.

When Nora closed behind her the door of her gilded cage and went out
into the world a new, regenerated personality, she opened the gate of
freedom and truth for her own sex and the race to come.

More than any other play, GHOSTS has acted like a bomb explosion,
shaking the social structure to its very foundations.

In DOLL'S HOUSE the justification of the union between Nora and
Helmer rested at least on the husband's conception of integrity and
rigid adherence to our social morality.  Indeed, he was the
conventional ideal husband and devoted father.  Not so in GHOSTS.
Mrs. Alving married Captain Alving only to find that he was a
physical and mental wreck, and that life with him would mean utter
degradation and be fatal to possible offspring.  In her despair she
turned to her youth's companion, young Pastor Manders who, as the
true savior of souls for heaven, must needs be indifferent to earthly
necessities.  He sent her back to shame and degradation,--to her
duties to husband and home.  Indeed, happiness--to him--was but the
unholy manifestation of a rebellious spirit, and a wife's duty was
not to judge, but "to bear with humility the cross which a higher
power had for your own good laid upon you."

Mrs. Alving bore the cross for twenty-six long years.  Not for the
sake of the higher power, but for her little son Oswald, whom she
longed to save from the poisonous atmosphere of her husband's home.

It was also for the sake of the beloved son that she supported the
lie of his father's goodness, in superstitious awe of "duty and
decency."  She learned, alas! too late, that the sacrifice of her
entire life had been in vain, and that her son Oswald was visited by
the sins of his father, that he was irrevocably doomed.  This, too,
she learned, that "we are all of us ghosts.  It is not only what we
have inherited from our father and mother that walks in us.  It is
all sorts of dead ideas and lifeless old beliefs.  They have no
vitality, but they cling to us all the same and we can't get rid of
them....  And then we are, one and all, so pitifully afraid of
light.  When you forced me under the yoke you called Duty and
Obligation; when you praised as right and proper what my whole soul
rebelled against as something loathsome; it was then that I began to
look into the seams of your doctrine.  I only wished to pick at a
single knot, but when I had got that undone, the whole thing ravelled
out.  And then I understood that it was all machine-sewn."

How could a society machine-sewn, fathom the seething depths whence
issued the great masterpiece of Henrik Ibsen?  It could not
understand, and therefore it poured the vials of abuse and venom upon
its greatest benefactor.  That Ibsen was not daunted he has proved by
his reply in AN ENEMY OF THE PEOPLE.

In that great drama Ibsen performs the last funeral rites over a
decaying and dying social system.  Out of its ashes rises the
regenerated individual, the bold and daring rebel.  Dr. Stockman, an
idealist, full of social sympathy and solidarity, is called to his
native town as the physician of the baths.  He soon discovers that
the latter are built on a swamp, and that instead of finding relief
the patients, who flock to the place, are being poisoned.

An honest man, of strong convictions, the doctor considers it his
duty to make his discovery known.  But he soon learns that dividends
and profits are concerned neither with health nor principles.  Even
the reformers of the town, represented in the PEOPLE'S MESSENGER,
always ready to prate of their devotion to the people, withdraw their
support from the "reckless" idealist, the moment they learn that the
doctor's discovery may bring the town into disrepute, and thus injure
their pockets.

But Doctor Stockman continues in the faith he entertains for has
townsmen.  They would hear him.  But here, too, he soon finds himself
alone.  He cannot even secure a place to proclaim his great truth.
And when he finally succeeds, he is overwhelmed by abuse and ridicule
as the enemy of the people.  The doctor, so enthusiastic of his
townspeople's assistance to eradicate the evil, is soon driven to a
solitary position.  The announcement of his discovery would result in
a pecuniary loss to the town, and that consideration induces the
officials, the good citizens, and soul reformers, to stifle the voice
of truth.  He finds them all a compact majority, unscrupulous enough
to be willing to build up the prosperity of the town on a quagmire of
lies and fraud.  He is accused of trying to ruin the community.  But
to his mind "it does not matter if a lying community is ruined.  It
must be levelled to the ground.  All men who live upon lies must be
exterminated like vermin.  You'll bring it to such a pass that the
whole country will deserve to perish."

Doctor Stockman is not a practical politician.  A free man, he
thinks, must not behave like a blackguard.  "He must not so act that
he would spit in his own face."  For only cowards permit
"considerations" of pretended general welfare or of party to override
truth and ideals.  "Party programmes wring the necks of all young,
living truths; and considerations of expediency turn morality and
righteousness upside down, until life is simply hideous."

These plays of Ibsen--THE PILLARS OF SOCIETY, A DOLL'S HOUSE, GHOSTS,
and AN ENEMY OF THE PEOPLE--constitute a dynamic force which is
gradually dissipating the ghosts walking the social burying ground
called civilization.  Nay, more; Ibsen's destructive effects are at
the same time supremely constructive, for he not merely undermines
existing pillars; indeed, he builds with sure strokes the foundation
of a healthier, ideal future, based on the sovereignty of the
individual within a sympathetic social environment.

England with her great pioneers of radical thought, the intellectual
pilgrims like Godwin, Robert Owen, Darwin, Spencer, William Morris,
and scores of others; with her wonderful larks of liberty--Shelley,
Byron, Keats--is another example of the influence of dramatic art.
Within comparatively a few years, the dramatic works of Shaw, Pinero,
Galsworthy, Rann Kennedy, have carried radical thought to the ears
formerly deaf even to Great Britain's wondrous poets.  Thus a public
which will remain indifferent reading an essay by Robert Owen, on
Poverty, or ignore Bernard Shaw's Socialistic tracts, was made to
think by MAJOR BARBARA, wherein poverty is described as the greatest
crime of Christian civilization.  "Poverty makes people weak,
slavish, puny; poverty creates disease, crime, prostitution; in fine,
poverty is responsible for all the ills and evils of the world."
Poverty also necessitates dependency, charitable organizations,
institutions that thrive off the very thing they are trying to
destroy.  The Salvation Army, for instance, as shown in MAJOR
BARBARA, fights drunkenness; yet one of its greatest contributors is
Badger, a whiskey distiller, who furnishes yearly thousands of pounds
to do away with the very source of his wealth.  Bernard Shaw,
therefore, concludes that the only real benefactor of society is a
man like Undershaft, Barbara's father, a cannon manufacturer, whose
theory of life is that powder is stronger than words.

"The worst of crimes," says Undershaft, "is poverty.  All the other
crimes are virtues beside it; all the other dishonors are chivalry
itself by comparison.  Poverty blights whole cities; spreads horrible
pestilences; strikes dead the very soul of all who come within sight,
sound, or smell of it.  What you call crime is nothing; a murder
here, a theft there, a blow now and a curse there: what do they
matter?  They are only the accidents and illnesses of life; there are
not fifty genuine professional criminals in London.  But there are
millions of poor people, abject people, dirty people, ill-fed,
ill-clothed people.  They poison us morally and physically; they kill
the happiness of society; they force us to do away with our own
liberties and to organize unnatural cruelties for fear they should
rise against us and drag us down into their abyss....  Poverty and
slavery have stood up for centuries to your sermons and leading
articles; they will not stand up to my machine guns.  Don't preach at
them; don't reason with them.  Kill them....  It is the final test
of conviction, the only lever strong enough to overturn a social
system....  Vote!  Bah!  When you vote, you only change the name
of the cabinet.  When you shoot, you pull down governments,
inaugurate new epochs, abolish old orders, and set up new."

No wonder people cared little to read Mr. Shaw's Socialistic tracts.
In no other way but in the drama could he deliver such forcible,
historic truths.  And therefore it is only through the drama that Mr.
Shaw is a revolutionary factor in the dissemination of radical ideas.

After Hauptmann's DIE WEBER, STRIFE, by Galsworthy, is the most
important labor drama.

The theme of STRIFE is a strike with two dominant factors: Anthony,
the president of the company, rigid, uncompromising, unwilling to
make the slightest concession, although the men held out for months
and are in a condition of semi-starvation; and David Roberts, an
uncompromising revolutionist, whose devotion to the workingman and
the cause of freedom is at white heat.  Between them the strikers are
worn and weary with the terrible struggle, and are harassed and
driven by the awful sight of poverty and want in their families.

The most marvellous and brilliant piece of work in STRIFE is
Galsworthy's portrayal of the mob, its fickleness, and lack of
backbone.  One moment they applaud old Thomas, who speaks of the
power of God and religion and admonishes the men against rebellion;
the next instant they are carried away by a walking delegate, who
pleads the cause of the union,--the union that always stands for
compromise, and which forsakes the workingmen whenever they dare to
strike for independent demands; again they are aglow with the
earnestness, the spirit, and the intensity of David Roberts--all
these people willing to go in whatever direction the wind blows.  It
is the curse of the working class that they always follow like sheep
led to slaughter.

Consistency is the greatest crime of our commercial age.  No matter
how intense the spirit or how important the man, the moment he will
not allow himself to be used or sell his principles, he is thrown on
the dustheap.  Such was the fate of the president of the company,
Anthony, and of David Roberts.  To be sure they represented opposite
poles--poles antagonistic to each other, poles divided by a terrible
gap that can never be bridged over.  Yet they shared a common fate.
Anthony is the embodiment of conservatism, of old ideas, of iron
methods:

"I have been chairman of this company thirty-two years.  I have
fought the men four times.  I have never been defeated.  It has been
said that times have changed.  If they have, I have not changed with
them.  It has been said that masters and men are equal.  Cant.  There
can be only one master in a house.  It has been said that Capital and
Labor have the same interests.  Cant.  Their interests are as wide
asunder as the poles.  There is only one way of treating men--with
the iron rod.  Masters are masters.  Men are men."

We may not like this adherence to old, reactionary notions, and yet
there is something admirable in the courage and consistency of this
man, nor is he half as dangerous to the interests of the oppressed,
as our sentimental and soft reformers who rob with nine fingers, and
give libraries with the tenth; who grind human beings like Russell
Sage, and then spend millions of dollars in social research work; who
turn beautiful young plants into faded old women, and then give them
a few paltry dollars or found a Home for Working Girls.  Anthony is a
worthy foe; and to fight such a foe, one must learn to meet him in
open battle.

David Roberts has all the mental and moral attributes of his
adversary, coupled with the spirit of revolt, and the depth of modern
ideas.  He, too, is consistent, and wants nothing for his class short
of complete victory.

"It is not for this little moment of time we are fighting, not for
our own little bodies and their warmth; it is for all those who come
after, for all times.  Oh, men, for the love of them don't turn up
another stone on their heads, don't help to blacken the sky.  If we
can shake that white-faced monster with the bloody lips that has
sucked the lives out of ourselves, our wives, and children, since the
world began, if we have not the hearts of men to stand against it,
breast to breast and eye to eye, and force it backward till it cry
for mercy, it will go on sucking life, and we shall stay forever
where we are, less than the very dogs."

It is inevitable that compromise and petty interest should pass on
and leave two such giants behind.  Inevitable, until the mass will
reach the stature of a David Roberts.  Will it ever?  Prophecy is not
the vocation of the dramatist, yet the moral lesson is evident.  One
cannot help realizing that the workingmen will have to use methods
hitherto unfamiliar to them; that they will have to discard all those
elements in their midst that are forever ready to reconcile the
irreconcilable, namely Capital and Labor.  They will have to learn
that characters like David Roberts are the very forces that have
revolutionized the world and thus paved the way for emancipation out
of the clutches of that "white-faced monster with bloody lips,"
towards a brighter horizon, a freer life, and a deeper recognition of
human values.

No subject of equal social import has received such extensive
consideration within the last few years as the question of prison and
punishment.

Hardly any magazine of consequence that has not devoted its columns
to the discussion of this vital theme.  A number of books by able
writers, both in America and abroad, have discussed this topic from
the historic, psychologic, and social standpoint, all agreeing that
present penal institutions and our mode of coping with crime have in
every respect proved inadequate as well as wasteful.  One would
expect that something very radical should result from the cumulative
literary indictment of the social crimes perpetrated upon the
prisoner.  Yet with the exception of a few minor and comparatively
insignificant reforms in some of our prisons, absolutely nothing has
been accomplished.  But at last this grave social wrong has found
dramatic interpretation in Galworthy's JUSTICE.

The play opens in the office of James How and Sons, Solicitors.  The
senior clerk, Robert Cokeson, discovers that a check he had issued
for nine pounds has been forged to ninety.  By elimination, suspicion
falls upon William Falder, the junior office clerk.  The latter is in
love with a married woman, the abused, ill-treated wife of a brutal
drunkard.  Pressed by his employer, a severe yet not unkindly man,
Falder confesses the forgery, pleading the dire necessity of his
sweetheart, Ruth Honeywill, with whom he had planned to escape to
save her from the unbearable brutality of her husband.
Notwithstanding the entreaties of young Walter, who is touched by
modern ideas, his father, a moral and law-respecting citizen, turns
Falder over to the police.

The second act, in the court-room, shows Justice in the very process
of manufacture.  The scene equals in dramatic power and psychologic
verity the great court scene in RESURRECTION.  Young Falder, a
nervous and rather weakly youth of twenty-three, stands before the
bar.  Ruth, his married sweetheart, full of love and devotion, burns
with anxiety to save the young man whose affection brought about his
present predicament.  The young man is defended by Lawyer Frome,
whose speech to the jury is a masterpiece of deep social philosophy
wreathed with the tendrils of human understanding and sympathy.  He
does not attempt to dispute the mere fact of Falder having altered
the check; and though he pleads temporary aberration in defense of
his client, that plea is based upon a social consciousness as deep
and all-embracing as the roots of our social ills--"the background of
life, that palpitating life which always lies behind the commission
of a crime."  He shows Falder to have faced the alternative of seeing
the beloved woman murdered by her brutal husband, whom she cannot
divorce; or of taking the law into his own hands.  The defence pleads
with the jury not to turn the weak young man into a criminal by
condemning him to prison, for "justice is a machine that, when
someone has given it a starting push, rolls on of itself....  Is
this young man to be ground to pieces under this machine for an act
which, at the worst, was one of weakness?  Is he to become a member
of the luckless crews that man those dark, ill-starred ships called
prisons?...  I urge you, gentlemen, do not ruin this young man.
For as a result of those four minutes, ruin, utter and irretrievable,
stares him in the face....  The rolling of the chariot wheels of
Justice over this boy began when it was decided to prosecute him."

But the chariot of Justice rolls mercilessly on, for--as the learned
Judge says--"the law is what it is--a majestic edifice, sheltering
all of us, each stone of which rests on another."

Falder is sentenced to three years' penal servitude.

In prison, the young, inexperienced convict soon finds himself the
victim of the terrible "system."  The authorities admit that young
Falder is mentally and physically "in bad shape," but nothing can be
done in the matter: many others are in a similar position, and "the
quarters are inadequate."

The third scene of the third act is heart-gripping in its silent
force.  The whole scene is a pantomime, taking place in Falder's
prison cell.

"In fast-falling daylight, Falder, in his stockings, is seen standing
motionless, with his head inclined towards the door, listening.  He
moves a little closer to the door, his stockinged feet making no
noise.  He stops at the door.  He is trying harder and harder to hear
something, any little thing that is going on outside.  He springs
suddenly upright--as if at a sound--and remains perfectly motionless.
Then, with a heavy sigh, he moves to his work, and stands looking at
it, with his head down; he does a stitch or two, having the air of a
man so lost in sadness that each stitch is, as it were, a coming to
life.  Then, turning abruptly, he begins pacing his cell, moving his
head, like an animal pacing its cage.  He stops again at the door,
listens, and, placing the palms of his hands against it with his
fingers spread out, leans his forehead against the iron.  Turning
from it, presently, he moves slowly back towards the window, holding
his head, as if he felt that it were going to burst, and stops under
the window.  But since he cannot see out of it he leaves off looking,
and, picking up the lid of one of the tins, peers into it, as if
trying to make a companion of his own face.  It has grown very nearly
dark.  Suddenly the lid falls out of his hand with a clatter--the
only sound that has broken the silence--and he stands staring
intently at the wall where the stuff of the shirt is hanging rather
white in the darkness--he seems to be seeing somebody or something
there.  There is a sharp tap and click; the cell light behind the
glass screen has been turned up.  The cell is brightly lighted.
Falder is seen gasping for breath.

A sound from far away, as of distant, dull beating on thick metal, is
suddenly audible.  Falder shrinks back, not able to bear this sudden
clamor.  But the sound grows, as though some great tumbril were
rolling towards the cell.  And gradually it seems to hypnotize him.
He begins creeping inch by inch nearer to the door.  The banging
sound, traveling from cell to cell, draws closer and closer; Falder's
hands are seen moving as if his spirit had already joined in this
beating, and the sound swells till it seems to have entered the very
cell.  He suddenly raises his clenched fists.  Panting violently, he
flings himself at his door, and beats on it."

Finally Falder leaves the prison, a broken ticket-of-leave man, the
stamp of the convict upon his brow, the iron of misery in his soul.
Thanks to Ruth's pleading, the firm of James How and Son is willing
to take Falder back in their employ, on condition that he give up
Ruth.  It is then that Falder learns the awful news that the woman he
loves had been driven by the merciless economic Moloch to sell
herself.  She "tried making skirts ... cheap things....  I never
made more than ten shillings a week, buying my own cotton, and
working all day.  I hardly ever got to bed till past twelve....
And then ... my employer happened--he's happened ever since."  At
this terrible psychologic moment the police appear to drag him back
to prison for failing to report himself as ticket-of-leave man.
Completely overwhelmed by the inexorability of his environment, young
Falder seeks and finds peace, greater than human justice, by throwing
himself down to death, as the detectives are taking him back to
prison.

It would be impossible to estimate the effect produced by this play.
Perhaps some conception can be gained from the very unusual
circumstance that it had proved so powerful as to induce the Home
Secretary of Great Britain to undertake extensive prison reforms in
England.  A very encouraging sign this, of the influence exerted by
the modern drama.  It is to be hoped that the thundering indictment
of Mr. Galsworthy will not remain without similar effect upon the
public sentiment and prison conditions of America.  At any rate, it
is certain that no other modern play has borne such direct and
immediate fruit in wakening the social conscience.

Another modern play, THE SERVANT IN THE HOUSE, strikes a vital key
in our social life.  The hero of Mr. Kennedy's masterpiece is Robert,
a coarse, filthy drunkard, whom respectable society has repudiated.
Robert, the sewer cleaner, is the real hero of the play; nay, its
true and only savior.  It is he who volunteers to go down into the
dangerous sewer, so that his comrades "can 'ave light and air."
After all, has he not sacrificed his life always, so that others may
have light and air?

The thought that labor is the redeemer of social well-being has been
cried from the housetops in every tongue and every clime.  Yet the
simple words of Robert express the significance of labor and its
mission with far greater potency.

America is still in its dramatic infancy.  Most of the attempts along
this line to mirror life, have been wretched failures.  Still, there
are hopeful signs in the attitude of the intelligent public toward
modern plays, even if they be from foreign soil.

The only real drama America has so far produced is THE EASIEST WAY,
by Eugene Walter.

It is supposed to represent a "peculiar phase" of New York life.  If
that were all, it would be of minor significance.  That which gives
the play its real importance and value lies much deeper.  It lies,
first, in the fundamental current of our social fabric which drives
us all, even stronger characters than Laura, into the easiest way--a
way so very destructive of integrity, truth, and justice.  Secondly,
the cruel, senseless fatalism conditioned in Laura's sex.  These two
features put the universal stamp upon the play, and characterize it
as one of the strongest dramatic indictments against society.

The criminal waste of human energy, in economic and social
conditions, drives Laura as it drives the average girl to marry any
man for a "home"; or as it drives men to endure the worst indignities
for a miserable pittance.

Then there is that other respectable institution, the fatalism of
Laura's sex.  The inevitability of that force is summed up in the
following words: "Don't you know that we count no more in the life of
these men than tamed animals?  It's a game, and if we don't play our
cards well, we lose."  Woman in the battle with life has but one
weapon, one commodity--sex.  That alone serves as a trump card in the
game of life.

This blind fatalism has made of woman a parasite, an inert thing.
Why then expect perseverance or energy of Laura?  The easiest way is
the path mapped out for her from time immemorial.  She could follow
no other.

A number of other plays could be quoted as characteristic of the
growing role of the drama as a disseminator of radical thought.
Suffice to mention THE THIRD DEGREE, by Charles Klein; THE FOURTH
ESTATE, by Medill Patterson; A MAN'S WORLD, by Ida Croutchers,--all
pointing to the dawn of dramatic art in America, an art which is
discovering to the people the terrible diseases of our social body.

It has been said of old, all roads lead to Rome.  In paraphrased
application to the tendencies of our day, it may truly be said that
all roads lead to the great social reconstruction.  The economic
awakening of the workingman, and his realization of the necessity for
concerted industrial action; the tendencies of modern education,
especially in their application to the free development of the child;
the spirit of growing unrest expressed through, and cultivated by,
art and literature, all pave the way to the Open Road.  Above all,
the modern drama, operating through the double channel of dramatist
and interpreter, affecting as it does both mind and heart, is the
strongest force in developing social discontent, swelling the
powerful tide of unrest that sweeps onward and over the dam of
ignorance, prejudice, and superstition.


[1] HONOR.

[2] MAGDA.

[3] BEFORE SUNRISE.

[4] THE WEAVERS.

[5] THE SUNKEN BELL.

[6] YOUTH.

[7] THE AWAKENING OF SPRING.









End of Project Gutenberg's Anarchism and Other Essays, by Emma Goldman



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANARCHISM AND OTHER ESSAYS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Social Significance of the Modern Drama
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Social Significance of the Modern Drama

Author: Emma Goldman

Release date: August 17, 2013 [eBook #43490]
                Most recently updated: October 23, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Fritz Ohrenschall, Steven Calwas and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SOCIAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE MODERN DRAMA ***

                   THE
           SOCIAL SIGNIFICANCE
              OF THE MODERN
                  DRAMA

               EMMA GOLDMAN

              [Illustration]

         BOSTON: RICHARD G. BADGER
    TORONTO: THE COPP CLARK CO., LIMITED

    Copyright, 1914, by Richard G. Badger
            All Rights Reserved
      THE GORHAM PRESS, BOSTON, U. S. A.




[Illustration: EMMA GOLDMAN
Printed by permission of S. T. Kajiwara]




FOREWORD


In order to understand the social and dynamic significance of modern
dramatic art it is necessary, I believe, to ascertain the difference
between the functions of art for art's sake and art as the mirror of
life.

Art for art's sake presupposes an attitude of aloofness on the part of
the artist toward the complex struggle of life: he must rise above the
ebb and tide of life. He is to be merely an artistic conjurer of
beautiful forms, a creator of pure fancy.

That is not the attitude of modern art, which is preminently the
reflex, the mirror of life. The artist being a part of life cannot
detach himself from the events and occurrences that pass panorama-like
before his eyes, impressing themselves upon his emotional and
intellectual vision.

The modern artist is, in the words of August Strindberg, "a lay preacher
popularizing the pressing questions of his time." Not necessarily
because his aim is to proselyte, but because he can best express himself
by being true to life.

Millet, Meunier, Turgenev, Dostoyevsky, Emerson, Walt Whitman, Tolstoy,
Ibsen, Strindberg, Hauptmann and a host of others mirror in their work
as much of the spiritual and social revolt as is expressed by the most
fiery speech of the propagandist. And more important still, they compel
far greater attention. Their creative genius, imbued with the spirit of
sincerity and truth, strikes root where the ordinary word often falls on
barren soil.

The reason that many radicals as well as conservatives fail to grasp the
powerful message of art is perhaps not far to seek. The average radical
is as hidebound by mere terms as the man devoid of all ideas. "Bloated
plutocrats," "economic determinism," "class consciousness," and similar
expressions sum up for him the symbols of revolt. But since art speaks a
language of its own, a language embracing the entire gamut of human
emotions, it often sounds meaningless to those whose hearing has been
dulled by the din of stereotyped phrases.

On the other hand, the conservative sees danger only in the advocacy of
the Red Flag. He has too long been fed on the historic legend that it is
only the "rabble" which makes revolutions, and not those who wield the
brush or pen. It is therefore legitimate to applaud the artist and hound
the rabble. Both radical and conservative have to learn that any mode of
creative work, which with true perception portrays social wrongs
earnestly and boldly, may be a greater menace to our social fabric and
a more powerful inspiration than the wildest harangue of the soapbox
orator.

Unfortunately, we in America have so far looked upon the theater as a
place of amusement only, exclusive of ideas and inspiration. Because the
modern drama of Europe has till recently been inaccessible in printed
form to the average theatergoer in this country, he had to content
himself with the interpretation, or rather misinterpretation, of our
dramatic critics. As a result the social significance of the Modern
Drama has well nigh been lost to the general public.

As to the native drama, America has so far produced very little worthy
to be considered in a social light. Lacking the cultural and
evolutionary tradition of the Old World, America has necessarily first
to prepare the soil out of which sprouts creative genius.

The hundred and one springs of local and sectional life must have time
to furrow their common channel into the seething sea of life at large,
and social questions and problems make themselves felt, if not
crystallized, before the throbbing pulse of the big national heart can
find its reflex in a great literature--and specifically in the drama--of
a social character. This evolution has been going on in this country for
a considerable time, shaping the widespread unrest that is now
beginning to assume more or less definite social form and expression.

Therefore, America could not so far produce its own social drama. But in
proportion as the crystallization progresses, and sectional and national
questions become clarified as fundamentally social problems, the drama
develops. Indeed, very commendable beginnings in this direction have
been made within recent years, among them "The Easiest Way," by Eugene
Walter, "Keeping Up Appearances," and other plays by Butler Davenport,
"Nowadays" and two others volumes of one-act plays, by George
Middleton,--attempts that hold out an encouraging promise for the
future.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Modern Drama, as all modern literature, mirrors the complex struggle
of life,--the struggle which, whatever its individual or topical
expression, ever has its roots in the depth of human nature and social
environment, and hence is, to that extent, universal. Such literature,
such drama, is at once the reflex and the inspiration of mankind in its
eternal seeking for things higher and better. Perhaps those who learn
the great truths of the social travail in the school of life, do not
need the message of the drama. But there is another class whose number
is legion, for whom that message is indispensable. In countries where
political oppression affects all classes, the best intellectual element
have made common cause with the people, have become their teachers,
comrades, and spokesmen. But in America political pressure has so far
affected only the "common" people. It is they who are thrown into
prison; they who are persecuted and mobbed, tarred and deported.
Therefore another medium is needed to arouse the intellectuals of this
country, to make them realize their relation to the people, to the
social unrest permeating the atmosphere.

The medium which has the power to do that is the Modern Drama, because
it mirrors every phase of life and embraces every strata of
society,--the Modern Drama, showing each and all caught in the throes of
the tremendous changes going on, and forced either to become part of the
process or be left behind.

Ibsen, Strindberg, Hauptmann, Tolstoy, Shaw, Galsworthy and the other
dramatists contained in this volume represent the social iconoclasts of
our time. They know that society has gone beyond the stage of patching
up, and that man must throw off the dead weight of the past, with all
its ghosts and spooks, if he is to go foot free to meet the future.

This is the social significance which differentiates modern dramatic
art from art for art's sake. It is the dynamite which undermines
superstition, shakes the social pillars, and prepares men and women for
the reconstruction.

Emma Goldman




              TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                           PAGE
  _Foreword_                                  3

  THE SCANDINAVIAN DRAMA
    _Henrik Ibsen_                           11
      The Pillars of Society                 13
      A Doll's House                         18
      Ghosts                                 25
      An Enemy of Society                    34
    _August Strindberg_                      43
      The Father                             45
      Countess Julie                         51
      Comrades                               61

  THE GERMAN DRAMA
    _Hermann Sudermann_                      69
      Magda                                  71
      The Fires of St. John                  80
    _Gerhart Hauptmann_                      87
      Lonely Lives                           87
      The Weavers                            98
      The Sunken Bell                       108
    _Frank Wedekind_                        118
      The Awakening of Spring               118

  THE FRENCH DRAMA
    _Maurice Maeterlinck_                   129
      Monna Vanna                           129
    _Edmond Rostand_                        138
      Chantecler                            138
    _Brieux_                                147
      Damaged Goods                         147
      Maternity                             161

  THE ENGLISH DRAMA
    _George Bernard Shaw_                   175
      Mrs. Warren's Profession              176
      Major Barbara                         186
    _John Galsworthy_                       196
      Strife                                197
      Justice                               208
      The Pigeon                            215
    _Stanley Houghton_                      226
      Hindle Wakes                          226
    _Githa Sowerby_                         235
      Rutherford and Son                    235

  THE IRISH DRAMA
    _William Butler Yeats_                  250
      Where There Is Nothing                252
    _Lenox Robinson_                        261
      Harvest                               261
    _T. G. Murray_                          267
      Maurice Harte                         267
  THE RUSSIAN DRAMA
    _Leo Tolstoy_                           275
      The Power of Darkness                 276
    _Anton Tchekhof_                        283
      The Seagull                           284
      The Cherry Orchard                    290
    _Maxim Gorki_                           294
      A Night's Lodging                     294
    _Leonid Andreyev_                       302
      King-Hunger                           302




THE SOCIAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE MODERN DRAMA




THE SCANDINAVIAN DRAMA




HENRIK IBSEN


In a letter to George Brandes, shortly after the Paris Commune, Henrik
Ibsen wrote concerning the State and political liberty:

"The State is the curse of the individual. How has the national strength
of Prussia been purchased? By the sinking of the individual in a
political and geographical formula.... The State must go! That will be a
revolution which will find me on its side. Undermine the idea of the
State, set up in its place spontaneous action, and the idea that
spiritual relationship is the only thing that makes for unity, and you
will start the elements of a liberty which will be something worth
possessing."

The State was not the only _bte noire_ of Henrik Ibsen. Every other
institution which, like the State, rests upon a lie, was an iniquity to
him. Uncompromising demolisher of all false idols and dynamiter of all
social shams and hypocrisy, Ibsen consistently strove to uproot every
stone of our social structure. Above all did he thunder his fiery
indictment against the four cardinal sins of modern society: the Lie
inherent in our social arrangements; Sacrifice and Duty, the twin curses
that fetter the spirit of man; the narrow-mindedness and pettiness of
Provincialism, that stifles all growth; and the Lack of Joy and Purpose
in Work which turns life into a vale of misery and tears.

So strongly did Ibsen feel on these matters, that in none of his works
did he lose sight of them. Indeed, they recur again and again, like a
_Leitmotif_ in music, in everything he wrote. These issues form the
keynote to the revolutionary significance of his dramatic works, as well
as to the psychology of Henrik Ibsen himself.

It is, therefore, not a little surprising that most of the interpreters
and admirers of Ibsen so enthusiastically accept his art, and yet remain
utterly indifferent to, not to say ignorant of, the message contained in
it. That is mainly because they are, in the words of Mrs. Alving, "so
pitifully afraid of the light." Hence they go about seeking mysteries
and hunting symbols, and completely losing sight of the meaning that is
as clear as daylight in all of the works of Ibsen, and mainly in the
group of his social plays, "The Pillars of Society," "A Doll's House,"
"Ghosts," and "An Enemy of the People."


THE PILLARS OF SOCIETY

The disintegrating effect of the Social Lie, of Duty, as an imposition
and outrage, and of the spirit of Provincialism, as a stifling factor,
are brought out with dynamic force in "The Pillars of Society."

_Consul Bernick_, driven by the conception of his duty toward the House
of Bernick, begins his career with a terrible lie. He sells his love for
_Lona Hessel_ in return for the large dowry of her step-sister _Betty_,
whom he does not love. To forget his treachery, he enters into a
clandestine relationship with an actress of the town. When surprised in
her room by the drunken husband, young _Bernick_ jumps out of the
window, and then graciously accepts the offer of his bosom friend,
_Johan_, to let him take the blame.

_Johan_, together with his faithful sister _Lona_, leaves for America.
In return for his devotion, young _Bernick_ helps to rob his friend of
his good name, by acquiescing in the rumors circulating in the town that
_Johan_ had broken into the safe of the _Bernicks_ and stolen a large
sum of money.

In the opening scene of "The Pillars of Society," we find _Consul
Bernick_ at the height of his career. The richest, most powerful and
respected citizen of the community, he is held up as the model of an
ideal husband and devoted father. In short, a worthy pillar of society.

The best ladies of the town come together in the home of the Bernicks.
They represent the society for the "Lapsed and Lost," and they gather to
do a little charitable sewing and a lot of charitable gossip. It is
through them we learn that _Dina Dorf_, the ward of _Bernick_, is the
issue of the supposed escapade of _Johan_ and the actress.

With them, giving unctuous spiritual advice and representing the purity
and morality of the community, is _Rector Rorlund_, hidebound,
self-righteous, and narrow-minded.

Into this deadening atmosphere of mental and social provincialism comes
_Lona Hessel_, refreshing and invigorating as the wind of the plains.
She has returned to her native town together with _Johan_.

The moment she enters the house of _Bernick_, the whole structure begins
to totter. For in _Lona's_ own words, "Fie, fie--this moral linen here
smells so tainted--just like a shroud. I am accustomed to the air of the
prairies now, I can tell you.... Wait a little, wait a little--we'll
soon rise from the sepulcher. We must have broad daylight here when my
boy comes."

Broad daylight is indeed needed in the community of _Consul Bernick_,
and above all in the life of the _Consul_ himself.

It seems to be the psychology of a lie that it can never stand alone.
_Consul Bernick_ is compelled to weave a network of lies to sustain his
foundation. In the disguise of a good husband, he upbraids, nags, and
tortures his wife on the slightest provocation. In the mask of a devoted
father, he tyrannizes and bullies his only child as only a despot used
to being obeyed can do. Under the cloak of a benevolent citizen he buys
up public land for his own profit. Posing as a true Christian, he even
goes so far as to jeopardize human life. Because of business
considerations he sends _The Indian Girl_, an unseaworthy, rotten
vessel, on a voyage, although he is assured by one of his most capable
and faithful workers that the ship cannot make the journey, that it is
sure to go down. But _Consul Bernick_ is a pillar of society; he needs
the respect and good will of his fellow citizens. He must go from
precipice to precipice, to keep up appearances.

_Lona_ alone sees the abyss facing him, and tells him: "What does it
matter whether such a society is supported or not? What is it that
passes current here? Lies and shams--nothing else. Here are you, the
first man in the town, living in wealth and pride, in power and honor,
you, who have set the brand of crime upon an innocent man." She might
have added, _many_ innocent men, for _Johan_ was not the only one at
whose expense _Karsten Bernick_ built up his career.

The end is inevitable. In the words of _Lona_: "All this eminence, and
you yourself along with it, stand on a trembling quicksand; a moment may
come, a word may be spoken, and, if you do not save yourself in time,
you and your whole grandeur go to the bottom."

But for _Lona_, or, rather, what she symbolizes, _Bernick_--even as _The
Indian Girl_--would go to the bottom.

In the last act, the whole town is preparing to give the great
philanthropist and benefactor, the eminent pillar of society, an
ovation. There are fireworks, music, gifts and speeches in honor of
_Consul Bernick_. At that very moment, the only child of the _Consul_ is
hiding in _The Indian Girl_ to escape the tyranny of his home. _Johan_,
too, is supposed to sail on the same ship, and with him, _Dina_, who has
learned the whole truth and is eager to escape from her prison, to go to
a free atmosphere, to become independent, and then to unite with _Johan_
in love and freedom. As _Dina_ says: "Yes, I will be your wife. But
first I will work, and become something for myself, just as you are. I
will give myself, I will not be taken."

_Consul Bernick_, too, is beginning to realize himself. The strain of
events and the final shock that he had exposed his own child to such
peril, act like a stroke of lightning on the _Consul_. It makes him see
that a house built on lies, shams, and crime must eventually sink by its
own weight. Surrounded by those who truly love and therefore understand
him, _Consul Bernick_, no longer the pillar of society, but the man
becomes conscious of his better self.

"Where have I been?" he exclaims. "You will be horrified when you know.
Now, I feel as if I had just recovered my senses after being poisoned.
But I feel--I feel that I _can_ be young and strong again. Oh, come
nearer--closer around me. Come, Betty! Come, Olaf! Come, Martha! Oh,
Martha, it seems as though I had never seen you in all these years. And
we--we have a long, earnest day of work before us; I most of all. But
let it come; gather close around me, you true and faithful women. I have
learned this, in these days: it is you women who are the Pillars of
Society."

_Lona:_ "Thee you have learned a poor wisdom, brother-in-law. No, no;
the spirit of Truth and of Freedom--these are the Pillars of Society."

The spirit of truth and freedom is the socio-revolutionary significance
of "The Pillars of Society." Those, who, like _Consul Bernick_, fail to
realize this all-important fact, go on patching up _The Indian Girl_,
which is Ibsen's symbol for our society. But they, too, must learn that
society is rotten to the core; that patching up or reforming one sore
spot merely drives the social poison deeper into the system, and that
all must go to the bottom unless the spirit of Truth and Freedom
revolutionize the world.


A DOLL'S HOUSE

In "A Doll's House" Ibsen returns to the subject so vital to him,--the
Social Lie and Duty,--this time as manifesting themselves in the sacred
institution of the home and in the position of woman in her gilded cage.

_Nora_ is the beloved, adored wife of _Torvald Helmer_. He is an
admirable man, rigidly honest, of high moral ideals, and passionately
devoted to his wife and children. In short, a good man and an enviable
husband. Almost every mother would be proud of such a match for her
daughter, and the latter would consider herself fortunate to become the
wife of such a man.

_Nora_, too, considers herself fortunate. Indeed, she worships her
husband, believes in him implicitly, and is sure that if ever her safety
should be menaced, _Torvald_, her idol, her god, would perform the
miracle.

When a woman loves as _Nora_ does, nothing else matters; least of all,
social, legal or moral considerations. Therefore, when her husband's
life is threatened, it is no effort, it is joy for _Nora_ to forge her
father's name to a note and borrow 800 cronen on it, in order to take
her sick husband to Italy.

In her eagerness to serve her husband, and in perfect innocence of the
legal aspect of her act, she does not give the matter much thought,
except for her anxiety to shield him from any emergency that may call
upon him to perform the miracle in her behalf. She works hard, and saves
every penny of her pin-money to pay back the amount she borrowed on the
forged check.

_Nora_ is light-hearted and gay, apparently without depth. Who, indeed,
would expect depth of a doll, a "squirrel," a song-bird? Her purpose in
life is to be happy for her husband's sake, for the sake of the
children; to sing, dance, and play with them. Besides, is she not
shielded, protected, and cared for? Who, then, would suspect _Nora_ of
depth? But already in the opening scene, when _Torvald_ inquires what
his precious "squirrel" wants for a Christmas present, _Nora_ quickly
asks him for money. Is it to buy macaroons or finery? In her talk with
_Mrs. Linden_, _Nora_ reveals her inner self, and forecasts the
inevitable debacle of her doll's house.

After telling her friend how she had saved her husband, _Nora_ says:
"When Torvald gave me money for clothes and so on, I never used more
than half of it; I always bought the simplest things.... Torvald never
noticed anything. But it was often very hard, Christina dear. For it's
nice to be beautifully dressed. Now, isn't it?... Well, and besides
that, I made money in other ways. Last winter I was so lucky--I got a
heap of copying to do. I shut myself up every evening and wrote far into
the night. Oh, sometimes I was so tired, so tired. And yet it was
splendid to work in that way and earn money. I almost felt as if I was a
man."

Down deep in the consciousness of _Nora_ there evidently slumbers
personality and character, which could come into full bloom only through
a great miracle--not the kind _Nora_ hopes for, but a miracle just the
same.

_Nora_ had borrowed the money from _Nils Krogstad_, a man with a shady
past in the eyes of the community and of the righteous moralist,
_Torvald Helmer_. So long as _Krogstad_ is allowed the little breathing
space a Christian people grants to him who has once broken its laws, he
is reasonably human. He does not molest _Nora_. But when _Helmer_
becomes director of the bank in which _Krogstad_ is employed, and
threatens the man with dismissal, _Krogstad_ naturally fights back. For
as he says to _Nora_: "If need be, I shall fight as though for my life
to keep my little place in the bank.... It's not only for the money:
that matters least to me. It's something else. Well, I'd better make a
clean breast of it. Of course you know, like every one else, that some
years ago I--got into trouble.... The matter never came into court; but
from that moment all paths were barred to me. Then I took up the
business you know about. I was obliged to grasp at something; and I
don't think I've been one of the worst. But now I must clear out of it
all. My sons are growing up; for their sake I must try to win back as
much respectability as I can. This place in the bank was the first step,
and now your husband wants to kick me off the ladder, back into the
mire. Mrs. Helmer, you evidently have no clear idea what you have really
done. But I can assure you that it was nothing more and nothing worse
that made me an outcast from society.... But this I may tell you, that
If I'm flung into the gutter a second time, you shall keep me company."

Even when _Nora_ is confronted with this awful threat, she does not fear
for herself, only for _Torvald_,--so good, so true, who has such an
aversion to debts, but who loves her so devotedly that for her sake he
would take the blame upon himself. But this must never be. _Nora_, too,
begins a fight for life, for her husband's life and that of her
children. Did not _Helmer_ tell her that the very presence of a criminal
like _Krogstad_ poisons the children? And is she not a criminal?

_Torvald Helmer_ assures her, in his male conceit, that "early
corruption generally comes from the mother's side, but of course the
father's influence may act in the same way. And this Krogstad has been
poisoning his own children for years past by a life of lies and
hypocrisy--that's why I call him morally ruined."

Poor _Nora_, who cannot understand why a daughter has no right to spare
her dying father anxiety, or why a wife has no right to save her
husband's life, is surely not aware of the true character of her idol.
But gradually the veil is lifted. At first, when in reply to her
desperate pleading for _Krogstad_, her husband discloses the true reason
for wanting to get rid of him: "The fact is, he was a college chum of
mine--there was one of those rash friendships between us that one so
often repents later. I don't mind confessing it--he calls me by my
Christian name; and he insists on doing it even when others are present.
He delights in putting on airs of familiarity--Torvald here, Torvald
there! I assure you it's most painful to me. He would make my position
at the bank perfectly unendurable."

And then again when the final blow comes. For forty-eight hours _Nora_
battles for her ideal, never doubting _Torvald_ for a moment. Indeed,
so absolutely sure is she of her strong oak, her lord, her god, that she
would rather kill herself than have him take the blame for her act. The
end comes, and with it the doll's house tumbles down, and _Nora_
discards her doll's dress--she sheds her skin, as it were. _Torvald
Helmer_ proves himself a petty Philistine, a bully and a coward, as so
many good husbands when they throw off their respectable cloak.

_Helmer's_ rage over _Nora's_ crime subsides the moment the danger of
publicity is averted--proving that _Helmer_, like many a moralist, is
not so much incensed at _Nora's_ offense as by the fear of being found
out. Not so _Nora_. Finding out is her salvation. It is then that she
realizes how much she has been wronged, that she is only a plaything, a
doll to _Helmer_. In her disillusionment she says, "You have never loved
me. You only thought it amusing to be in love with me."

  _Helmer._ Why, Nora, what a thing to say!

  _Nora._ Yes, it is so, Torvald. While I was at home with father he
  used to tell me all his opinions and I held the same opinions. If I
  had others I concealed them, because he would not have liked it. He
  used to call me his doll child, and play with me as I played with my
  dolls. Then I came to live in your house---- ... I mean I passed
  from father's hands into yours. You settled everything according to
  your taste; and I got the same tastes as you; or I pretended to--I
  don't know which--both ways perhaps. When I look back on it now, I
  seem to have been living here like a beggar, from hand to mouth. I
  lived by performing tricks for you, Torvald. But you would have it
  so. You and father have done me a great wrong. It's your fault that
  my life has been wasted....

  _Helmer._ It's exasperating! Can you forsake your holiest duties in
  this way?

  _Nora._ What do you call my holiest duties?

  _Helmer._ Do you ask me that? Your duties to your husband and your
  children.

  _Nora._ I have other duties equally sacred.

  _Helmer._ Impossible! What duties do you mean?

  _Nora._ My duties toward myself.

  _Helmer._ Before all else you are a wife and a mother.

  _Nora._ That I no longer believe. I think that before all else I am
  a human being, just as much as you are--or, at least, I will try to
  become one. I know that most people agree with you, Torvald, and
  that they say so in books. But henceforth I can't be satisfied with
  what most people say, and what is in books. I must think things out
  for myself and try to get clear about them.... I had been living
  here these eight years with a strange man, and had borne him three
  children--Oh! I can't bear to think of it--I could tear myself to
  pieces!... I can't spend the night in a strange man's house.

Is there anything more degrading to woman than to live with a stranger,
and bear him children? Yet, the lie of the marriage institution decrees
that she shall continue to do so, and the social conception of duty
insists that for the sake of that lie she need be nothing else than a
plaything, a doll, a nonentity.

When _Nora_ closes behind her the door of her doll's house, she opens
wide the gate of life for woman, and proclaims the revolutionary message
that only perfect freedom and communion make a true bond between man and
woman, meeting in the open, without lies, without shame, free from the
bondage of duty.


GHOSTS

The social and revolutionary significance of Henrik Ibsen is brought
out with even greater force in "Ghosts" than in his preceding works.

Not only does this pioneer of modern dramatic art undermine in "Ghosts"
the Social Lie and the paralyzing effect of Duty, but the uselessness
and evil of Sacrifice, the dreary Lack of Joy and of Purpose in Work are
brought to light as most pernicious and destructive elements in life.

_Mrs. Alving_, having made what her family called a most admirable
match, discovers shortly after her marriage that her husband is a
drunkard and a _rou_. In her despair she flees to her young friend, the
divinity student _Manders_. But he, preparing to save souls, even though
they be encased in rotten bodies, sends _Mrs. Alving_ back to her
husband and her duties toward her home.

_Helen Alving_ is young and immature. Besides, she loves young
_Manders_; his command is law to her. She returns home, and for
twenty-five years suffers all the misery and torture of the damned. That
she survives is due mainly to her passionate love for the child born of
that horrible relationship--her boy _Oswald_, her all in life. He must
be saved at any cost. To do that, she had sacrificed her great yearning
for him and sent him away from the poisonous atmosphere of her home.

And now he has returned, fine and free, much to the disgust of _Pastor
Manders_, whose limited vision cannot conceive that out in the large
world free men and women can live a decent and creative life.

  _Manders._ But how is it possible that a--a young man or young woman
  with any decent principles can endure to live in that way?--in the
  eyes of all the world!

  _Oswald._ What are they to do? A poor young artist--a poor girl. It
  costs a lot of money to get married. What are they to do?

  _Manders._ What are they to do? Let me tell you, Mr. Alving, what
  they ought to do. They ought to exercise self-restraint from the
  first; that's what they ought to do.

  _Oswald._ Such talk as that won't go far with warm-blooded young
  people, over head and ears in love.

  _Mrs. Alving._ No, it wouldn't go far.

  _Manders._ How can the authorities tolerate such things? Allow it to
  go on in the light of day? (_To Mrs. Alving._) Had I not cause to be
  deeply concerned about your son? In circles where open immorality
  prevails, and has even a sort of prestige----!

  _Oswald._ Let me tell you, sir, that I have been a constant
  Sunday-guest in one or two such irregular homes----

  _Manders._ On Sunday of all days!

  _Oswald._ Isn't that the day to enjoy one's self? Well, never have I
  heard an offensive word, and still less have I ever witnessed
  anything that could be called immoral. No; do you know when and
  where I have found immorality in artistic circles?

  _Manders._ No! Thank heaven, I don't!

  _Oswald._ Well, then, allow me to inform you. I have met with it
  when one or other of our pattern husbands and fathers has come to
  Paris to have a look around on his own account, and has done the
  artists the honor of visiting their humble haunts. _They_ knew what
  was what. These gentlemen could tell us all about places and things
  we had never dreamt of.

  _Manders._ What? Do you mean to say that respectable men from home
  here would----?

  _Oswald._ Have you never heard these respectable men, when they got
  home again, talking about the way in which immorality was running
  rampant abroad?

  _Manders_. Yes, of course.

  _Mrs. Alving._ I have, too.

  _Oswald._ Well, you may take their word for it. They know what they
  are talking about! Oh! that that great, free, glorious life out
  there should be defiled in such a way!

_Pastor Manders_ is outraged, and when _Oswald_ leaves, he delivers
himself of a tirade against _Mrs. Alving_ for her "irresponsible
proclivities to shirk her duty."

  _Manders._ It is only the spirit of rebellion that craves for
  happiness in this life. What right have we human beings to
  happiness? No, we have to do our duty! And your duty was to hold
  firmly to the man you had once chosen and to whom you were bound by
  a holy tie.... It was your duty to bear with humility the cross
  which a Higher Power had, for your own good, laid upon you. But
  instead of that you rebelliously cast away the cross.... I was but a
  poor instrument in a Higher Hand. And what a blessing has it not
  been to you all the days of your life, that I got you to resume the
  yoke of duty and obedience!

The price _Mrs. Alving_ had to pay for her yoke, her duty and obedience,
staggers even _Dr. Manders_, when she reveals to him the martyrdom she
had endured those long years.

  _Mrs. Alving._ You have now spoken out, Pastor Manders; and
  to-morrow you are to speak publicly in memory of my husband. I
  shall not speak to-morrow. But now I will speak out a little to you,
  as you have spoken to me.... I want you to know that after nineteen
  years of marriage my husband remained as dissolute in his desires as
  he was when you married us. After Oswald's birth, I thought Alving
  seemed to be a little better. But it did not last long. And then I
  had to struggle twice as hard, fighting for life or death, so that
  nobody should know what sort of a man my child's father was. I had
  my little son to bear it for. But when the last insult was added;
  when my own servant-maid---- Then I swore to myself: This shall come
  to an end. And so I took the upper hand in the house--the whole
  control over him and over everything else. For now I had a weapon
  against him, you see; he dared not oppose me. It was then that
  Oswald was sent from home. He was in his seventh year, and was
  beginning to observe and ask questions, as children do. That I could
  not bear. I thought the child must get poisoned by merely breathing
  the air in this polluted home. That was why I placed him out. And
  now you can see, too, why he was never allowed to set foot inside
  his home so long as his father lived. No one knows what it has cost
  me.... From the day after to-morrow it shall be for me as though he
  who is dead had never lived in this house. No one shall be here but
  my boy and his mother. (_From within the dining-room comes the noise
  of a chair overturned, and at the same moment is heard:_)

  _Regina (sharply, but whispering)._ Oswald! take care! are you mad?
  let me go!

  _Mrs. Alving (starts in terror)._ Ah! (_She stares wildly toward
  the half-opened door. Oswald is heard coughing and humming inside.)_

  _Manders (excited)._ What in the world is the matter? What is it,
  Mrs. Alving?

  _Mrs. Alving (hoarsely)._ Ghosts! The couple from the conservatory
  has risen again!

Ghosts, indeed! _Mrs. Alving_ sees this but too clearly when she
discovers that though she did not want _Oswald_ to inherit a single
penny from the purchase money _Captain Alving_ had paid for her, all her
sacrifice did not save _Oswald_ from the poisoned heritage of his
father. She learns soon enough that her beloved boy had inherited a
terrible disease from his father, as a result of which he will never
again be able to work. She also finds out that, for all her freedom, she
has remained in the clutches of Ghosts, and that she has fostered in
_Oswald's_ mind an ideal of his father, the more terrible because of her
own loathing for the man. Too late she realizes her fatal mistake:

  _Mrs. Alving._ I ought never to have concealed the facts of Alving's
  life. But ... in my superstitious awe for Duty and Decency I lied to
  my boy, year after year. Oh! what a coward, what a coward I have
  been!... Ghosts! When I heard Regina and Oswald in there, it was as
  though I saw the Ghosts before me. But I almost think we are all of
  us Ghosts, Pastor Manders. It is not only what we have inherited
  from our father and mother that "walks" in us. It is all sorts of
  dead ideas, and lifeless old beliefs, and so forth. They have no
  vitality, but they cling to us all the same, and we can't get rid of
  them.... There must be Ghosts all the country over, as thick as the
  sand of the sea. And then we are, one and all, so pitifully afraid
  of the light.... When you forced me under the yoke you called Duty
  and Obligation; when you praised as right and proper what my whole
  soul rebelled against, as something loathsome. It was then that I
  began to look into the seams of your doctrine. I only wished to pick
  at a single knot; but when I had got that undone, the whole thing
  ravelled out. And then I understood that it was all machine-sewn....
  It was a crime against us both.

Indeed, a crime on which the sacred institution is built, and for which
thousands of innocent children must pay with their happiness and life,
while their mothers continue to the very end without ever learning how
hideously criminal their life is.

Not so _Mrs. Alving_ who, though at a terrible price, works herself out
to the truth; aye, even to the height of understanding the dissolute
life of the father of her child, who had lived in cramped provincial
surroundings, and could find no purpose in life, no outlet for his
exuberance. It is through her child, through _Oswald_, that all this
becomes illumed to her.

  _Oswald._ Ah, the joy of life, mother; that's a thing you don't know
  much about in these parts. I have never felt it here.... And then,
  too, the joy of work. At bottom, it's the same thing. But that too
  you know nothing about.... Here people are brought up to believe
  that work is a curse and a punishment for sin, and that life is
  something miserable, something we want to be done with, the sooner
  the better.... Have you noticed that everything I have painted has
  turned upon the joy of life? always, always upon the joy of
  life?--light and sunshine and glorious air, and faces radiant with
  happiness? That is why I am afraid of remaining at home with you.

  _Mrs. Alving._ Oswald, you spoke of the joy of life; and at that
  word a new light burst for me over my life and all it has
  contained.... You ought to have known your father when he was a
  young lieutenant. He was brimming over with the joy of life!... He
  had no object in life, but only an official position. He had no work
  into which he could throw himself heart and soul; he had only
  business. He had not a single comrade that knew what the joy of life
  meant--only loafers and boon companions----.... So that happened
  which was sure to happen.... Oswald, my dear boy; has it shaken you
  very much?

  _Oswald._ Of course it came upon me as a great surprise, but, after
  all, it can't matter much to me.

  _Mrs. Alving._ Can't matter! That your father was so infinitely
  miserable!

  _Oswald._ Of course I can pity him as I would anybody else; but----

  _Mrs. Alving._ Nothing more? Your own father!

  _Oswald._ Oh, there! "Father," "father"! I never knew anything of
  father. I don't remember anything about him except--that he once
  made me sick.

  _Mrs. Alving._ That's a terrible way to speak! Should not a son love
  his father, all the same?

  _Oswald._ When a son has nothing to thank his father for? has never
  known him? Do you really cling to the old superstition?--you who are
  so enlightened in other ways?

  _Mrs. Alving._ Is that only a superstition?

In truth, a superstition--one that is kept like the sword of Damocles
over the child who does not ask to be given life, and is yet tied with a
thousand chains to those who bring him into a cheerless, joyless, and
wretched world.

       *       *       *       *       *

The voice of Henrik Ibsen in "Ghosts" sounds like the trumpets before
the walls of Jericho. Into the remotest nooks and corners reaches his
voice, with its thundering indictment of our moral cancers, our social
poisons, our hideous crimes against unborn and born victims. Verily a
more revolutionary condemnation has never been uttered in dramatic form
before or since the great Henrik Ibsen.

We need, therefore, not be surprised at the vile abuse and denunciation
heaped upon Ibsen's head by the Church, the State, and other moral
eunuchs. But the spirit of Henrik Ibsen could not be daunted. It
asserted itself with even greater defiance in "An Enemy of Society,"--a
powerful arraignment of the political and economic Lie,--Ibsen's own
confession of faith.


AN ENEMY OF SOCIETY

Dr. Thomas Stockmann is called to the position of medical adviser to the
management of the "Baths," the main resource of his native town.

A sincere man of high ideals, _Dr. Stockmann_ returns home after an
absence of many years, full of the spirit of enterprise and progressive
innovation. For as he says to his brother _Peter_, the town
_Burgomaster_, "I am so glad and content. I feel so unspeakably happy in
the midst of all this growing, germinating life. After all, what a
glorious time we do live in. It is as if a new world were springing up
around us."

  _Burgomaster._ Do you really think so?

  _Dr. Stockmann._ Well, of course, you can't see this as clearly as I
  do. You've spent all your life in this place, and so your
  perceptions have been dulled. But I, who had to live up there in
  that small hole in the north all those years, hardly ever seeing a
  soul to speak a stimulating word to me--all this affects me as if I
  were carried to the midst of a crowded city--I know well enough that
  the conditions of life are small compared with many other towns. But
  here is life, growth, an infinity of things to work for and to
  strive for; and that is the main point.

In this spirit _Dr. Stockmann_ sets to his task. After two years of
careful investigation, he finds that the Baths are built on a swamp,
full of poisonous germs, and that people who come there for their health
will be infected with fever.

_Thomas Stockmann_ is a conscientious physician. He loves his native
town, but he loves his fellow-men more. He considers it his duty to
communicate his discovery to the highest authority of the town, the
_Burgomaster_, his brother _Peter Stockmann_.

_Dr. Stockmann_ is indeed an idealist; else he would know that the man
is often lost in the official. Besides, _Peter Stockmann_ is also the
president of the board of directors and one of the heaviest stockholders
of the Baths. Sufficient reason to upbraid his reckless medical brother
as a dangerous man:

  _Burgomaster._ Anyhow, you've an ingrained propensity for going your
  own way. And that in a well-ordered community is almost as
  dangerous. The individual must submit himself to the whole
  community, or, to speak more correctly, bow to the authority that
  watches over the welfare of all.

But the _Doctor_ is not disconcerted: _Peter_ is an official; he is not
concerned with ideals. But there is the press,--that is the medium for
his purpose! The staff of the _People's Messenger_--_Hovstad_,
_Billings_, and _Aslaksen_, are deeply impressed by the _Doctor's_
discovery. With one eye to good copy and the other to the political
chances, they immediately put the _People's Messenger_ at the disposal
of _Thomas Stockmann_. _Hovstad_ sees great possibilities for a thorough
radical reform of the whole life of the community.

  _Hovstad._ To you, as a doctor and a man of science, this business
  of the water-works is an isolated affair. I fancy it hasn't occurred
  to you that a good many other things are connected with it.... The
  swamp our whole municipal life stands and rots in.... I think a
  journalist assumes an immense responsibility when he neglects an
  opportunity of aiding the masses, the poor, the oppressed. I know
  well enough that the upper classes will call this stirring up the
  people, and so forth, but they can do as they please, if only my
  conscience is clear.

_Aslaksen_, printer of the _People's Messenger_, chairman of the
Householders' Association, and agent for the Moderation Society, has,
like _Hovstad_, a keen eye to business. He assures the _Doctor_ of his
whole-hearted coperation, especially emphasizing that, "It might do you
no harm to have us middle-class men at your back. We now form a compact
majority in the town--when we really make up our minds to. And it's
always as well, Doctor, to have the majority with you.... And so I think
it wouldn't be amiss if we made some sort of a demonstration.... Of
course with great moderation, Doctor. I am always in favor of
moderation; for moderation is a citizen's first virtue--at least those
are my sentiments."

Truly, _Dr. Stockmann_ is an idealist; else he would not place so much
faith in the staff of the _People's Messenger_, who love the people so
well that they constantly feed them with high-sounding phrases of
democratic principles and of the noble function of the press, while they
pilfer their pockets.

That is expressed in _Hovstad's_ own words, when _Petra_, the daughter
of _Dr. Stockmann_, returns a sentimental novel she was to translate for
the _People's Messenger_: "This can't possibly go into the _Messenger_,"
she tells _Hovstad_; "it is in direct contradiction to your own
opinion."

  _Hovstad._ Well, but for the sake of the cause--

  _Petra._ You don't understand me yet. It is all about a supernatural
  power that looks after the so-called good people here on earth, and
  turns all things to their advantage at last, and all the bad people
  are punished.

  _Hovstad._ Yes, but that's very fine. It's the very thing the public
  like.

  _Petra._ And would you supply the public with such stuff? Why, you
  don't believe one word of it yourself. You know well enough that
  things don't really happen like that.

  _Hovstad._ You're right there; but an editor can't always do as he
  likes. He often has to yield to public opinion in small matters.
  After all, politics is the chief thing in life--at any rate for a
  newspaper; and if I want the people to follow me along the path of
  emancipation and progress, I mustn't scare them away. If they find
  such a moral story down in the cellar, they're much more willing to
  stand what is printed above it--they feel themselves safer.

Editors of the stamp of _Hovstad_ seldom dare to express their real
opinions. They cannot afford to "scare away" their readers. They
generally yield to the most ignorant and vulgar public opinion; they do
not set themselves up against constituted authority. Therefore the
_People's Messenger_ drops the "greatest man" in town when it learns
that the _Burgomaster_ and the influential citizens are determined that
the truth shall be silenced. The _Burgomaster_ soundly denounces his
brother's "rebellion."

  _Burgomaster._ The public doesn't need new ideas. The public is best
  served by the good old recognized ideas that they have already....
  As an official, you've no right to have any individual conviction.

  _Dr. Stockmann._ The source is poisoned, man! Are you mad? We live
  by trafficking in filth and garbage. The whole of our developing
  social life is rooted in a lie!

  _Burgomaster._ Idle fancies--or something worse. The man who makes
  such offensive insinuations against his own native place must be an
  enemy of society.

  _Dr. Stockmann._ And I must bear such treatment! In my own house.
  Katrine! What do you think of it?

  _Mrs. Stockmann._ Indeed, it is a shame and an insult,
  Thomas----.... But, after all, your brother has the power----

  _Dr. Stockmann._ Yes, but I have the right!

  _Mrs. Stockmann._ Ah, yes, right, right! What is the good of being
  right when you haven't any might?

  _Dr. Stockmann._ What! No good in a free society to have right on
  your side? You are absurd, Katrine. And besides, haven't I the free
  and independent press with me? The compact majority behind me?
  That's might enough, I should think!

_Katrine Stockmann_ is wiser than her husband. For he who has no might
need hope for no right. The good _Doctor_ has to drink the bitter cup to
the last drop before he realizes the wisdom of his wife.

Threatened by the authorities and repudiated by the _People's
Messenger_, _Dr. Stockmann_ attempts to secure a hall wherein to hold a
public meeting. A free-born citizen, he believes in the Constitution and
its guarantees; he is determined to maintain his right of free
expression. But like so many others, even most advanced liberals blinded
by the spook of constitutional rights and free speech, _Dr. Stockmann_
inevitably has to pay the penalty of his credulity. He finds every hall
in town closed against him. Only one solitary citizen has the courage to
open his doors to the persecuted Doctor,--his old friend _Horster_. But
the mob follows him even there and howls him down as an enemy of
society. _Thomas Stockmann_ makes the discovery in his battle with
ignorance, stupidity, and vested interests that "the most dangerous
enemies of truth and freedom in our midst are the compact majority, the
damned compact liberal majority." His experiences lead him to the
conclusion that "the majority is never right.... That is one of those
conventional lies against which a free, thoughtful man must rebel....
The majority has might unhappily--but right it has not."

  _Hovstad._ The man who would ruin a whole community must be an enemy
  of society!

  _Dr. Stockmann._ It doesn't matter if a lying community is
  ruined!... You'll poison the whole country in time; you will bring
  it to such a pass that the whole country will deserve to perish. And
  should it come to this, I say, from the bottom of my heart: Perish
  the country! Perish all its people!

Driven out of the place, hooted and jeered by the mob, _Dr. Stockmann_
barely escapes with his life, and seeks safety in his home, only to
find everything demolished there. In due time he is repudiated by the
grocer, the baker, and the candlestick maker. The landlord, of course,
is very sorry for him. The Stockmanns have always paid their rent
regularly, but it would injure his reputation to have such an avowed
rebel for a tenant. The grocer is sorry, and the butcher, too; but they
can not jeopardize their business. Finally the board of education sends
expressions of regret: _Petra_ is an excellent teacher and the boys of
Stockmann splendid pupils, but it would contaminate the other children
were the Stockmanns allowed to remain at school. And again _Dr.
Stockmann_ learns a vital lesson. But he will not submit; he will be
strong.

  _Dr. Stockmann._ Should I let myself be beaten off the field by
  public opinion, and the compact majority, and such deviltry? No,
  thanks. Besides, what I want is so simple, so clear and
  straightforward. I only want to drive into the heads of these curs
  that the Liberals are the worst foes of free men; that
  party-programmes wring the necks of all young living truths; that
  considerations of expediency turn morality and righteousness upside
  down, until life is simply hideous.... I don't see any man free and
  brave enough to dare the Truth.... The strongest man is he who
  stands most alone.

A confession of faith, indeed, because Henrik Ibsen, although recognized
as a great dramatic artist, remained alone in his stand as a
revolutionist.

His dramatic art, without his glorious rebellion against every
authoritative institution, against every social and moral lie, against
every vestige of bondage, were inconceivable. Just as his art would lose
human significance, were his love of truth and freedom lacking. Already
in "Brand," Henrik Ibsen demanded all or nothing, no weak-kneed
moderation,--no compromise of any sort in the struggle for the ideal.
His proud defiance, his enthusiastic daring, his utter indifference to
consequences, are Henrik Ibsen's bugle call, heralding a new dawn and
the birth of a new race.




STRINDBERG


"The reproach was levelled against my tragedy, 'The Father,' that it was
so sad, as though one wanted merry tragedies. People clamour for the joy
of life, and the theatrical managers order farces, as though the joy of
life consisted in being foolish, and in describing people as if they
were each and all afflicted with St. Vitus's dance or idiocy. I find the
joy of life in the powerful, cruel struggle of life, and my enjoyment in
discovering something, in learning something."

The passionate desire to discover something, to learn something, has
made of August Strindberg a keen dissector of souls. Above all, of his
own soul.

Surely there is no figure in contemporary literature, outside of
Tolstoy, that laid bare the most secret nooks and corners of his own
soul with the sincerity of August Strindberg. One so relentlessly honest
with himself, could be no less with others.

That explains the bitter opposition and hatred of his critics. They did
not object so much to Strindberg's self-torture; but that he should
have dared to torture _them_, to hold up his searching mirror to
_their_ sore spots, that they could not forgive.

Especially is this true of woman. For centuries she has been lulled into
a trance by the songs of the troubadours who paid homage to her
goodness, her sweetness, her selflessness and, above all, her noble
motherhood. And though she is beginning to appreciate that all this
incense has befogged her mind and paralyzed her soul, she hates to give
up the tribute laid at her feet by sentimental moonshiners of the past.

To be sure, it is rude to turn on the full searchlight upon a painted
face. But how is one to know what is back of the paint and artifice?
August Strindberg hated artifice with all the passion of his being;
hence his severe criticism of woman. Perhaps it was his tragedy to see
her as she really is, and not as she appears in her trance. To love with
open eyes is, indeed, a tragedy, and Strindberg loved woman. All his
life long he yearned for her love, as mother, as wife, as companion. But
his longing for, and his need of her, were the crucible of Strindberg,
as they have been the crucible of every man, even of the mightiest
spirit.

Why it is so is best expressed in the words of the old nurse, _Margret_,
in "The Father": "Because all you men, great and small, are woman's
children, every man of you."

The child in man--- and the greater the man the more dominant the child
in him--has ever succumbed to the Earth Spirit, Woman, and as long as
that is her only drawing power, Man, with all his strength and genius,
will ever be at her feet.

The Earth Spirit is motherhood carrying the race in its womb; the flame
of life luring the moth, often against its will, to destruction.

In all of Strindberg's plays we see the flame of life at work, ravishing
man's brain, consuming man's faith, rousing man's passion. Always,
always the flame of life is drawing its victims with irresistible force.
August Strindberg's arraignment of that force is at the same time a
confession of faith. He, too, was the child of woman, and utterly
helpless before her.


THE FATHER

"The Father" portrays the tragedy of a man and a woman struggling for
the possession of their child. The father, a cavalry captain, is
intellectual, a freethinker, a man of ideas. His wife is narrow,
selfish, and unscrupulous in her methods when her antagonism is wakened.

Other members of the family are the wife's mother, a Spiritualist, and
the _Captain's_ old nurse, _Margret_, ignorant and superstitious. The
father feels that the child would be poisoned in such an atmosphere:

  _The Captain._ This house is full of women who all want to have
  their say about my child. My mother-in-law wants to make a
  Spiritualist of her. Laura wants her to be an artist; the governess
  wants her to be a Methodist, old Margret a Baptist, and the
  servant-girls want her to join the Salvation Army! It won't do to
  try to make a soul in patches like that. I, who have the chief right
  to try to form her character, am constantly opposed in my efforts.
  And that's why I have decided to send her away from home.

But it is not only because the _Captain_ does not believe in "making a
soul in patches," that he wants to rescue the child from the hot-house
environment, nor because he plans to make her an image of himself. It is
rather because he wants her to grow up with a healthy outlook on life.

  _The Captain._ I don't want to be a procurer for my daughter and
  educate her exclusively for matrimony, for then if she were left
  unmarried she might have bitter days. On the other hand, I don't
  want to influence her toward a career that requires a long course of
  training which would be entirely thrown away if she should marry. I
  want her to be a teacher. If she remains unmarried she will be able
  to support herself, and at any rate she wouldn't be any worse off
  than the poor schoolmasters who have to share their salaries with a
  family. If she marries she can use her knowledge in the education
  of her children.

While the father's love is concerned with the development of the child,
that of the mother is interested mainly in the possession of the child.
Therefore she fights the man with every means at her command, even to
the point of instilling the poison of doubt into his mind, by hints that
he is not the father of the child. Not only does she seek to drive her
husband mad, but through skillful intrigue she leads every one,
including the Doctor, to believe that he is actually insane. Finally
even the old nurse is induced to betray him: she slips the straitjacket
over him, adding the last touch to the treachery. Robbed of his faith,
broken in spirit and subdued, the _Captain_ dies a victim of the Earth
Spirit--of motherhood, which slays the man for the sake of the child.
Laura herself will have it so when she tells her husband, "You have
fulfilled your function as an unfortunately necessary father and
breadwinner. You are not needed any longer, and you must go."

       *       *       *       *       *

Critics have pronounced "The Father" an aberration of Strindberg's mind,
utterly false and distorted. But that is because they hate to face the
truth. In Strindberg, however, the truth is his most revolutionary
significance.

"The Father" contains two basic truths. Motherhood, much praised,
poetized, and hailed as a wonderful thing, is in reality very often the
greatest deterrent influence in the life of the child. Because it is not
primarily concerned with the potentialities of character and growth of
the child; on the contrary, it is interested chiefly in the
birthgiver,--that is, the mother. Therefore, the mother is the most
subjective, self-centered and conservative obstacle. She binds the child
to herself with a thousand threads which never grant sufficient freedom
for mental and spiritual expansion. It is not necessary to be as bitter
as Strindberg to realize this. There are of course exceptional mothers
who continue to grow with the child. But the average mother is like the
hen with her brood, forever fretting about her chicks if they venture a
step away from the coop. The mother enslaves with kindness,--a bondage
harder to bear and more difficult to escape than the brutal fist of the
father.

Strindberg himself experienced it, and nearly every one who has ever
attempted to outgrow the soul strings of the mother.

In portraying motherhood, as it really is, August Strindberg is
conveying a vital and revolutionary message, namely, that true
motherhood, even as fatherhood, does not consist in molding the child
according to one's image, or in imposing upon it one's own ideas and
notions, but in allowing the child freedom and opportunity to grow
harmoniously according to its own potentialities, unhampered and
unmarred.

The child was August Strindberg's religion,--perhaps because of his own
very tragic childhood and youth. He was like Father Time in "Jude the
Obscure," a giant child, and as he has _Laura_ say of the _Captain_ in
"The Father," "he had either come too early into the world, or perhaps
was not wanted at all."

"Yes, that's how it was," the _Captain_ replies, "my father's and my
mother's will was against my coming into the world, and consequently I
was born without a will."

The horror of having been brought into the world undesired and unloved,
stamped its indelible mark on August Strindberg. It never left him. Nor
did fear and hunger--the two terrible phantoms of his childhood.

Indeed, the child was Strindberg's religion, his faith, his passion. Is
it then surprising that he should have resented woman's attitude towards
the man as a mere means to the child; or, in the words of _Laura_, as
"the function of father and breadwinner"? That this is the attitude of
woman, is of course denied. But it is nevertheless true. It holds good
not only of the average, unthinking woman, but even of many feminists
of to-day; and, no doubt, they were even more antagonistic to the male
in Strindberg's time.

It is only too true that woman is paying back what she has endured for
centuries--humiliation, subjection, and bondage. But making oneself free
through the enslavement of another, is by no means a step toward
advancement. Woman must grow to understand that the father is as vital a
factor in the life of the child as is the mother. Such a realization
would help very much to minimize the conflict between the sexes.

Of course, that is not the only cause of the conflict. There is another,
as expressed by _Laura_: "Do you remember when I first came into your
life, I was like a second mother?... I loved you as my child. But ...
when the nature of your feelings changed and you appeared as my lover, I
blushed, and your embraces were joy that was followed by remorseful
conscience as if my blood were ashamed."

The vile thought instilled into woman by the Church and Puritanism that
sex expression without the purpose of procreation is immoral, has been a
most degrading influence. It has poisoned the life of thousands of women
who similarly suffer "remorseful conscience"; therefore their disgust
and hatred of the man; therefore also the conflict.

Must it always be thus? Even Strindberg does not think so. Else he would
not plead in behalf of "divorce between man and wife, so that lovers
may be born." He felt that until man and woman cease to have "remorseful
consciences" because of the most elemental expression of the joy of
life, they cannot realize the purity and beauty of sex, nor appreciate
its ecstasy, as the source of full understanding and creative harmony
between male and female. Till then man and woman must remain in
conflict, and the child pay the penalty.

August Strindberg, as one of the numberless innocent victims of this
terrible conflict, cries out bitterly against it, with the artistic
genius and strength that compel attention to the significance of his
message.


COUNTESS JULIE

In his masterly preface to this play, August Strindberg writes: "The
fact that my tragedy makes a sad impression on many is the fault of the
many. When we become strong, as were the first French revolutionaries,
it will make an exclusively pleasant and cheerful impression to see the
royal parks cleared of rotting, superannuated trees which have too long
stood in the way of others with equal right to vegetate their full
lifetime; it will make a good impression in the same sense as does the
sight of the death of an incurable."

What a wealth of revolutionary thought,--were we to realize that those
who will clear society of the rotting, superannuated trees that have so
long been standing in the way of others entitled to an equal share in
life, must be as strong as the great revolutionists of the past!

Indeed, Strindberg is no trimmer, no cheap reformer, no patchworker;
therefore his inability to remain fixed, or to content himself with
accepted truths. Therefore also, his great versatility, his deep grasp
of the subtlest phases of life. Was he not forever the seeker, the
restless spirit roaming the earth, ever in the death-throes of the Old,
to give birth to the New? How, then, could he be other than relentless
and grim and brutally frank.

"Countess Julie," a one-act tragedy, is no doubt a brutally frank
portrayal of the most intimate thoughts of man and of the age-long
antagonism between classes. Brutally frank, because August Strindberg
strips both of their glitter, their sham and pretense, that we may see
that "at bottom there's not so much difference between people
and--people."

Who in modern dramatic art is there to teach us that lesson with the
insight of an August Strindberg? He who had been tossed about all his
life between the decadent traditions of his aristocratic father and the
grim, sordid reality of the class of his mother. He who had been
begotten through the physical mastery of his father and the physical
subserviency of his mother. Verily, Strindberg knew whereof he
spoke--for he spoke with his soul, a language whose significance is
illuminating, compelling.

_Countess Julie_ inherited the primitive, intense passion of her mother
and the neurotic aristocratic tendencies of her father. Added to this
heritage is the call of the wild, the "intense summer heat when the
blood turns to fire, and when all are in a holiday spirit, full of
gladness, and rank is flung aside." _Countess Julie_ feels, when too
late, that the barrier of rank reared through the ages, by wealth and
power, is not flung aside with impunity. Therein the vicious brutality,
the boundless injustice of rank.

The people on the estate of _Julie's_ father are celebrating St. John's
Eve with dance, song and revelry. The Count is absent, and _Julie_
graciously mingles with the servants. But once having tasted the simple
abandon of the people, once having thrown off the artifice and
superficiality of her aristocratic decorum, her suppressed passions leap
into full flame, and _Julie_ throws herself into the arms of her
father's valet, _Jean_--not because of love for the man, nor yet openly
and freely, but as persons of her station may do when carried away by
the moment.

The woman in _Julie_ pursues the male, follows him into the kitchen,
plays with him as with a pet dog, and then feigns indignation when
_Jean_, aroused, makes advances. How dare he, the servant, the lackey,
even insinuate that she would have him! "I, the lady of the house! I
honor the people with my presence. I, in love with my coachman? I, who
step down."

How well Strindberg knows the psychology of the upper classes! How well
he understands that their graciousness, their charity, their interest in
the "common people" is, after all, nothing but arrogance, blind conceit
of their own importance and ignorance of the character of the people.

Even though _Jean_ is a servant, he has his pride, he has his dreams. "I
was not hired to be your plaything," he says to _Julie_; "I think too
much of myself for that."

Strange, is it not, that those who serve and drudge for others, should
think so much of themselves as to refuse to be played with? Stranger
still that they should indulge in dreams. _Jean_ says:

  Do you know how people in high life look from the under-world?...
  They look like hawks and eagles whose backs one seldom sees, for
  they soar up above. I lived in a hovel provided by the State, with
  seven brothers and sisters and a pig; out on a barren stretch where
  nothing grew, not even a tree, but from the window I could see the
  Count's park walls with apple trees rising above them. That was the
  garden of paradise; and there stood many angry angels with flaming
  swords protecting it; but for all that I and other boys found the
  way to the tree of life--now you despise me.... I thought if it is
  true that the thief on the cross could enter heaven and dwell among
  the angels it was strange that a pauper child on God's earth could
  not go into the castle park and play with the Countess' daughter....
  What I wanted--I don't know. You were unattainable, but through the
  vision of you I was made to realize how hopeless it was to rise
  above the conditions of my birth.

What rich food for thought in the above for all of us, and for the
Jeans, the people who do not know what they want, yet feel the cruelty
of a world that keeps the pauper's child out of the castle of his
dreams, away from joy and play and beauty! The injustice and the
bitterness of it all, that places the stigma of birth as an impassable
obstacle, a fatal imperative excluding one from the table of life, with
the result of producing such terrible effects on the Julies and the
Jeans. The one unnerved, made helpless and useless by affluence, ease
and idleness; the other enslaved and bound by service and dependence.
Even when _Jean_ wants to, he cannot rise above his condition. When
_Julie_ asks him to embrace her, to love her, he replies:

  I can't as long as we are in this house.... There is the Count, your
  father.... I need only to see his gloves lying in a chair to feel
  my own insignificance. I have only to hear his bell, to start like a
  nervous horse.... And now that I see his boots standing there so
  stiff and proper, I feel like bowing and scraping.... I can't
  account for it but--but ah, it is that damned servant in my back--I
  believe if the Count came here now, and told me to cut my throat, I
  would do it on the spot.... Superstition and prejudice taught in
  childhood can't be uprooted in a moment.

No, superstition and prejudice cannot be uprooted in a moment; nor in
years. The awe of authority, servility before station and wealth--these
are the curse of the Jean class that makes such cringing slaves of them.
Cringing before those who are above them, tyrannical and overbearing
toward those who are below them. For _Jean_ has the potentiality of the
master in him as much as that of the slave. Yet degrading as "the damned
servant" reacts upon _Jean_, it is much more terrible in its effect upon
_Kristin_, the cook, the dull, dumb animal who has so little left of the
spirit of independence that she has lost even the ambition to rise above
her condition. Thus when _Kristin_, the betrothed of Jean, discovers
that her mistress _Julie_ had given herself to him, she is indignant
that her lady should have so much forgotten her station as to stoop to
her father's valet.

  _Kristin._ I don't want to be here in this house any longer where
  one cannot respect one's betters.

  _Jean._ Why should one respect them?

  _Kristin._ Yes, you can say that, you are so smart. But I don't want
  to serve people who behave so. It reflects on oneself, I think.

  _Jean._ Yes, but it's a comfort that they're not a bit better than
  we.

  _Kristin._ No, I don't think so, for if they are not better there's
  no use in our trying to better ourselves in this world. And to think
  of the Count! Think of him who has had so much sorrow all his days.
  No, I don't want to stay in this house any longer! And to think of
  it being with such as you! If it had been the Lieutenant-- ... I
  have never lowered my position. Let any one say, if they can, that
  the Count's cook has had anything to do with the riding master or
  the swineherd. Let them come and say it!

Such dignity and morality are indeed pathetic, because they indicate how
completely serfdom may annihilate even the longing for something higher
and better in the breast of a human being. The Kristins represent the
greatest obstacle to social growth, the deadlock in the conflict between
the classes. On the other hand, the Jeans, with all their longing for
higher possibilities, often become brutalized in the hard school of
life; though in the conflict with _Julie_, _Jean_ shows brutality only
at the critical moment, when it becomes a question of life and death, a
moment that means discovery and consequent ruin, or safety for both.

_Jean_, though the male is aroused in him, pleads with _Julie_ not to
play with fire, begs her to return to her room, and not to give the
servants a chance for gossip. And when later _Jean_ suggests his room
for a hiding place that _Julie_ may escape the approaching merry-makers,
it is to save her from their songs full of insinuation and ribaldry.
Finally when the inevitable happens, when as a result of their closeness
in _Jean's_ room, of their overwrought nerves, their intense passion,
the avalanche of sex sweeps them off their feet, forgetful of station,
birth and conventions, and they return to the kitchen, it is again
_Jean_ who is willing to bear his share of the responsibility. "I don't
care to shirk my share of the blame," he tells _Julie_, "but do you
think any one of my position would have dared to raise his eyes to you
if you had not invited it?"

There is more truth in this statement than the Julies can grasp, namely,
that even servants have their passions and feelings that cannot long be
trifled with, with impunity. The Jeans know "that it is the glitter of
brass, not gold, that dazzles us from below, and that the eagle's back
is gray like the rest of him." For _Jean_ says, "I'm sorry to have to
realize that all that I have looked up to is not worth while, and it
pains me to see you fallen lower than your cook, as it pains me to see
autumn blossoms whipped to pieces by the cold rain and transformed
into--dirt!"

       *       *       *       *       *

It is this force that helps to transform the blossom into dirt that
August Strindberg emphasizes in "The Father." For the child born against
the will of its parents must also be without will, and too weak to bear
the stress and storm of life. In "Countess Julie" this idea recurs with
even more tragic effect. _Julie_, too, had been brought into the world
against her mother's wishes. Indeed, so much did her mother dread the
thought of a child that she "was always ill, she often had cramps and
acted queerly, often hiding in the orchard or the attic." Added to this
horror was the conflict, the relentless war of traditions between
_Julie's_ aristocratic father and her mother descended from the people.
This was the heritage of the innocent victim, _Julie_--an autumn blossom
blown into fragments by lack of stability, lack of love and lack of
harmony. In other words, while _Julie_ is broken and weakened by her
inheritance and environment, _Jean_ is hardened by his.

When _Jean_ kills the bird which _Julie_ wants to rescue from the ruins
of her life, it is not so much out of real cruelty, as it is because the
character of _Jean_ was molded in the relentless school of necessity,
in which only those survive who have the determination to act in time of
danger. For as _Jean_ says, "Miss Julie, I see that you are unhappy, I
know that you are suffering, but I cannot understand you. Among my kind
there is no nonsense of this sort. We love as we play--when work gives
us time. We haven't the whole day and night for it as you."

Here we have the key to the psychology of the utter helplessness and
weakness of the Julie type, and of the brutality of the Jeans. The one,
the result of an empty life, of parasitic leisure, of a useless,
purposeless existence. The other, the effect of too little time for
development, for maturity and depth; of too much toil to permit the
growth of the finer traits in the human soul.

August Strindberg, himself the result of the class conflict between his
parents, never felt at home with either of them. All his life he was
galled by the irreconcilability of the classes; and though he was no
sermonizer in the sense of offering a definite panacea for individual or
social ills, yet with master touch he painted the degrading effects of
class distinction and its tragic antagonisms. In "Countess Julie" he
popularized one of the most vital problems of our age, and gave to the
world a work powerful in its grasp of elemental emotions, laying bare
the human soul behind the mask of social tradition and class culture.


COMRADES

Although "Comrades" was written in 1888, it is in a measure the most
up-to-date play of Strindberg,--so thoroughly modern that one at all
conversant with the _milieu_ that inspired "Comrades" could easily point
out the type of character portrayed in the play.

It is a four-act comedy of marriage--the kind of marriage that lacks
social and legal security in the form of a ceremony, but retains all the
petty conventions of the marriage institution. The results of such an
anomaly are indeed ludicrous when viewed from a distance, but very
tragic for those who play a part in it.

_Axel Alberg_ and his wife _Bertha_ are Swedish artists residing in
Paris. They are both painters. Of course they share the same living
quarters, and although each has a separate room, the arrangement does
not hinder them from trying to regulate each other's movements. Thus
when _Bertha_ does not arrive on time to keep her engagement with her
model, _Axel_ is provoked; and when he takes the liberty to chide her
for her tardiness, his wife is indignant at the "invasiveness" of her
husband, because women of the type of _Bertha_ are as sensitive to fair
criticism as their ultra-conservative sisters. Nor is _Bertha_ different
in her concept of love, which is expressed in the following dialogue:

  _Bertha._ Will you be very good, very, very good?

  _Axel._ I always want to be good to you, my friend.

_Bertha_, who has sent her painting to the exhibition, wants to make use
of _Axel's_ "goodness" to secure the grace of one of the art jurors.

  _Bertha._ You would not make a sacrifice for your wife, would you?

  _Axel._ Go begging? No, I don't want to do that.

_Bertha_ immediately concludes that he does not love her and that,
moreover, he is jealous of her art. There is a scene.

_Bertha_ soon recovers. But bent on gaining her purpose, she changes her
manner.

  _Bertha._ Axel, let's be friends! And hear me a moment. Do you think
  that my position in your house--for it is yours--is agreeable to me?
  You support me, you pay for my studying at Julian's, while you
  yourself cannot afford instruction. Don't you think I see how you
  sit and wear out yourself and your talent on these pot-boiling
  drawings, and are able to paint only in leisure moments? You haven't
  been able to afford models for yourself, while you pay mine five
  hard-earned francs an hour. You don't know how good--how noble--how
  sacrificing you are, and also you don't know how I suffer to see you
  toil so for me. Oh, Axel, you can't know how I feel my position.
  What am I to you? Of what use am I in your house? Oh, I blush when
  I think about it!

  _Axel._ What talk! Isn't a man to support his wife?

  _Bertha._ I don't want it. And you, Axel, you must help me. I'm not
  your equal when it's like that, but I could be if you would humble
  yourself once, just once! Don't think that you are alone in going to
  one of the jury to say a good word for another. If it were for
  yourself, it would be another matter, but for me--Forgive me! Now I
  beg of you as nicely as I know how. Lift me from my humiliating
  position to your side, and I'll be so grateful I shall never trouble
  you again with reminding you of my position. Never, Axel!

Yet though _Bertha_ gracefully accepts everything _Axel_ does for her,
with as little compunction as the ordinary wife, she does not give as
much in return as the latter. On the contrary, she exploits _Axel_ in a
thousand ways, squanders his hard-earned money, and lives the life of
the typical wifely parasite.

August Strindberg could not help attacking with much bitterness such a
farce and outrage parading in the disguise of radicalism. For _Bertha_
is not an exceptional, isolated case. To-day, as when Strindberg
satirized the all-too-feminine, the majority of so-called emancipated
women are willing to accept, like _Bertha_, everything from the man, and
yet feel highly indignant if he asks in return the simple comforts of
married life. The ordinary wife, at least, does not pretend to play an
important rle in the life of her husband. But the Berthas deceive
themselves and others with the notion that the "emancipated" wife is a
great moral force, an inspiration to the man. Whereas in reality she is
often a cold-blooded exploiter of the work and ideas of the man, a heavy
handicap to his life-purpose, retarding his growth as effectively as did
her grandmothers in the long ago. _Bertha_ takes advantage of _Axel's_
affection to further her own artistic ambitions, just as the Church and
State married woman uses her husband's love to advance her social
ambitions. It never occurs to _Bertha_ that she is no less despicable
than her legally married sister. She cannot understand _Axel's_
opposition to an art that clamors only for approval, distinction and
decorations.

However, _Axel_ can not resist _Bertha's_ pleadings. He visits the
patron saint of the salon, who, by the way, is not M. Roubey, but Mme.
Roubey; for she is the "President of the Woman-Painter Protective
Society." What chance would _Bertha_ have with one of her own sex in
authority? Hence her husband must be victimized. During _Axel's_ absence
_Bertha_ learns that his picture has been refused by the salon, while
hers is accepted. She is not in the least disturbed, nor at all
concerned over the effect of the news on _Axel_. On the contrary, she is
rather pleased because "so many women are refused that a man might put
up with it, and be made to feel it once."

In her triumph _Bertha's_ attitude to _Axel_ becomes overbearing; she
humiliates him, belittles his art, and even plans to humble him before
the guests invited to celebrate _Bertha's_ artistic success.

But _Axel_ is tearing himself free from the meshes of his decaying love.
He begins to see _Bertha_ as she is: her unscrupulousness in money
matters, her ceaseless effort to emasculate him. In a terrible word
tussle he tells her: "I had once been free, but you clipped the hair of
my strength while my tired head lay in your lap. During sleep you stole
my best blood."

In the last act _Bertha_ discovers that _Axel_ had generously changed
the numbers on the paintings in order to give her a better chance. It
was _his_ picture that was chosen as _her_ work. She feels ashamed and
humiliated; but it is too late. _Axel_ leaves her with the exclamation,
"I want to meet my comrades in the caf, but at home I want a wife."

A characteristic sidelight in the play is given by the conversation of
_Mrs. Hall_, the divorced wife of _Doctor Ostermark_. She comes to
Bertha with a bitter tirade against the Doctor because he gives her
insufficient alimony.

  _Mrs. Hall._ And now that the girls are grown up and about to start
  in life, now he writes us that he is bankrupt and that he can't send
  us more than half the allowance. Isn't that nice, just now when the
  girls are grown up and are going out into life?

  _Bertha._ We must look into this. He'll be here in a few days. Do
  you know that you have the law on your side and that the courts can
  force him to pay? And he shall be forced to do so. Do you
  understand? So, he can bring children into the world and then leave
  them empty-handed with the poor deserted mother.

_Bertha_, who believes in woman's equality with man, and in her economic
independence, yet delivers herself of the old sentimental gush in behalf
of "the poor deserted mother," who has been supported by her husband for
years, though their relations had ceased long before.

       *       *       *       *       *

A distorted picture, some feminists will say. Not at all. It is as
typical to-day as it was twenty-six years ago. Even to-day some
"emancipated" women claim the right to be self-supporting, yet demand
their husband's support. In fact, many leaders in the American suffrage
movement assure us that when women will make laws, they will force men
to support their wives. From the leaders down to the simplest devotee,
the same attitude prevails, namely, that man is a _blagueur_, and that
but for him the Berthas would have long ago become Michelangelos,
Beethovens, or Shakespeares; they claim that the Berthas represent the
most virtuous half of the race, and that they have made up their minds
to make man as virtuous as they are.

That such ridiculous extravagance should be resented by the Axels is not
at all surprising. It is resented even by the more intelligent of
_Bertha's_ own sex. Not because they are opposed to the emancipation of
woman, but because they do not believe that her emancipation can ever be
achieved by such absurd and hysterical notions. They repudiate the idea
that people who retain the substance of their slavery and merely escape
the shadow, can possibly be free, live free, or act free.

The radicals, no less than the feminists, must realize that a mere
external change in their economic and political status, cannot alter the
inherent or acquired prejudices and superstitions which underlie their
slavery and dependence, and which are the main causes of the antagonism
between the sexes.

The transition period is indeed a most difficult and perilous stage for
the woman as well as for the man. It requires a powerful light to guide
us past the dangerous reefs and rocks in the ocean of life. August
Strindberg is such a light. Sometimes glaring, ofttimes scorching, but
always beneficially illuminating the path for those who walk in
darkness, for the blind ones who would rather deceive and be deceived
than look into the recesses of their being. Therefore August Strindberg
is not only "the spiritual conscience of Sweden," as he has been called,
but the spiritual conscience of the whole human family, and, as such, a
most vital revolutionary factor.




THE GERMAN DRAMA




HERMANN SUDERMANN


It has been said that military conquest generally goes hand in hand with
the decline of creative genius, with the retrogression of culture. I
believe this is not a mere assertion. The history of the human race
repeatedly demonstrates that whenever a nation achieved great military
success, it invariably involved the decline of art, of literature, of
the drama; in short, of culture in the deepest and finest sense. This
has been particularly borne out by Germany after its military triumph in
the Franco-Prussian War.

For almost twenty years after that war, the country of poets and
thinkers remained, intellectually, a veritable desert, barren of ideas.
Young Germany had to go for its intellectual food to France,--Daudet,
Maupassant, and Zola; or to Russia--Tolstoy, Turgenev, and Dostoyevski;
finally also to Ibsen and Strindberg. Nothing thrived in Germany during
that period, except a sickening patriotism and sentimental romanticism,
perniciously misleading the people and giving them no adequate outlook
upon life and the social struggle. Perhaps that accounts for the popular
vogue of Hermann Sudermann: it may explain why he was received by the
young generation with open arms and acclaimed a great artist.

It is not my intention to discuss Hermann Sudermann as an artist or to
consider him from the point of view of the technic of the drama. I
intend to deal with him as the first German dramatist to treat social
topics and discuss the pressing questions of the day. From this point of
view Hermann Sudermann may be regarded as the pioneer of a new era in
the German drama. Primarily is this true of the three plays "Honor,"
"Magda," and "The Fires of St. John." In these dramas Hermann Sudermann,
while not delving deeply into the causes of the social conflicts,
nevertheless touches upon many vital subjects.

In "Honor" the author demolishes the superficial, sentimental conception
of "honor" that is a purely external manifestation, having no roots in
the life, the habits, or the customs of the people. He exposes the
stupidity of the notion that because a man looks askance at you, or
fails to pay respect to your uniform, you must challenge him to a duel
and shoot him dead. In this play Sudermann shows that the conception of
honor is nothing fixed or permanent, but that it varies with economic
and social status, different races, peoples and times holding different
ideas of it. With "Honor" Sudermann succeeded in undermining to a
considerable extent the stupid and ridiculous notion of the Germans
ruled by the rod and the Kaiser's coat.

But I particularly wish to consider "Magda," because, of all the plays
written by Hermann Sudermann, it is the most revolutionary and the least
national. It deals with a universal subject,--the awakening of woman. It
is revolutionary, not because Sudermann was the first to treat this
subject, for Ibsen had preceded him, but because in "Magda" he was the
first to raise the question of woman's right to motherhood with or
without the sanction of State and Church.


MAGDA

Lieutenant Colonel Schwartze, _Magda's_ father, represents all the
conventional and conservative notions of society.

  _Schwartze._ Modern ideas! Oh, pshaw! I know them. But come into the
  quiet homes where are bred brave soldiers and virtuous wives. There
  you'll hear no talk about heredity, no arguments about
  individuality, no scandalous gossip. There modern ideas have no
  foothold, for it is there that the life and strength of the
  Fatherland abide. Look at this home! There is no luxury,--hardly
  even what you call good taste,--faded rugs, birchen chairs, old
  pictures; and yet when you see the beams of the western sun pour
  through the white curtains and lie with such a loving touch on the
  old room, does not something say to you, "Here dwells true
  happiness"?

The _Colonel_ is a rigid military man. He is utterly blind to the modern
conception of woman's place in life. He rules his family as the Kaiser
rules the nation, with severe discipline, with terrorism and despotism.
He chooses the man whom _Magda_ is to marry, and when she refuses to
accept his choice, he drives her out of the house.

At the age of eighteen _Magda_ goes out into the world yearning for
development; she longs for artistic expression and economic
independence. Seventeen years later she returns to her native town, a
celebrated singer. As _Madelene dell'Orto_ she is invited to sing at the
town's charity bazaar, and is acclaimed, after the performance, one of
the greatest stars of the country.

_Magda_ has not forgotten her home; especially does she long to see her
father whom she loves passionately, and her sister, whom she had left a
little child of eight. After the concert _Magda_, the renowned artist,
steals away from her admirers, with their flowers and presents, and goes
out into the darkness of the night to catch a glimpse, through the
window at least, of her father and her little sister.

_Magda's_ father is scandalized at her mode of life: what will people
say if the daughter of the distinguished officer stops at a hotel,
associates with men without a chaperon, and is wined and dined away from
her home? _Magda_ is finally prevailed upon to remain with her parents.
She consents on condition that they should not pry into her life, that
they should not soil and besmirch her innermost being. But that is
expecting the impossible from a provincial environment. It is not that
her people really question; but they insinuate, they speak with looks
and nods; burning curiosity to unearth _Magda's_ life is in the very
air.

  _Schwartze._ I implore you--Come here, my child--nearer--so--I
  implore you--let me be happy in my dying hour. Tell me that you have
  remained pure in body and soul, and then go with my blessing on your
  way.

  _Magda._ I have remained--true to myself, dear father.

  _Schwartze._ How? In good or in ill?

  _Magda._ In what--for me--was good.

  _Schwartze._ I love you with my whole heart, because I have sorrowed
  for you--so long. But I must know who you are.

Among the townspeople who come to pay homage to _Magda_ is _Councillor
von Keller_. In his student days he belonged to the bohemian set and was
full of advanced ideas. At that period he met _Magda_, young,
beautiful, and inexperienced. A love affair developed. But when _Von
Keller_ finished his studies, he went home to the fold of his family,
and forgot his sweetheart _Magda_. In due course he became an important
pillar of society, a very influential citizen, admired, respected, and
feared in the community.

When _Magda_ returns home, _Von Keller_ comes to pay her his respects.
But she is no longer the insignificant little girl he had known; she is
now a celebrity. What pillar of society is averse to basking in the glow
of celebrities? _Von Keller_ offers flowers and admiration. But _Magda_
discovers in him the man who had robbed her of her faith and trust,--the
father of her child.

_Magda_ has become purified by her bitter struggle. It made her finer
and bigger. She does not even reproach the man, because--

  _Magda._ I've painted this meeting to myself a thousand times, and
  have been prepared for it for years. Something warned me, too, when
  I undertook this journey home--though I must say I hardly expected
  just here to--Yes, how is it that, after what has passed between us,
  you came into this house? It seems to me a little-- ... I can see it
  all. The effort to keep worthy of respect under such difficulties,
  with a bad conscience, is awkward. You look down from the height of
  your pure atmosphere on your sinful youth,--for you are called a
  pillar, my dear friend.

  _Von Keller._ Well, I felt myself called to higher things. I
  thought--Why should I undervalue my position? I have become
  Councillor, and that comparatively young. An ordinary ambition might
  take satisfaction in that. But one sits and waits at home, while
  others are called to the ministry. And this environment,
  conventionality, and narrowness, all is so gray,--gray! And the
  ladies here--for one who cares at all about elegance--I assure you
  something rejoiced within me when I read this morning that you were
  the famous singer,--you to whom I was tied by so many dear memories
  and--

  _Magda._ And then you thought whether it might not be possible with
  the help of these dear memories to bring a little color into the
  gray background?

  _Von Keller._ Oh, pray don't--

  _Magda._ Well, between old friends--

  _Von Keller._ Really, are we that, really?

  _Magda._ Certainly, _sans rancune_. Oh, if I took it from the other
  standpoint, I should have to range the whole gamut,--liar, coward,
  traitor! But as I look at it, I owe you nothing but thanks, my
  friend.

  _Von Keller._ This is a view which--

  _Magda._ Which is very convenient for you. But why should I not make
  it convenient for you? In the manner in which we met, you had no
  obligations towards me. I had left my home; I was young and
  innocent, hot-blooded and careless, and I lived as I saw others
  live. I gave myself to you because I loved you. I might perhaps have
  loved anyone who came in my way. That--that seemed to be all over.
  And we were so happy,--weren't we?... Yes, we were a merry set; and
  when the fun had lasted half a year, one day my lover vanished.

  _Von Keller._ An unlucky chance, I swear to you. My father was ill.
  I had to travel. I wrote everything to you.

  _Magda._ H'm! I didn't reproach you. And now I will tell you why I
  owe you thanks. I was a stupid, unsuspecting thing, enjoying freedom
  like a runaway monkey. Through you I became a woman. For whatever I
  have done in my art, for whatever I have become in myself, I have
  you to thank. My soul was like--yes, down below there, there used to
  be an olian harp which was left moldering because my father could
  not bear it. Such a silent harp was my soul; and through you it was
  given to the storm. And it sounded almost to breaking,--the whole
  scale of passions which bring us women to maturity,--love and hate
  and revenge and ambition, and need, need, need,--three times
  need--and the highest, the strongest, the holiest of all, the
  mother's love!--All I owe to you!

  _Von Keller._ My child!

  _Magda._ Your child? Who calls it so? Yours? Ha, ha! Dare to claim
  portion in him and I'll kill you with these hands. Who are you?
  You're a strange man who gratified his lust and passed on with a
  laugh. But I have a child,--my son, my God, my all! For him I lived
  and starved and froze and walked the streets; for him I sang and
  danced in concert-halls,--for my child who was crying for his
  bread!

  _Von Keller._ For Heaven's sake, hush! someone's coming.

  _Magda._ Let them come! Let them all come! I don't care, I don't
  care! To their faces I'll say what I think of you,--of you and your
  respectable society. Why should I be worse than you, that I must
  prolong my existence among you by a lie! Why should this gold upon
  my body, and the lustre which surrounds my name, only increase my
  infamy? Have I not worked early and late for ten long years? Have I
  not woven this dress with sleepless nights? Have I not built up my
  career step by step, like thousands of my kind? Why should I blush
  before anyone? I am myself, and through myself I have become what I
  am.

_Magda's_ father learns about the affair and immediately demands that
the _Councillor_ marry his daughter, or fight a duel. _Magda_ resents
the preposterous idea. _Von Keller_ is indeed glad to offer _Magda_ his
hand in marriage: she is so beautiful and fascinating; she will prove a
great asset to his ambitions. But he stipulates that she give up her
profession of singer, and that the existence of the child be kept
secret. He tells _Magda_ that later on, when they are happily married
and firmly established in the world, they will bring their child to
their home and adopt it; but for the present respectability must not
know that it is theirs, born out of wedlock, without the sanction of the
Church and the State.

That is more than _Magda_ can endure. She is outraged that she, the
mother, who had given up everything for the sake of her child, who had
slaved, struggled and drudged in order to win a career and economic
independence--all for the sake of the child--that she should forswear
her right to motherhood, her right to be true to herself!

  _Magda._ What--what do you say?

  _Von Keller._ Why, it would ruin us. No, no, it is absurd to think
  of it. But we can make a little journey every year to wherever it is
  being educated. One can register under a false name; that is not
  unusual in foreign parts, and is hardly criminal. And when we are
  fifty years old, and other regular conditions have been fulfilled,
  that can be arranged, can't it? Then we can, under some pretext,
  adopt it, can't we?

  _Magda._ I have humbled myself, I have surrendered my judgment, I
  have let myself be carried like a lamb to the slaughter. But my
  child I will not leave. Give up my child to save his career!

_Magda_ orders _Von Keller_ out of the house. But the old _Colonel_ is
unbending. He insists that his daughter become an honorable woman by
marrying the man who had seduced her. Her refusal fires his wrath to
wild rage.

  _Schwartze._ Either you swear to me now ... that you will become the
  honorable wife of your child's father, or--neither of us two shall
  go out of this room alive.... You think ... because you are free
  and a great artist, that you can set at naught--

  _Magda._ Leave art out of the question. Consider me nothing more
  than the seamstress or the servant-maid who seeks, among strangers,
  the little food and the little love she needs. See how much the
  family with its morality demand from us! It throws us on our own
  resources, it gives us neither shelter nor happiness, and yet, in
  our loneliness, we must live according to the laws which it has
  planned for itself alone. We must still crouch in the corner, and
  there wait patiently until a respectful wooer happens to come. Yes,
  wait. And meanwhile the war for existence of body and soul is
  consuming us. Ahead we see nothing but sorrow and despair, and yet
  shall we not once dare to give what we have of youth and strength to
  the man for whom our whole being cries? Gag us, stupefy us, shut us
  up in harems or in cloisters--and that perhaps would be best. But if
  you give us our freedom, do not wonder if we take advantage of it.

But morality and the family never understand the Magdas. Least of all
does the old Colonel understand his daughter. Rigid in his false notions
and superstitions, wrought up with distress, he is about to carry out
his threat, when a stroke of apoplexy overtakes him.

In "Magda," Hermann Sudermann has given to the world a new picture of
modern womanhood, a type of free motherhood. As such the play is of
great revolutionary significance, not alone to Germany, but to the
universal spirit of a newer day.


THE FIRES OF ST. JOHN

In "The Fires of St. John," Sudermann does not go as far as in "Magda."
Nevertheless the play deals with important truths. Life does not always
draw the same conclusions; life is not always logical, not always
consistent. The function of the artist is to portray Life--only thus can
he be true both to art and to life.

In this drama we witness the bondage of gratitude,--one of the most
enslaving and paralyzing factors. _Mr. Brauer_, a landed proprietor, has
a child, _Gertrude_, a beautiful girl, who has always lived the
sheltered life of a hot-house plant. The Brauers also have an adopted
daughter, _Marie_, whom they had picked up on the road, while traveling
on a stormy night. They called her "the calamity child," because a great
misfortune had befallen them shortly before. _Mr. Brauer's_ younger
brother, confronted with heavy losses, had shot himself, leaving behind
his son _George_ and a heavily mortgaged estate. The finding of the
baby, under these circumstances, was considered by the Brauers an omen.
They adopted it and brought it up as their own.

This involved the forcible separation of _Marie_ from her gypsy mother,
who was a pariah, an outcast beggar. She drank and stole in order to
subsist. But with it all, her mother instinct was strong and it always
drove her back to the place where her child lived. _Marie_ had her first
shock when, on her way home from confirmation, the ragged and brutalized
woman threw herself before the young girl, crying, "Mamie, my child, my
Mamie!" It was then that _Marie_ realized her origin. Out of gratitude
she consecrated her life to the Brauers.

_Marie_ never forgot for a moment that she owed everything--her
education, her support and happiness--to her adopted parents. She
wrapped herself around them with all the intensity and passion of her
nature. She became the very spirit of the house. She looked after the
estate, and devoted herself to little _Gertrude_, as to her own sister.

_Gertrude_ is engaged to marry her cousin _George_, and everything is
beautiful and joyous in the household. No one suspects that _Marie_ has
been in love with the young man ever since her childhood. However,
because of her gratitude to her benefactors, she stifles her nature,
hardens her heart, and locks her feelings behind closed doors, as it
were. And when _Gertrude_ is about to marry _George_, _Marie_ throws
herself into the work of fixing up a home for the young people, to
surround them with sunshine and joy in their new love life.

Accidentally _Marie_ discovers a manuscript written by _George_, wherein
he discloses his deep love for her. She learns that he, even as she, has
no other thought, no other purpose in life than his love for her. But he
also is bound by gratitude for his uncle _Brauer_ who had saved the
honor of his father and had rescued him from poverty. He feels it
dishonorable to refuse to marry _Gertrude_.

  _George._ All these years I have struggled and deprived myself with
  only one thing in view--to be free--free--and yet I must bow--I must
  bow. If it were not for the sake of this beautiful child, who is
  innocent of it all, I would be tempted to--But the die is cast, the
  yoke is ready--and so am I!... I, too, am a child of misery, a
  calamity child; but I am a subject of charity. I accept all they
  have to give.... Was I not picked up from the street, as my uncle so
  kindly informed me for the second time--like yourself? Do I not
  belong to this house, and am I not smothered with the damnable
  charity of my benefactors, like yourself?

It is St. John's night. The entire family is gathered on the estate of
the Brauers, while the peasants are making merry with song and dance at
the lighted bonfires.

It is a glorious, dreamy night, suggestive of symbolic meaning.
According to the servant _Katie_, it is written that "whoever shall give
or receive their first kiss on St. John's eve, their love is sealed and
they will be faithful unto death."

In the opinion of the _Pastor_, St. John's night represents a religious
phase, too holy for flippant pagan joy.

  _Pastor._ On such a dreamy night, different emotions are aroused
  within us. We seem to be able to look into the future, and imagine
  ourselves able to fathom, all mystery and heal all wounds. The
  common becomes elevated, our wishes become fate; and now we ask
  ourselves: What is it that causes all this within us--all these
  desires and wishes? It is _love_, brotherly love, that has been
  planted in our souls, that fills our lives: and, it is life itself.
  Am I not right? And now, with one bound, I will come to the point.
  In the revelation you will find: "God is love." Yes, God is love;
  and that is the most beautiful trait of our religion--that the best,
  the most beautiful within us, has been granted us by Him above. Then
  how could I, this very evening, so overcome with feeling for my
  fellow-man--how could I pass Him by? Therefore, Mr. Brauer, no
  matter, whether pastor or layman, I must confess my inability to
  grant your wish, and decline to give you a genuine pagan toast--

But Christian symbolism having mostly descended from primitive pagan
custom, _George's_ view is perhaps the most significant.

  _George._ Since the Pastor has so eloquently withdrawn, I will give
  you a toast. For, you see, my dear Pastor, something of the old
  pagan, a spark of heathenism, is still glowing somewhere within us
  all. It has outlived century after century, from the time of the old
  Teutons. Once every year that spark is fanned into flame--it flames
  up high, and then it is called "The Fires of St. John." Once every
  year we have "free night." Then the witches ride upon their
  brooms--the same brooms with which their witchcraft was once driven
  out of them--with scornful laughter the wild hordes sweep across the
  tree-tops, up, up, high upon the Blocksberg! Then it is, when in our
  hearts awake those wild desires which our fates could not
  fulfill--and, understand me well, dared not fulfill--then, no matter
  what may be the name of the law that governs the world on that day,
  in order that one single wish may become a reality, by whose grace
  we prolong our miserable existence, thousand others must miserably
  perish, part because they were never attainable; but the others,
  yes, the others, because we allowed them to escape us like wild
  birds, which, though already in our hands, but too listless to
  profit by opportunity, we failed to grasp at the right moment. But
  no matter. Once every year we have "free night." And yonder tongues
  of fire shooting up towards the heavens--do you know what they are?
  They are the spirits of our dead perished wishes! That is the red
  plumage of our birds of paradise we might have petted and nursed
  through our entire lives, but have escaped us! That is the old
  chaos, the heathenism within us; and though we be happy in sunshine
  and according to law, to-night is St. John's night. To its ancient
  pagan fires I empty this glass. To-night they shall burn and flame
  up high--high and again high!

_George_ and _Marie_ meet. They, too, have had their instinct locked
away even from their own consciousness. And on this night they break
loose with tremendous, primitive force. They are driven into each
other's arms because they feel that they belong to each other; they know
that if they had the strength they could take each other by the hand,
face their benefactor and tell him the truth: tell him that it would be
an unpardonable crime for _George_ to marry _Gertrude_ when he loves
another woman.

Now they all but find courage and strength for it, when the pitiful
plaint reaches them, "Oh, mine Mamie, mine daughter, mine child." And
_Marie_ is cast down from the sublime height of her love and passion,
down to the realization that she also, like her pariah mother, must go
out into the world to struggle, to fight, to become free from the
bondage of gratitude, of charity and dependence.

Not so _George_. He goes to the altar, like many another man, with a lie
upon his lips. He goes to swear that all his life long he will love,
protect and shelter the woman who is to be his wife.

This play is rich in thought and revolutionary significance. For is it
not true that we are all bound by gratitude, tied and fettered by what
we think we owe to others? Are we not thus turned into weaklings and
cowards, and do we not enter into new relationships with lies upon our
lips? Do we not become a lie to ourselves and a lie to those we
associate with? And whether we have the strength to be true to the
dominant spirit, warmed into being by the fires of St. John; whether we
have the courage to live up to it always or whether it manifests itself
only on occasion, it is nevertheless true that there is the potentiality
of freedom in the soul of every man and every woman; that there is the
possibility of greatness and fineness in all beings, were they not bound
and gagged by gratitude, by duty and shams,--a vicious network that
enmeshes body and soul.




GERHART HAUPTMANN


LONELY LIVES

Gerhart Hauptmann is the dramatist of whom it may be justly said that he
revolutionized the spirit of dramatic art in Germany: the last Mohican
of a group of four--Ibsen, Strindberg, Tolstoy, and Hauptmann--who
illumined the horizon of the nineteenth century. Of these Hauptmann,
undoubtedly the most human, is also the most universal.

It is unnecessary to make comparisons between great artists: life is
sufficiently complex to give each his place in the great scheme of
things. If, then, I consider Hauptmann more human, it is because of his
deep kinship with every stratum of life. While Ibsen deals exclusively
with _one_ attitude, Hauptmann embraces all, understands all, and
portrays all, because nothing human is alien to him.

Whether it be the struggle of the transition stage in "Lonely Lives," or
the conflict between the Ideal and the Real in "The Sunken Bell," or
the brutal background of poverty in "The Weavers," Hauptmann is never
aloof as the iconoclast Ibsen, never as bitter as the soul dissector
Strindberg, nor yet as set as the crusader Tolstoy. And that because of
his humanity, his boundless love, his oneness with the disinherited of
the earth, and his sympathy with the struggles and the travail, the hope
and the despair of every human soul. That accounts for the bitter
opposition which met Gerhart Hauptmann when he made his first appearance
as a dramatist; but it also accounts for the love and devotion of those
to whom he was a battle cry, a clarion call against all iniquity,
injustice and wrong.

In "Lonely Lives" we see the wonderful sympathy, the tenderness of
Hauptmann permeating every figure of the drama.

_Dr. Vockerat_ is not a fighter, not a propagandist or a soapbox orator;
he is a dreamer, a poet, and above all a searcher for truth; a
scientist, a man who lives in the realm of thought and ideas, and is out
of touch with reality and his immediate surroundings.

His parents are simple folk, religious and devoted. To them the world is
a book with seven seals. Having lived all their life on a farm,
everything with them is regulated and classified into simple ideas--good
or bad, great or small, strong or weak. How can they know the infinite
shades between strong and weak, how could they grasp the endless
variations between the good and the bad? To them life is a daily routine
of work and prayer. God has arranged everything, and God manages
everything. Why bother your head? Why spend sleepless nights? "Leave it
all to God." What pathos in this childish simplicity!

They love their son _John_, they worship him, and they consecrate their
lives to their only boy; and because of their love for him, also to his
wife and the newly born baby. They have but one sorrow: their son has
turned away from religion. Still greater their grief that _John_ is an
admirer of Darwin, Spencer and Haeckel and other such men,--sinners,
heathens all, who will burn in purgatory and hell. To protect their
beloved son from the punishment of God, the old folks continuously pray,
and give still more devotion and love to their erring child.

_Kitty_, _Dr. Vockerat's_ wife, is a beautiful type of the Gretchen,
reared without any ideas about life, without any consciousness of her
position in the world, a tender, helpless flower. She loves _John_; he
is her ideal; he is her all. But she cannot understand him. She does not
live in his sphere, nor speak his language. She has never dreamed his
thoughts,--not because she is not willing or not eager to give the man
all that he needs, but because she does not understand and does not
know how.

Into this atmosphere comes _Anna Mahr_ like a breeze from the plains.
_Anna_ is a Russian girl, a woman so far produced in Russia only,
perhaps because the conditions, the life struggles of that country have
been such as to develop a different type of woman. _Anna Mahr_ has spent
most of her life on the firing line. She has no conception of the
personal: she is universal in her feelings and thoughts, with deep
sympathies going out in abundance to all mankind.

When she comes to the Vockerats, their whole life is disturbed,
especially that of _John Vockerat_, to whom she is like a balmy spring
to the parched wanderer in the desert. She understands him, for has she
not dreamed such thoughts as his, associated with men and women who, for
the sake of the ideal, sacrificed their lives, went to Siberia, and
suffered in the underground dungeons? How then could she fail a
Vockerat? It is quite natural that _John_ should find in _Anna_ what his
own little world could not give him,--understanding, comradeship, deep
spiritual kinship.

The Anna Mahrs give the same to any one, be it man, woman or child. For
theirs is not a feeling of sex, of the personal; it is the selfless, the
human, the all-embracing fellowship.

In the invigorating presence of _Anna Mahr_, _John Vockerat_ begins to
live, to dream and work. Another phase of him, as it were, comes into
being; larger vistas open before his eyes, and his life is filled with
new aspiration for creative work in behalf of a liberating purpose.

Alas, the inevitability that the ideal should be besmirched and
desecrated when it comes in contact with sordid reality! This tragic
fate befalls _Anna Mahr_ and _John Vockerat_.

Old _Mother Vockerat_, who, in her simplicity of soul cannot conceive of
an intimate friendship between a man and a woman, unless they be husband
and wife, begins first to suspect and insinuate, then to nag and
interfere. Of course, it is her love for _John_, and even more so her
love for her son's wife, who is suffering in silence and wearing out her
soul in her realization of how little she can mean to her husband.

_Mother Vockerat_ interprets _Kitty's_ grief in a different manner:
jealousy, and antagonism to the successful rival is her most convenient
explanation for the loneliness, the heart-hunger of love. But as a
matter of fact, it is something deeper and more vital that is born in
_Kitty's_ soul. It is the awakening of her own womanhood, of her
personality.

  _Kitty._ I agree with Miss Mahr on many points. She was saying
  lately that we women live in a condition of degradation. I think she
  is quite right there. It is what I feel very often.... It's as
  clear as daylight that she is right. We are really and truly a
  despised and ill-used sex. Only think that there is still a law--so
  she told me yesterday--which allows the husband to inflict a
  moderate amount of corporal punishment on his wife.

And yet, corporal punishment is not half as terrible as the punishment
society inflicts on the Kittys by rearing them as dependent and useless
beings, as hot-house flowers, ornaments for a fine house, but of no
substance to the husband and certainly of less to her children.

And _Mother Vockerat_, without any viciousness, instills poison into the
innocent soul of _Kitty_ and embitters the life of her loved son.
Ignorantly, _Mother Vockerat_ meddles, interferes, and tramples upon the
most sacred feelings, the innocent joys of true comradeship.

And all the time _John_ and _Anna_ are quite unaware of the pain and
tragedy they are the cause of: they are far removed from the
commonplace, petty world about them. They walk and discuss, read and
argue about the wonders of life, the needs of humanity, the beauty of
the ideal. They have both been famished so long: _John_ for spiritual
communion, _Anna_ for warmth of home that she had known so little
before, and which in her simplicity she has accepted at the hand of
_Mother Vockerat_ and _Kitty_, oblivious of the fact that nothing is so
enslaving as hospitality prompted by a sense of duty.

  _Miss Mahr._ It is a great age that we live in. That which has so
  weighed upon people's minds and darkened their lives seems to me to
  be gradually disappearing. Do you not think so, Dr. Vockerat?

  _John._ How do you mean?

  _Miss Mahr._ On the one hand we were oppressed by a sense of
  uncertainty, of apprehension, on the other by gloomy fanaticism.
  This exaggerated tension is calming down, is yielding to the
  influence of something like a current of fresh air, that is blowing
  in upon us from--let us say from the twentieth century.

  _John._ But I don't find it possible to arrive at any real joy in
  life yet. I don't know....

  _Miss Mahr._ It has no connection with our individual fates--our
  little fates, Dr. Vockerat!... I have something to say to you--but
  you are not to get angry; you are to be quite quiet and good.... Dr.
  Vockerat! we also are falling into the error of weak natures. We
  must look at things more impersonally. We must learn to take
  ourselves less seriously.

  _John._ But we'll not talk about that at present.... And is one
  really to sacrifice everything that one has gained to this cursed
  conventionality? Are people incapable of understanding that there
  can be no crime in a situation which only tends to make both parties
  better and nobler? Do parents lose by their son becoming a better,
  wiser man? Does a wife lose by the spiritual growth of her husband?

  _Miss Mahr._ You are both right and wrong.... Your parents have a
  different standard from you. Kitty's again, differs from theirs. It
  seems to me that in this we cannot judge for them.

  _John._ Yes, but you have always said yourself that one should not
  allow one's self to be ruled by the opinion of others--that one
  ought to be independent?

  _Miss Mahr._ You have often said to me that you foresee a new, a
  nobler state of fellowship between man and woman.

  _John._ Yes, I feel that it will come some time--a relationship in
  which the human will preponderate over the animal tie. Animal will
  no longer be united to animal, but one human being to another.
  Friendship is the foundation on which this love will rise,
  beautiful, unchangeable, a miraculous structure. And I foresee more
  than this--something nobler, richer, freer still.

  _Miss Mahr._ But will you get anyone, except me, to believe this?
  Will this prevent Kitty's grieving herself to death?... Don't let us
  speak of ourselves at all. Let us suppose, quite generally, the
  feeling of a new, more perfect relationship between two people to
  exist, as it were prophetically. It is only a feeling, a young and
  all too tender plant which must be carefully watched and guarded.
  Don't you think so, Dr. Vockerat? That this plant should come to
  perfection during our lifetime is not to be expected. We shall not
  see or taste its fruits. But we may help to propagate it for future
  generations. I could imagine a person accepting this as a life-task.

  _John._ And hence you conclude that we must part.

  _Miss Mahr._ I did not mean to speak of ourselves. But it is as you
  say ... we must part. Another idea ... had sometimes suggested
  itself to me too ... momentarily. But I could not entertain it now.
  I too have felt as if it were the presentiment of better things. And
  since then the old aim seems to me too poor a one for us--too
  common, to tell the truth. It is like coming down from the
  mountain-top with its wide, free view, and feeling the narrowness,
  the nearness of everything in the valley.

Those who feel the narrow, stifling atmosphere must either die or leave.
_Anna Mahr_ is not made for the valley. She must live on the heights.
But _John Vockerat_, harassed and whipped on by those who love him most,
is unmanned, broken and crushed. He clings to _Anna Mahr_ as one
condemned to death.

  _John._ Help me, Miss Anna! There is no manliness, no pride left in
  me. I am quite changed. At this moment I am not even the man I was
  before you came to us. The one feeling left in me is disgust and
  weariness of life. Everything has lost its worth to me, is soiled,
  polluted, desecrated, dragged through the mire. When I think what
  you, your presence, your words made me, I feel that if I cannot be
  that again, then--then all the rest no longer means anything to me.
  I draw a line through it all and--_close my account_.

  _Miss Mahr._ It grieves me terribly, Dr. Vockerat, to see you like
  this. I hardly know how I am to help you. But one thing you ought to
  remember--that we foresaw this. We knew that we must be prepared for
  this sooner or later.

  _John._ Our prophetic feeling of a new, a free existence, a far-off
  state of blessedness--that feeling we will keep. It shall never be
  forgotten, though it may never be realized. It shall be my guiding
  light; when this light is extinguished, my life will be extinguished
  too.

  _Miss Mahr._ John! one word more! This ring--was taken from the
  finger of a dead woman, who had followed her--her husband to
  Siberia--and faithfully shared his suffering to the end. Just the
  opposite to our case.... It is the only ring I have ever worn. Its
  story is a thing to think of when one feels weak. And when you look
  at it--in hours of weakness--then--think of her--who, far
  away--lonely like yourself--is fighting the same secret
  fight--Good-bye!

But John lacks the strength for the fight. Life to him is too lonely,
too empty, too unbearably desolate. He has to die--a suicide.

       *       *       *       *       *

What wonderful grasp of the deepest and most hidden tones of the human
soul! What significance in the bitter truth that those who struggle for
an ideal, those who attempt to cut themselves loose from the old, from
the thousand fetters that hold them down, are doomed to lonely lives!

Gerhart Hauptmann has dedicated this play "to those who have lived this
life." And there are many, oh, so many who must live this life, torn out
root and all from the soil of their birth, of their surroundings and
past. The ideal they see only in the distance--sometimes quite near,
again in the far-off distance. These are the lonely lives.

This drama also emphasizes the important point that not only the parents
and the wife of _John Vockerat_ fail to understand him, but even his own
comrade, one of his own world, the painter _Braun_,--the type of
fanatical revolutionist who scorns human weaknesses and ridicules those
who make concessions and compromises. But not even this
arch-revolutionist can grasp the needs of _John_. Referring to his
chum's friendship with _Anna_, _Braun_ upbraids him. He charges _John_
with causing his wife's unhappiness and hurting the feelings of his
parents. This very man who, as a propagandist, demands that every one
live up to his ideal, is quick to condemn his friend when the latter,
for the first time in his life, tries to be consistent, to be true to
his own innermost being.

The revolutionary, the social and human significance of "Lonely Lives"
consists in the lesson that the real revolutionist,--the dreamer, the
creative artist, the iconoclast in whatever line,--is fated to be
misunderstood, not only by his own kin, but often by his own comrades.
That is the doom of all great spirits: they are detached from their
environment. Theirs is a lonely life--the life of the transition stage,
the hardest and the most difficult period for the individual as well as
for a people.


THE WEAVERS

When "The Weavers" first saw the light, pandemonium broke out in the
"land of thinkers and poets." "What!" cried Philistia, "workingmen,
dirty, emaciated and starved, to be placed on the stage! Poverty, in all
its ugliness, to be presented as an after-dinner amusement? That is too
much!"

Indeed it is too much for the self-satisfied bourgeoisie to be brought
face to face with the horrors of the weaver's existence. It is too much,
because of the truth and reality that thunders in the placid ears of
society a terrific _J'accuse_!

       *       *       *       *       *

Gerhart Hauptmann is a child of the people; his grandfather was a
weaver, and the only way his father could escape the fate of his parents
was by leaving his trade and opening an inn. Little Gerhart's vivid and
impressionable mind must have received many pictures from the stories
told about the life of the weavers. Who knows but that the social
panorama which Hauptmann subsequently gave to the world, had not
slumbered in the soul of the child, gaining form and substance as he
grew to manhood. At any rate "The Weavers," like the canvases of Millet
and the heroic figures of Meunier, represent the epic of the age-long
misery of labor, a profoundly stirring picture.

The background of "The Weavers" is the weaving district in Silesia,
during the period of home industry--a gruesome sight of human phantoms,
dragging on their emaciated existence almost by superhuman effort. Life
is a tenacious force that clings desperately even to the most meager
chance in an endeavor to assert itself. But what is mirrored in "The
Weavers" is so appalling, so dismally hopeless that it stamps the
damning brand upon our civilization.

One man and his hirelings thrive on the sinew and bone, on the very
blood, of an entire community. The manufacturer _Dreissiger_ spends more
for cigars in a day than an entire family earns in a week. Yet so
brutalizing, so terrible is the effect of wealth that neither pale
hunger nor black despair can move the master.

There is nothing in literature to equal the cruel reality of the scene
in the office of _Dreissiger_, when the weavers bring the finished
cloth. For hours they are kept waiting in the stuffy place, waiting the
pleasure of the rich employer after they had walked miles on an empty
stomach and little sleep. For as one of the men says, "What's to hinder
a weaver waitin' for an hour, or for a day? What else is he there for?"

Indeed what else, except to be always waiting in humility, to be
exploited and degraded, always at the mercy of the few pence thrown to
them after an endless wait.

Necessity knows no law. Neither does it know pride. The weavers, driven
by the whip of hunger, bend their backs, beg and cringe before their
"superior."

  _Weaver's wife._ No one can't call me idle, but I am not fit now for
  what I once was. I've twice had a miscarriage. As to John, he's but
  a poor creature. He's been to the shepherd at Zerlau, but he
  couldn't do him no good, and ... you can't do more than you've
  strength for.... We works as hard as ever we can. This many a week
  I've been at it till far into the night. An' we'll keep our heads
  above water right enough if I can just get a bit o' strength into
  me. But you must have pity on us, Mr. Pfeifer, sir. You'll please be
  so very kind as to let me have a few pence on the next job, sir?
  Only a few pence, to buy bread with. We can't get no more credit.
  We've a lot o' little ones.

"Suffer little children to come unto me." Christ loves the children of
the poor. The more the better. Why, then, care if they starve? Why care
if they faint away with hunger, like the little boy in _Dreissiger's_
office? For "little Philip is one of nine and the tenth's coming, and
the rain comes through their roof--and the mother hasn't two shirts
among the nine."

Who is to blame? Ask the Dreissigers. They will tell you, "The poor have
too many children." Besides--

  _Dreissiger._ It was nothing serious. The boy is all right again.
  But all the same it's a disgrace. The child's so weak that a puff of
  wind would blow him over. How people, how any parents can be so
  thoughtless is what passes my comprehension. Loading him with two
  heavy pieces of fustian to carry six good miles! No one would
  believe it that hadn't seen it. It simply means that I shall have to
  make a rule that no goods brought by children will be taken ever. I
  sincerely trust that such things will not occur again.--Who gets all
  the blame for it? Why, of course the manufacturer. It's entirely our
  fault. If some poor little fellow sticks in the snow in winter and
  goes to sleep, a special correspondent arrives post-haste, and in
  two days we have a blood-curdling story served up in all the papers.
  Is any blame laid on the father, the parents, that send such a
  child?--Not a bit of it. How should they be to blame? It's all the
  manufacturer's fault--he's made the scapegoat. They flatter the
  weaver, and give the manufacturer nothing but abuse--he's a cruel
  man, with a heart like a stone, a dangerous fellow, at whose calves
  every cur of a journalist may take a bite. He lives on the fat of
  the land, and pays the poor weavers starvation wages. In the flow of
  his eloquence the writer forgets to mention that such a man has his
  cares too and his sleepless nights; that he runs risks of which the
  workman never dreams; that he is often driven distracted by all the
  calculations he has to make, and all the different things he has to
  take into account; that he has to struggle for his very life against
  competition; and that no day passes without some annoyance or some
  loss. And think of the manufacturer's responsibilities, think of the
  numbers that depend on him, that look to him for their daily bread.
  No, No! none of you need wish yourselves in my shoes--you would soon
  have enough of it. You all saw how that fellow, that scoundrel
  Becker, behaved. Now he'll go and spread about all sorts of tales of
  my hardheartedness, of how my weavers are turned off for a mere
  trifle, without a moment's notice. Is that true? Am I so very
  unmerciful?

The weavers are too starved, too subdued, too terror-stricken not to
accept _Dreissiger's_ plea in his own behalf. What would become of these
living corpses were it not for the rebels like _Becker_, to put fire,
spirit, and hope in them? Verily the Beckers are dangerous.

Appalling as the scene in the office of _Dreissiger_ is, the life in the
home of the old weaver _Baumert_ is even more terrible. His decrepit old
wife, his idiotic son _August_, who still has to wind spools, his two
daughters weaving their youth and bloom into the cloth, and _Ansorge_,
the broken remnant of a heroic type of man, bent over his baskets, all
live in cramped quarters lit up only by two small windows. They are
waiting anxiously for the few pence old _Baumert_ is to bring, that they
may indulge in a long-missed meal. "What ... what ... what is to become
of us if he don't come home?" laments _Mother Baumert_. "There is not so
much as a handful o' salt in the house--not a bite o' bread, nor a bit
o' wood for the fire."

But old _Baumert_ has not forgotten his family. He brings them a repast,
the first "good meal" they have had in two years. It is the meat of
their faithful little dog, whom _Baumert_ could not kill himself because
he loved him so. But hunger knows no choice; _Baumert_ had his beloved
dog killed, because "a nice little bit o' meat like that does you a lot
o' good."

It did not do old _Baumert_ much good. His stomach, tortured and abused
so long, rebelled, and the old man had to "give up the precious dog."
And all this wretchedness, all this horror almost within sight of the
palatial home of _Dreissiger_, whose dogs are better fed than his human
slaves.

Man's endurance is almost limitless. Almost, yet not quite. For there
comes a time when the _Baumerts_, even like their stomachs, rise in
rebellion, when they hurl themselves, even though in blind fury, against
the pillars of their prison house. Such a moment comes to the weavers,
the most patient, docile and subdued of humanity, when stirred to
action by the powerful poem read to them by the _Jaeger_.

    The justice to us weavers dealt
      Is bloody, cruel, and hateful;
    Our life's one torture, long drawn out:
      For Lynch law we'd be grateful.

    Stretched on the rack day after day,
      Heart sick and bodies aching,
    Our heavy sighs their witness bear
      To spirit slowly breaking.

    The Dreissigers true hangmen are,
      Servants no whit behind them;
    Masters and men with one accord
      Set on the poor to grind them.

    You villains all, you brood of hell ...
      You fiends in fashion human,
    A curse will fall on all like you,
      Who prey on man and woman.

    The suppliant knows he asks in vain,
      Vain every word that's spoken.
    "If not content, then go and starve--
      Our rules cannot be broken."

    Then think of all our woe and want,
      O ye, who hear this ditty!
    Our struggle vain for daily bread
      Hard hearts would move to pity.

    But pity's what you've never known,--
      You'd take both skin and clothing,
    You cannibals, whose cruel deeds
      Fill all good men with loathing.

The _Dreissigers_, however, will take no heed. Arrogant and secure in
the possession of their stolen wealth, supported by the mouthpieces of
the Church and the State, they feel safe from the wrath of the
people--till it is too late. But when the storm breaks, they show the
yellow streak and cravenly run to cover.

The weavers, roused at last by the poet's description of their
condition, urged on by the inspiring enthusiasm of the _Beckers_ and the
_Jaegers_, become indifferent to the threats of the law and ignore the
soft tongue of the dispenser of the pure word of God,--"the God who
provides shelter and food for the birds and clothes the lilies of the
field." Too long they had believed in Him. No wonder _Pastor Kittelhaus_
is now at a loss to understand the weavers, heretofore "so patient, so
humble, so easily led." The _Pastor_ has to pay the price for his
stupidity: the weavers have outgrown even him.

The spirit of revolt sweeps their souls. It gives them courage and
strength to attack the rotten structure, to drive the thieves out of the
temple, aye, even to rout the soldiers who come to save the sacred
institution of capitalism. The women, too, are imbued with the spirit
of revolt and become an avenging force. Not even the devout faith of
_Old Hilse_, who attempts to stem the tide with his blind belief in his
Saviour, can stay them.

  _Old Hilse._ O Lord, we know not how to be thankful enough to Thee,
  for that Thou hast spared us this night again in Thy goodness ...
  an' hast had pity on us ... an' hast suffered us to take no harm.
  Thou art the All-merciful, an' we are poor, sinful children of
  men--that bad that we are not worthy to be trampled under Thy feet.
  Yet Thou art our loving Father, an' Thou wilt look upon us an'
  accept us for the sake of Thy dear Son, our Lord and Saviour Jesus
  Christ. "Jesus' blood and righteousness, Our covering is and
  glorious dress." An' if we're sometimes too sore cast down under Thy
  chastening--when the fire of Thy purification burns too ragin'
  hot--oh, lay it not to our charge; forgive us our sin. Give us
  patience, heavenly Father, that after all these sufferin's we may be
  made partakers of Thy eternal blessedness. Amen.

The tide is rushing on. _Luise_, _Old Hilse's_ own daughter-in-law, is
part of the tide.

  _Luise._ You an' your piety an' religion--did they serve to keep the
  life in my poor children? In rags an' dirt they lay, all the
  four--it didn't as much as keep 'em dry. Yes! I sets up to be a
  mother, that's what I do--an' if you'd like to know it, that's why
  I'd send all the manufacturers to hell--because I am a mother!--Not
  one of the four could I keep in life! It was cryin' more than
  breathin' with me from the time each poor little thing came into the
  world till death took pity on it. The devil a bit you cared! You sat
  there prayin' and singin', and let me run about till my feet bled,
  tryin' to get one little drop o' skim milk. How many hundred nights
  has I lain an' racked my head to think what I could do to cheat the
  churchyard of my little one? What harm has a baby like that done
  that it must come to such a miserable end--eh? An' over there at
  Dittrich's they're bathed in wine an' washed in milk. No! you may
  talk as you like, but if they begins here, ten horses won't hold me
  back. An' what's more--if there's a rush on Dittrich's, you will see
  me in the forefront of it--an' pity the man as tries to prevent
  me--I've stood it long enough, so now you know it.

Thus the tide sweeps over _Old Hilse_, as it must sweep over every
obstacle, every hindrance, once labor awakens to the consciousness of
its solidaric power.

An epic of misery and revolt never before painted with such terrific
force, such inclusive artistry. Hence its wide human appeal, its
incontrovertible indictment and its ultra-revolutionary significance,
not merely to Silesia or Germany, but to our whole pseudo-civilization
built on the misery and exploitation of the wealth producers, of Labor.
None greater, none more universal than this stirring, all-embracing
message of the most humanly creative genius of our time--Gerhart
Hauptmann.


THE SUNKEN BELL

The great versatility of Gerhart Hauptmann is perhaps nowhere so
apparent as in "The Sunken Bell," the poetic fairy tale of the tragedy
of Man, a tragedy as rich in symbolism as it is realistically true--a
tragedy as old as mankind, as elemental as man's ceaseless struggle to
cut loose from the rock of ages.

_Heinrich_, the master bell founder, is an idealist consumed by the fire
of a great purpose. He has already set a hundred bells ringing in a
hundred different towns, all singing his praises. But his restless
spirit is not appeased. Ever it soars to loftier heights, always
yearning to reach the sun.

Now once more he has tried his powers, and the new bell, the great
Master Bell, is raised aloft,--only to sink into the mere, carrying its
maker with it.

His old ideals are broken, and _Heinrich_ is lost in the wilderness of
life.

Weak and faint with long groping in the dark woods, and bleeding,
_Heinrich_ reaches the mountain top and there beholds _Rautendelein_,
the spirit of freedom, that has allured him on in the work which he
strove--"in one grand Bell, to weld the silver music of thy voice with
the warm gold of a Sun-holiday. It should have been a master-work! I
failed, then wept I tears of blood." _Heinrich_ returns to his faithful
wife _Magda_, his children, and his village friends--to die. The bell
that sank into the mere was not made for the heights--it was not fit to
wake the answering echoes of the peaks!

      _Heinrich._

       *       *       *       *       *

    'Twas for the valley--not the mountain-top!
    I choose to die. The service of the valleys
    Charms me no longer, ... since on the peak I stood.
    Youth--a new youth--I'd need, if I should live:
    Out of some rare and magic mountain flower
    Marvelous juices I should need to press--
    Heart-health, and strength, and the mad lust of triumph,
    Steeling my hand to work none yet have dreamed of!

_Rautendelein_, the symbol of youth and freedom, the vision of new
strength and expression, wakes _Heinrich_ from his troubled sleep,
kisses him back to life, and inspires him with faith and courage to work
toward greater heights.

_Heinrich_ leaves his wife, his hearth, his native place, and rises to
the summit of his ideal, there to create, to fashion a marvel bell whose
iron throat shall send forth

    The first waking peal
    Shall shake the skies--when, from the somber clouds
    That weighed upon us through the winter night,
    Rivers of jewels shall go rushing down
    Into a million hands outstretched to clutch!
    Then all who drooped, with sudden power inflamed,
    Shall bear their treasure homeward to their huts,
    There to unfurl, at last, the silken banners,
    Waiting--so long, so long--to be upraised,

       *       *       *       *       *

    And now the wondrous chime again rings out,
    Filling the air with such sweet, passionate sound
    As makes each breast to sob with rapturous pain.
    It sings a song, long lost and long forgotten,
    A song of home--a childlike song of Love,
    Born in the waters of some fairy well--
    Known to all mortals, and yet heard of none!

       *       *       *       *       *

    And as it rises, softly first, and low,
    The nightingale and dove seem singing, too;
    And all the ice in every human breast
    Is melted, and the hate, and pain, and woe,
    Stream out in tears.

Indeed a wondrous bell, as only those can forge who have reached the
mountain top,--they who can soar upon the wings of their imagination
high above the valley of the commonplace, above the dismal gray of petty
consideration, beyond the reach of the cold, stifling grip of
reality,--higher, ever higher, to kiss the sun-lit sky.

_Heinrich_ spreads his wings. Inspired by the divine fire of
_Rautendelein_, he all but reaches the pinnacle. But there is the
_Vicar_, ready to wrestle with the devil for a poor human soul; to buy
it free, if need be, to drag it back to its cage that it may never rise
again in rebellion to the will of God.

      _The Vicar._

    You shun the church, take refuge in the mountains;
    This many a month you have not seen the home
    Where your poor wife sits sighing, while, each day,
    Your children drink their lonely mother's tears!

       *       *       *       *       *

    For this there is no name but madness,
    And wicked madness. Yes. I speak the truth.
    Here stand I, Master, overcome with horror
    At the relentless cruelty of your heart.
    Now Satan, aping God, hath dealt a blow--
    Yes, I must speak my mind--a blow so dread
    That even he must marvel at his triumph.
                               ... Now--I have done.
    Too deep, yea to the neck, you are sunk in sin!
    Your Hell, decked out in beauty as high Heaven,
    Shall hold you fast. I will not waste more words.
    Yet mark this, Master: witches make good fuel,
    Even as heretics, for funeral-pyres.
                                     ... Your ill deeds,
    Heathen, and secret once, are now laid bare.
    Horror they wake, and soon there shall come hate.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Then, go your way! Farewell! My task is done.
    The hemlock of your sin no man may hope
    To rid your soul of. May God pity you!
    But this remember! There's a word named rue!
    And some day, some day, as your dreams you dream,
    A sudden arrow, shot from out the blue,
    Shall pierce your breast! And yet you shall not die,
    Nor shall you live. In that dread day you'll curse
    All you now cherish--God, the world, your work,
    Your wretched self you'll curse. Then ... think of me!
    That bell shall ring again! Then think of me!

Barely does _Heinrich_ escape the deadly clutch of outlined creeds,
superstitions, and conventions embodied in the _Vicar_, than he is in
the throes of other foes who conspire his doom.

Nature herself has decreed the death of _Heinrich_. For has not man
turned his back upon her, has he not cast her off, scorned her
beneficial offerings, robbed her of her beauty, devastated her charms
and betrayed her trust--all for the ephemeral glow of artifice and sham?
Hence Nature, too, is _Heinrich's_ foe. Thus the Spirit of the Earth,
with all its passions and lusts, symbolized in the Wood Sprite, and
gross materialism in the person of the _Nickelmann_, drive the intruder
back.

      _The Wood Sprite._

    He crowds us from our hills. He hacks and hews,
    Digs up our metals, sweats, and smelts, and brews.
    The earth-man and the water-sprite he takes
    To drag his burdens, and, to harness, breaks.

       *       *       *       *       *

    She steals my cherished flowers, my red-brown ores,
    My gold, my precious stones, my resinous stores.
    She serves him like a slave, by night and day.
    'Tis he she kisses--us she keeps at bay.
    Naught stands against him. Ancient trees he fells.
    The earth quakes at his tread, and all the dells
    Ring with the echo of his thunderous blows.
    His crimson smithy furnace glows and shines
    Into the depths of my most secret mines.
    What he is up to, only Satan knows!

      _The Nickelmann._

    Brekekekex! Hadst thou the creature slain,
    A-rotting in the mere long since he had lain--
    The maker of the bell, beside the bell.
    And so when next I had wished to throw the stones,
    The bell had been my box--the dice, his bones!

But even they are powerless to stem the tide of the Ideal: they are
helpless In the face of _Heinrich's_ new-born faith, of his burning
passion to complete his task, and give voice to the thousand-throated
golden peal.

_Heinrich_ works and toils, and when doubt casts its black shadow
athwart his path, _Rautendelein_ charms back hope. She alone has
boundless faith in her Balder,--god of the joy of Life--for he is part
of her, of the great glowing force her spirit breathed into the
Heinrichs since Time was born--Liberty, redeemer of man.

      _Heinrich._

    I am thy Balder?
    Make me believe it--make me know it, child!
    Give my faint soul the rapturous joy it needs,
    To nerve it to its task. For, as the hand,
    Toiling with tong and hammer, on and on,
    To hew the marble and to guide the chisel,
    Now bungles here, now there, yet may not halt.
                           ... But--enough of this,
    Still straight and steady doth the smoke ascend
    From my poor human sacrifice to heaven.
    Should now a Hand on high reject my gift,
    Why, it may do so. Then the priestly robe
    Falls from my shoulder--by no act of mine;
    While I, who erst upon the heights was set,
    Must look my last on Horeb, and be dumb!
    But now bring torches! Lights! And show thine Art!
    Enchantress! Fill the wine-cup! We will drink!
    Ay, like the common herd of mortal men,
    With resolute hands our fleeting joy we'll grip!
    Our unsought leisure we will fill with life,
    Not waste it, as the herd, in indolence.
    We will have music!

While _Heinrich_ and _Rautendelein_ are in the ecstasy of their love and
work, the spirits weave their treacherous web--they threaten, they
plead, they cling,--spirits whose pain and grief are harder to bear
than the enmity or menace of a thousand foes. Spirits that entwine one's
heartstrings with tender touch, yet are heavier fetters, more oppressive
than leaden weights. _Heinrich's_ children, symbolizing regret that
paralyzes one's creative powers, bring their mother's tears and with
them a thousand hands to pull _Heinrich_ down from his heights, back to
the valley.

"The bell! The bell!" The old, long buried bell again ringing and
tolling. Is it not the echo from the past? The superstitions instilled
from birth, the prejudices that cling to man with cruel persistence, the
conventions which fetter the wings of the idealist: the Old wrestling
with the New for the control of man.

       *       *       *       *       *

"The Sunken Bell" is a fairy tale in its poetic beauty and glow of
radiant color. But stripped of the legendary and symbolic, it is the
life story of every seeker for truth, of the restless spirit of
rebellion ever striving onward, ever reaching out toward the sun-tipped
mountain, ever yearning for a new-born light.

Too long had _Heinrich_ lived in the valley. It has sapped his strength,
has clipped his wings. "Too late! Thy heavy burdens weigh thee down; thy
dead ones are too mighty for thee." _Heinrich_ has to die. "He who has
flown so high into the very Light, as thou hast flown, must perish, if
he once fall back to earth."

Thus speak the worldly wise. As if death could still the burning thirst
for light; as if the hunger for the ideal could ever be appeased by the
thought of destruction! The worldly wise never feel the irresistible
urge to dare the cruel fates. With the adder in Maxim Gorki's "Song of
the Falcon" they sneer, "What is the sky? An empty place.... Why disturb
the soul with the desire to soar into the sky?... Queer birds," they
laugh at the falcons. "Not knowing the earth and grieving on it, they
yearn for the sky, seeking for light in the sultry desert. For it is
only a desert, with no food and no supporting place for a living body."

The Heinrichs are the social falcons, and though they perish when they
fall to earth, they die in the triumphant glory of having beheld the
sun, of having braved the storm, defied the clouds and mastered the air.

The sea sparkles in the glowing light, the waves dash against the shore.
In their lion-like roar a song resounds about the proud falcons: "O
daring Falcon, in the battle with sinister forces you lose your life.
But the time will come when your precious blood will illumine, like the
burning torch of truth, the dark horizon of man; when your blood shall
inflame many brave hearts with a burning desire for freedom."

The time when the peals of Heinrich's Bell will call the strong and
daring to battle for light and joy. "Hark!... 'Tis the music of the
Sun-bells' song! The Sun ... the Sun ... draws near!" ... and though
"the night is long," dawn breaks, its first rays falling on the dying
Heinrichs.




FRANK WEDEKIND


THE AWAKENING OF SPRING

Frank Wedekind is perhaps the most daring dramatic spirit in Germany.
Coming to the fore much later than Sudermann and Hauptmann, he did not
follow in their path, but set out in quest of new truths. More boldly
than any other dramatist Frank Wedekind has laid bare the shams of
morality in reference to sex, especially attacking the ignorance
surrounding the sex life of the child and its resultant tragedies.

Wedekind became widely known through his great drama "The Awakening of
Spring," which he called a tragedy of childhood, dedicating the work to
parents and teachers. Verily an appropriate dedication, because parents
and teachers are, in relation to the child's needs, the most ignorant
and mentally indolent class. Needless to say, this element entirely
failed to grasp the social significance of Wedekind's work. On the
contrary, they saw in it an invasion of their traditional authority and
an outrage on the sacred rights of parenthood.

The critics also could see naught in Wedekind, except a base, perverted,
almost diabolic nature bereft of all finer feeling. But professional
critics seldom see below the surface; else they would discover beneath
the grin and satire of Frank Wedekind a sensitive soul, deeply stirred
by the heart-rending tragedies about him. Stirred and grieved especially
by the misery and torture of the child,--the helpless victim unable to
explain the forces germinating in its nature, often crushed and
destroyed by mock modesty, sham decencies, and the complacent morality
that greet its blind gropings.

Never was a more powerful indictment hurled against society, which out
of sheer hypocrisy and cowardice persists that boys and girls must grow
up in ignorance of their sex functions, that they must be sacrificed
on the altar of stupidity and convention which taboo the enlightenment
of the child in questions of such elemental importance to health and
well-being.

The most criminal phase of the indictment, however, is that it is
generally the most promising children who are sacrificed to sex
ignorance and to the total lack of appreciation on the part of teachers
of the latent qualities and tendencies in the child: the one slaying the
body and soul, the other paralyzing the function of the brain; and both
conspiring to give to the world mental and physical mediocrities.

"The Awakening of Spring" is laid in three acts and fourteen scenes,
consisting almost entirely of dialogues among the children. So close is
Wedekind to the soul of the child that he succeeds in unveiling before
our eyes, with a most gripping touch, its joys and sorrows, its hopes
and despair, its struggles and tragedies.

The play deals with a group of school children just entering the age of
puberty,--imaginative beings speculating about the mysteries of life.
_Wendla_, sent to her grave by her loving but prudish mother, is an
exquisite, lovable child; _Melchior_, the innocent father of _Wendla's_
unborn baby, is a gifted boy whose thirst for knowledge leads him to
inquire into the riddle of life, and to share his observations with his
school chums,--a youth who, in a free and intelligent atmosphere, might
have developed into an original thinker. That such a boy should be
punished as a moral pervert, only goes to prove the utter unfitness of
our educators and parents. _Moritz_, _Melchior's_ playfellow, is driven
to suicide because he cannot pass his examinations, thanks to our stupid
and criminal system of education which consists in cramming the mind to
the bursting point.

Wedekind has been accused of exaggerating his types, but any one
familiar with child life knows that every word in "The Awakening of
Spring" is vividly true. The conversation between _Melchior_ and
_Moritz_, for instance, is typical of all boys not mentally inert.

  _Melchior._ I'd like to know why we really are on earth!

  _Moritz._ I'd rather be a cab-horse than go to school!--Why do we go
  to school?--We go to school so that somebody can examine us!--And
  why do they examine us?--In order that we may fail. Seven must fail,
  because the upper classroom will hold only sixty.--I feel so queer
  since Christmas.--The devil take me, if it were not for Papa, I'd
  pack my bundle and go to Altoona, to-day!

  _Moritz._ Do you believe, Melchior, that the feeling of shame in man
  is only a product of his education?

  _Melchior._ I was thinking over that for the first time the day
  before yesterday. It seems to me deeply rooted in human nature. Only
  think, you must appear entirely clothed before your best friend. You
  wouldn't do so if he didn't do the same thing.--Therefore, it's more
  or less of a fashion.

  _Moritz._ Have you experienced it yet?

  _Melchior._ What?

  _Moritz._ How do you say it?

  _Melchior._ Manhood's emotion?

  _Moritz._ M--'hm.

  _Melchior._ Certainly.

  _Moritz._ I also ...

  _Melchior._ I've known that for a long while!--Almost for a year.

  _Moritz._ I was startled as if by lightning.

  _Melchior._ Did you dream?

  _Moritz._ Only for a little while--of legs in light blue tights,
  that strode over the cathedral--to be correct, I thought they wanted
  to go over it. I only saw them for an instant.

  _Melchior._ George Zirschnitz dreamed of his mother.

  _Moritz._ Did he tell you that?... I thought I was incurable. I
  believed I was suffering from an inward hurt.--Finally I became calm
  enough to begin to jot down the recollections of my life. Yes, yes,
  dear Melchior, the last three weeks have been a Gethsemane for
  me.... Truly they play a remarkable game with us. And we're expected
  to give thanks for it. I don't remember to have had any longing for
  this kind of excitement. Why didn't they let me sleep peacefully
  until all was still again. My dear parents might have had a hundred
  better children. I came here, I don't know how, and must be
  responsible myself for not staying away.--Haven't you often
  wondered, Melchior, by what means we were brought into this whirl?

  _Melchior._ Don't you know that yet either, Moritz?

  _Moritz._ How should I know it? I see how the hens lay eggs, and
  hear that Mamma had to carry me under her heart. But is that
  enough?... I have gone through Meyer's "Little Encyclopedia" from A
  to Z. Words--nothing but words and words! Not a single plain
  explanation. Oh, this feeling of shame!--What good to me is an
  encyclopedia that won't answer me concerning the most important
  question in life?

Yes, of what good is an encyclopedia or the other wise books to the
quivering, restless spirit of the child? No answer anywhere, least of
all from your own mother, as _Wendla_ and many another like her have
found out.

The girl, learning that her sister has a new baby, rushes to her mother
to find out how it came into the world.

  _Wendla._ I have a sister who has been married for two and a half
  years, I myself have been made an aunt for the third time, and I
  haven't the least idea how it all comes about--Don't be cross,
  Mother dear, don't be cross! Whom in the world should I ask but you!
  Please tell me, dear Mother! Tell me, dear Mother! I am ashamed for
  myself. Please, Mother, speak! Don't scold me for asking you about
  it. Give me an answer--How does it happen?--How does it all come
  about?--You cannot really deceive yourself that I, who am fourteen
  years old, still believe in the stork.

  _Frau Bergmann._ Good Lord, child, but you are peculiar!--What ideas
  you have!--I really can't do that!

  _Wendla._ But why not, Mother?--Why not?--It can't be anything ugly
  if everybody is delighted over it!

  _Fran Bergmann._ O--O God, protect me!--I deserve--Go get dressed,
  child, go get dressed.

  _Wendla._ I'll go--And suppose your child went out and asked the
  chimney sweep?

  _Fran Bergmann._ But that would be madness!--Come here, child, come
  here, I'll tell you! I'll tell you everything-- ... In order to have
  a child--one must love--the man--to whom one is married--love him, I
  tell you--as one can only love a man! One must love him so much with
  one's whole heart, so--so that one can't describe it! One must love
  him, Wendla, as you at your age are still unable to love--Now you
  know it!

How much _Wendla_ knew, her mother found out when too late.

_Wendla_ and _Melchior_, overtaken by a storm, seek shelter in a
haystack, and are drawn by what _Melchior_ calls the "first emotion of
manhood" and curiosity into each other's arms. Six months later
_Wendla's_ mother discovers that her child is to become a mother. To
save the family honor, the girl is promptly placed in the hands of a
quack who treats her for chlorosis.

  _Wendla._ No, Mother, no! I know it. I feel it. I haven't chlorosis.
  I have dropsy--I won't get better. I have the dropsy, I must die,
  Mother--O, Mother, I must die!

  _Frau Bergmann._ You must not die, child! You must not die--Great
  heavens, you must not die!

  _Wendla._ But why do you weep so frightfully, then?

  _Frau Bergmann._ You must not die, child! You haven't the dropsy,
  you have a child, girl! You have a child! Oh, why did you do that to
  me!

  _Wendla._ I haven't done anything to you.

  _Frau Bergmann._ Oh, don't deny it any more, Wendla!--I know
  everything. See, I didn't want to say a word to you.--Wendla, my
  Wendla--!

  _Wendla._ But it's not possible, Mother.... I have loved nobody in
  the world as I do you, Mother.

The pathos of it, that such a loving mother should be responsible for
the death of her own child! Yet _Frau Bergmann_ is but one of the many
good, pious mothers who lay their children to "rest in God," with the
inscription on the tombstone: "Wendla Bergmann, born May 5th, 1878, died
from chlorosis, Oct. 27, 1892. Blessed are the pure of heart."

_Melchior_, like _Wendla_, was also "pure of heart"; yet how was he
"blessed"? Surely not by his teachers who, discovering his essay on the
mystery of life, expel the boy from school. Only Wedekind could inject
such grim humor into the farce of education--the smug importance of the
faculty of the High School sitting under the portraits of Rousseau and
Pestalozzi, and pronouncing judgment on their "immoral" pupil
_Melchior_.

  _Rector Sonnenstich._ Gentlemen: We cannot help moving the expulsion
  of our guilty pupil before the National Board of Education; there
  are the strongest reasons why we cannot: we cannot, because we must
  expiate the misfortune which has fallen upon us already; we cannot,
  because of our need to protect ourselves from similar blows in the
  future; we cannot, because we must chastise our guilty pupil for the
  demoralizing influence he exerted upon his classmates; we cannot,
  above all, because we must hinder him from exerting the same
  influence upon his remaining classmates. We cannot ignore the
  charge--and this, gentlemen, is possibly the weightiest of all--on
  any pretext concerning a ruined career, because it is our duty to
  protect ourselves from an epidemic of suicide similar to that which
  has broken out recently in various grammar schools, and which until
  to-day has mocked all attempts of the teachers to shackle it by any
  means known to advanced education.... We see ourselves under the
  necessity of judging the guilt-laden that we may not be judged
  guilty ourselves.... Are you the author of this obscene manuscript?

  _Melchior._ Yes--I request you, sir, to show me anything obscene in
  it.

  _Sonnenstich._ You have as little respect for the dignity of your
  assembled teachers as you have a proper appreciation of mankind's
  innate sense of shame which belongs to a moral world.

_Melchior's_ mother, a modern type, has greater faith in her child than
in school education. But even she cannot hold out against the pressure
of public opinion; still less against the father of _Melchior_, a firm
believer in authority and discipline.

  _Herr Gabor._ Anyone who can write what Melchior wrote must be
  rotten to the core of his being. The mark is plain. A half-healthy
  nature wouldn't do such a thing. None of us are saints. Each of us
  wanders from the straight path. His writing, on the contrary,
  tramples on principles. His writing is no evidence of a chance slip
  in the usual way; it sets forth with dreadful plainness and a
  frankly definite purpose that natural longing, that propensity for
  immorality, because it is immorality. His writing manifests that
  exceptional state of spiritual corruption which we jurists classify
  under the term "moral imbecility."

Between the parents and the educators, _Melchior_ is martyred even as
_Wendla_. He is sent to the House of Correction; but being of sturdier
stock than the girl, he survives.

Not so his chum _Moritz_. Harassed by the impelling forces of his
awakened nature, and unable to grapple with the torturous tasks demanded
by his "educators" at the most critical period of his life, _Moritz_
fails in the examinations. He cannot face his parents: they have placed
all their hope in him, and have lashed him, by the subtle cruelty of
gratitude, to the grindstone till his brain reeled. _Moritz_ is the
third victim in the tragedy, the most convenient explanation of which is
given by _Pastor Kahlbauch_ in the funeral sermon.

  _Pastor Kahlbauch._ He who rejects the grace with which the
  Everlasting Father has blessed those born in sin, he shall die a
  spiritual death!--He, however, who in willful carnal abnegation of
  God's proper honor, lives for and serves evil, shall die the death
  of the body!--Who, however, wickedly throws away from him the cross
  which the All Merciful has laid upon him for his sins, verily,
  verily, I say unto you, he shall die the everlasting death! Let us,
  however, praise the All Gracious Lord and thank Him for His
  inscrutable grace in order that we may travel the thorny path more
  and more surely. For as truly as this one died a triple death, as
  truly will the Lord God conduct the righteous unto happiness and
  everlasting life....

It is hardly necessary to point out the revolutionary significance of
this extraordinary play. It speaks powerfully for itself. One need only
add that "The Awakening of Spring" has done much to dispel the mist
enveloping the paramount issue of sex in the education of the child.
To-day it is conceded even by conservative elements that the conspiracy
of silence has been a fatal mistake. And while sponsors of the Church
and of moral fixity still clamor for the good old methods, the message
of Wedekind is making itself felt throughout the world, breaking down
the barriers.

The child is the unit of the race, and only through its unhampered
unfoldment can humanity come into its heritage. "The Awakening of
Spring" is one of the great forces of modern times that is paving the
way for the birth of a free race.




THE FRENCH DRAMA


MAETERLINCK

To those who are conversant with the works of Maeterlinck it may seem
rather far-fetched to discuss him from the point of view of
revolutionary and social significance. Above all, Maeterlinck is the
portrayer of the remote, the poet of symbols: therefore it may seem out
of place to bring him down to earth, to simplify him, or to interpret
his revolutionary spirit. To some extent these objections have
considerable weight; but on the other hand, if one keeps in mind that
only those who go to the remote are capable of understanding the
obvious, one will readily see how very significant Maeterlinck is as a
revolutionizing factor. Besides, we have Maeterlinck's own conception of
the significance of the revolutionary spirit. In a very masterly article
called "The Social Revolution," he discusses the objection on the part
of the conservative section of society to the introduction of
revolutionary methods. He says that they would like us to "go slow";
that they object to the use of violence and the forcible overthrow of
the evils of society. And Maeterlinck answers in these significant
words:

"We are too ready to forget that the headsmen of misery are less noisy,
less theatrical, but infinitely more numerous, more cruel and active
than those of the most terrible revolutions."

Maeterlinck realizes that there are certain grievances in society,
iniquitous conditions which demand immediate solution, and that if we do
not solve them with the readiest and quickest methods at our command,
they will react upon society and upon life a great deal more terribly
than even the most terrible revolutions. No wonder, then, that his works
were put under the ban by the Catholic Church which forever sees danger
in light and emancipation. Surely if Maeterlinck were not primarily the
spokesman of truth, he would be embraced by the Catholic Church.

In "Monna Vanna" Maeterlinck gives a wonderful picture of the new
woman--not the new woman as portrayed in the newspapers, but the new
woman as a reborn, regenerated spirit; the woman who has emancipated
herself from her narrow outlook upon life, and detached herself from the
confines of the home; the woman, in short, who has become race-conscious
and therefore understands that she is a unit in the great ocean of
life, and that she must take her place as an independent factor in order
to rebuild and remold life. In proportion as she learns to become
race-conscious, does she become a factor in the reconstruction of
society, valuable to herself, to her children, and to the race.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pisa is subdued by the forces of Florence; it is beaten and conquered.
The city is in danger of being destroyed, and the people exposed to
famine and annihilation. There is only one way of saving Pisa. _Marco
Colonna_, the father of the Commander of Pisa, brings the ultimatum of
the enemy:

  _Marco._ Know, then, that I saw Prinzivalle and spoke with him.... I
  thought to find some barbarian, arrogant and heavy, always covered
  with blood or plunged in drunken stupor; at best, the madman they
  have told us of, whose spirit was lit up at times, upon the
  battlefield, by dazzling flashes of brilliance, coming no man knows
  whence. I thought to meet the demon of combat, blind, unreasoning,
  vain and cruel, faithless and dissolute.... I found a man who bowed
  before me as a loving disciple bows before the master. He is
  lettered, eager for knowledge, and obedient to the voice of
  wisdom.... He loves not war; his smile speaks of understanding and
  gentle humanity. He seeks the reason of passions and events. He
  looks into his own heart; he is endowed with conscience and
  sincerity, and it is against his will that he serves a faithless
  State.... I have told you that Prinzivalle seems wise, that he is
  humane and reasonable. But where is the wise man that hath not his
  private madness, the good man to whom no monstrous idea has ever
  come? On one side is reason and pity and justice; on the other--ah!
  _there_ is desire and passion and what you will--the insanity into
  which we all fall at times. I have fallen into it myself, and shall,
  belike, again--so have you. Man is made in that fashion. A grief
  which should not be within the experience of man is on the point of
  touching you.... Hearken: this great convoy, the victuals that I
  have seen, wagons running over with corn, others full of wine and
  fruit; flocks of sheep and herds of cattle, enough to feed a city
  for months; all these tuns of powder and bars of lead, with which
  you may vanquish Florence and make Pisa lift her head--all this will
  enter the city to-night, ... if you send in exchange, to give her up
  to Prinzivalle until to-morrow's dawn, ... for he will send her back
  when the first faint gray shows in the sky, ... only, he exacts
  that, in sign of victory and submission, she shall come alone, and
  her cloak for all her covering....

  _Guido._ Who? Who shall thus come?

  _Marco._ Giovanna.

  _Guido._ My wife? Vanna?

  _Marco._ Ay, your Vanna.

_Guido Colonna_, in the consciousness that the woman belongs to him,
that no man may even look, with desire, upon her dazzling beauty,
resents this mortal insult. He is willing that all the other women
should face danger, that the little children of Pisa should be exposed
to hunger and destruction, rather than that he give up his possession.
But _Monna Vanna_ does not hesitate. When she is before the issue of
saving her people, she does not stop to consider. She goes into the
enemy's tent, as a child might go, without consciousness of self, imbued
solely with the impulse to save her people.

The meeting of _Monna Vanna_ and _Prinzivalle_ is an exquisite
interpretation of love--the sweetness, purity, and fragrance of
_Prinzivalle's_ love for the woman of his dream--the one he had known
when she was but a child, and who remained an inspiring vision all
through his career. He knows he cannot reach her; he also knows that he
will be destroyed by the political intriguers of Florence, and he stakes
his all on this one step to satisfy the dream of his life to see _Vanna_
and in return to save Pisa.

  _Prinzivalle._ Had there come ten thousand of you into my tent, all
  clad alike, all equally fair, ten thousand sisters whom even their
  mother would not know apart, I should have risen, should have taken
  your hand, and said, "This is she!" Is it not strange that a beloved
  image can live thus in a man's heart? For yours lived so in mine
  that each day it changed as in real life--the image of to-day
  replaced that of yesterday--it blossomed out, it became always
  fairer; and the years adorned it with all that they add to a child
  that grows in grace and beauty. But when I saw you again, it seemed
  to me at first that my eyes deceived me. My memories were so fair
  and so fond--but they had been too slow and too timid--they had not
  dared to give you all the splendor which appeared so suddenly to
  dazzle me. I was as a man that recalled to mind a flower he had but
  seen in passing through a garden on a gray day, and should be
  suddenly confronted with a hundred thousand as fair in a field
  bathed with sunshine. I saw once more your hair, your brow, your
  eyes, and I found all the soul of the face I had adored--but how its
  beauty shames that which I had treasured in silence through endless
  days, through years whose only light was a memory that had taken too
  long a road and found itself outshone by the reality!... Ah! I knew
  not too well what I meant to do. I felt that I was lost--and I
  desired to drag with me all I could.... And I hated you, because of
  the love.... Yes, I should have gone to the end had it not been
  _you_.... Yet any other would have seemed odious to me--you yourself
  would have had to be other than you are.... I lose my reason when I
  think of it.... One word would have been enough that was different
  from your words--one gesture that was not yours--the slightest thing
  would have inflamed my hate and let loose the monster. But when I
  saw you, I saw in that same moment that it was impossible.

  _Vanna._ I felt a change, too.... I marveled that I could speak to
  you as I have spoken since the first moment.... I am silent by
  nature--I have never spoken thus to any man, unless it be to Marco,
  Guido's father.... And even with him it is not the same. He has a
  thousand dreams that take up all his mind, ... and we have talked
  but a few times. The others have always a desire in their eyes that
  will not suffer one to tell them that one loves them and would fain
  know what they have in their hearts. In your eyes, too, a longing
  burns; but it is not the same--it does not affright me nor fill me
  with loathing. I felt at once that I knew you before I remembered
  that I had ever seen you....

_Vanna_, awed by the character and personality of this despised and
hated outlaw, pleads with him to come with her to Pisa under the
protection of herself and her husband. She is sure that he will be safe
with them, and that he will be hailed as the redeemer of the people of
Pisa. Like innocent children they walk to their doom.

_Vanna_ is honored by the people whom she has saved, but scorned by her
husband who, like the true male, does not credit her story.

  _Vanna._ Hear me, I say! I have never lied--but to-day, above all
  days, I tell the deepest truth, the truth that can be told but once
  and brings life or death.... Hearken, Guido, then--and look upon me,
  if you have never known me until this hour, the first and only hour
  when you have it in your power to love me as I would be loved. I
  speak in the name of our life, of all that I am, of all that you are
  to me.... Be strong enough to believe that which is incredible. This
  man has spared my honor.... He had all power--I was given over to
  him. Yet he has not touched me--I have issued from his tent as I
  might from my brother's house.... I gave him one only kiss upon the
  brow--and he gave it me again.

  _Guido._ Ah, that was what you were to tell us--that was the
  miracle! Ay, already, at the first words, I divined something
  beneath them that I understood not.... It passed me like a flash--I
  took no heed of it.... But I see now that I must look more closely.
  So, when he had you in his tent, alone, with a cloak for all your
  covering, all night long, you say he spared you?... Am I a man to
  believe that the stars are fragments of hellebore, or that one may
  drop something into a well and put out the moon?... What! a man
  desires you so utterly that he will betray his country, stake all
  that he has for one single night, ruin himself forever, and do it
  basely, do such a deed as no man ever thought to do before him, and
  make the world uninhabitable to himself forever! And this man has
  you there in his tent, alone and defenseless, and he has but this
  single night that he has bought at such a price--and he contents
  himself with a kiss upon the brow, and comes even hither to make us
  give him credence! No, let us reason fairly and not too long mock at
  misfortune. If he asked but that, what need was there that he should
  plunge a whole people into sadness, sink me in an abyss of misery
  such that I have come from it crushed and older by ten years? Ah!
  Had he craved but a kiss upon the brow, he might have saved us
  without torturing us so! He had but to come like a god to our
  rescue.... But a kiss upon the brow is not demanded and prepared for
  after his fashion.... The truth is found in our cries of anguish
  and despair....

It is only at this psychological moment, a moment that sometimes changes
all our conceptions, all our thoughts, our very life, that _Monna Vanna_
feels the new love for _Prinzivalle_ stirring in her soul, a love that
knows no doubt. The conception of such a love is revolutionary in the
scope of its possibilities--a love that is pregnant with the spirit of
daring, of freedom, that lifts woman out of the ordinary and inspires
her with the strength and joy of molding a new and free race.




ROSTAND


CHANTECLER

In view of the progress the modern drama has made as an interpreter of
social ideas and portrayer of the human struggle against internal and
external barriers, it is difficult to say what the future may bring in
the way of great dramatic achievement. So far, however, there is hardly
anything to compare with "Chantecler" in philosophic depth and poetic
beauty.

_Chantecler_ is the intense idealist, whose mission is light and truth.
His soul is aglow with deep human sympathies, and his great purpose in
life is to dispel the night. He keeps aloof from mediocrity; indeed, he
has little knowledge of his immediate surroundings. Like all great
visionaries, _Chantecler_ is human, "all too human"; therefore subject
to agonizing soul depressions and doubts. Always, however, he regains
confidence and strength when he is close to the soil; when he feels the
precious sap of the earth surging through his being. At such times he
feels the mysterious power that gives him strength to proclaim the
truth, to call forth the golden glory of the day.

The _pheasant hen_ is the eternal female, bewitchingly beautiful, but
self-centered and vain. True to her destiny, she must possess the man
and is jealous of everything that stands between her and him she loves.
She therefore employs every device to kill _Chantecler's_ faith in
himself, for, as she tells him, "You can be all in all to me, but
nothing to the dawn."

The _blackbird_ is the modernist who has become blas, mentally and
spiritually empty. He is a cynic and scoffer; without principle or
sincerity himself, he sees only small and petty intentions in everybody
else.

_Patou_, true and stanch, is the symbol of honest conviction and
simplicity of soul. He loathes the blackbird because he sees in him the
embodiment of a shallow, superficial modernity, a modernity barren of
all poetic vision, which aims only at material success and tinseled
display, without regard for worth, harmony or peace.

The _peacock_ is the overbearing, conceited, intellectual charlatan; the
spokesman of our present-day culture; the idle prater of "art for art's
sake." As such he sets the style and pace for the idle pursuits of an
idle class.

The _guinea hen_ is none other than our most illustrious society lady.
Sterile of mind and empty of soul, she flits from one social function
to another, taking up every fad, clinging to the coattails of every
newcomer, provided he represent station and prestige. She is the slave
of fashion, the imitator of ideas, the silly hunter after effect--in
short, the parasite upon the labor and efforts of others.

The _night birds_ are the ignorant, stupid maintainers of the old. They
detest the light because it exposes their mediocrity and stagnation.
They hate _Chantecler_ because, as the old owl remarks, "Simple torture
it is to hear a brazen throat forever reminding you of what you know to
be only too true!" This is a crime mediocrity never forgives, and it
conspires to kill _Chantecler_.

The _woodpecker_ is our very learned college professor. Dignified and
important, he loudly proclaims the predigested food of his college as
the sole source of all wisdom.

The _toads_ represent the cringing, slimy hangers-on, the flunkies and
lickspittles who toady for the sake of personal gain.

"Chantecler," then, is a scathing arraignment of the emptiness of our
so-called wise and cultured, of the meanness of our conventional lies,
the petty jealousies of the human breed in relation to each other. At
the same time "Chantecler" characterizes the lack of understanding for,
and appreciation of, the ideal and the idealists--the mob spirit,
whether on top or at the bottom, using the most cruel and contemptible
methods to drag the idealist down; to revile and persecute him--aye,
even to kill him--for the unpardonable sin of proclaiming the ideal.
They cannot forgive _Chantecler_ for worshiping the sun:

      _Chantecler._
    Blaze forth in glory!...
    O thou that driest the tears of the meanest among weeds
    And dost of a dead flower make a living butterfly--
    Thy miracle, wherever almond-trees
    Shower down the wind their scented shreds,
    Dead petals dancing in a living swarm--
    I worship thee, O Sun! whose ample light,
    Blessing every forehead, ripening every fruit,
    Entering every flower and every hovel,
    Pours itself forth and yet is never less,
    Still spending and unspent--like mother's love!

    I sing of thee, and will be thy high priest,
    Who disdainest not to glass thy shining face
    In the humble basin of blue suds,
    Or see the lightning of thy last farewell
    Reflected in an humble cottage pane!

    ...

    Glory to thee in the vineyards! Glory to thee in the fields!
    Glory among the grass and on the roofs,
    In eyes of lizards and on wings of swans,--
    Artist who making splendid the great things
    Forgets not to make exquisite the small!
    'Tis thou that, cutting out a silhouette,
    To all thou beamest on dost fasten this dark twin,
    Doubling the number of delightful shapes,
    Appointing to each thing its shadow,
    More charming often than itself.

    I praise thee, Sun! Thou sheddest roses on the air,
    Diamonds on the stream, enchantment on the hill;
    A poor dull tree thou takest and turnest to green rapture,
    O Sun, without whose golden magic--things
    Would be no more than what they are!

In the atmosphere of persecution and hatred _Chantecler_ continues to
hope and to work for his sublime mission of bringing the golden day. But
his passion for the _pheasant hen_ proves his Waterloo. It is through
her that he grows weak, disclosing his secret. Because of her he attends
the silly five o'clock function at the _guinea hen's_, and is involved
in a prize fight. His passion teaches him to understand life and the
frailties of his fellow creatures. He learns the greatest of all
truths,--that "it is the struggle for, rather than the attainment of,
the ideal, which must forever inspire the sincere, honest idealist."
Indeed, it is life which teaches _Chantecler_ that if he cannot wake the
dawn, he must rouse mankind to greet the sun.

_Chantecler_ finds himself in a trying situation when he comes into the
gathering at the _guinea hen's_ five o'clock tea, to meet the pompous,
overbearing cocks representing the various governments. When he arrives
in the midst of these distinguished society people, he is plied with the
query, "How do you sing? Do you sing the Italian school or the French
school or the German school?" Poor _Chantecler_, in the simplicity of
his idealism, replies, "I don't know how I sing, but I know why I sing."
Why need the chanteclers know how they sing? They represent the truth,
which needs no stylish clothes or expensive feathers. That is the
difference between truth and falsehood. Falsehood must deck herself out
beyond all semblance of nature and reality.

  _Chantecler._ I say ... that these resplendent gentlemen are
  manufactured wares, the work of merchants with highly complex
  brains, who to fashion a ridiculous chicken have taken a wing from
  that one, a topknot from this. I say that in such Cocks nothing
  remains of the true Cock. They are Cocks of shreds and patches, idle
  bric-a-brac, fit to figure in a catalogue, not in a barnyard with
  its decent dunghill and its dog. I say that those befrizzled,
  beruffled, bedeviled Cocks were never stroked and cherished by
  Nature's maternal hand.... And I add that the whole duty of a Cock
  is to be an embodied crimson cry! And when a Cock is not that, it
  matters little that his comb be shaped like a toadstool, or his
  quills twisted like a screw, he will soon vanish and be heard of no
  more, having been nothing but a variety of a variety!

The _Game Cock_ appears. He greets _Chantecler_ with the announcement
that he is the Champion fighter, that he has killed so and so many Cocks
in one day and an equal number on other occasions. _Chantecler_ replies
simply, "I have never killed anything. But as I have at different times
succored, defended, protected this one and that, I might perhaps be
called, in my fashion, brave."

The fight begins. _Chantecler_ is wounded and about to succumb, when
suddenly all the guests present rush to _Chantecler_ for protection: the
common enemy, the _Hawk_ is seen to approach. _Chantecler_ mistakes the
cowardice of those who come to seek his aid, for friendship; but the
moment the danger is over, the crowd again circles around the fighters,
inciting the _Game Cock_ to kill _Chantecler_. But at the critical
moment the _Game Cock_ mortally wounds himself with his own spurs, and
is jeered and driven off the scene by the same mob that formerly cheered
him on. _Chantecler_, weak and exhausted from loss of blood,
disillusioned and stung to the very soul, follows the _pheasant hen_ to
the Forest.

Soon he finds himself a henpecked husband: he may not crow to his
heart's content any more, he may not wake the sun, for his lady love is
jealous. The only time he can crow is when her eyes are closed in sleep.

But leave it to the _pheasant hen_ to ferret out a secret. Overhearing
_Chantecler's_ conversation with the _woodpecker_, she is furious. "I
will not let the sun defraud me of my love," she cries. But _Chantecler_
replies, "There is no great love outside of the shadow of the ideal."
She makes use of her beauty and charm to win him from the sun. She
embraces him and pleads, "Come to my soft bosom. Why need you bother
about the sun?"

_Chantecler_ hears the nightingale and, like all great artists, he
recognizes her wonderful voice, her inspiring powers compared with which
his own must seem hard and crude. Suddenly a shot is heard, and the
little bird falls dead to the ground. _Chantecler_ is heart-broken. And
as he mourns the sweet singer, the dawn begins to break. The _pheasant
hen_ covers him with her wing, to keep him from seeing the sun rise, and
then mocks him because the sun has risen without his crowing. The shock
is terrible to poor _Chantecler_, yet in his desperation he gives one
tremendous cock-a-doodle-do.

"Why are you crowing?" the hen asks.

"As a warning to myself, for thrice have I denied the thing I love."

_Chantecler_ is in despair. But now he hears another Nightingale, more
silvery and beautiful than the first. "Learn, comrade, this sorrowful
and reassuring fact, that no one, Cock of the morning or evening
nightingale, has quite the song of his dreams."

A wonderful message, for there must always be "in the soul a faith so
faithful that it comes back even after it has been slain." It Is vital
to understand that it is rather the consciousness that though we cannot
wake the dawn, we must prepare the people to greet the rising sun.




BRIEUX


DAMAGED GOODS

In the preface to the English edition of "Damaged Goods," George Bernard
Shaw relates a story concerning Lord Melbourne, in the early days of
Queen Victoria. When the cabinet meeting threatened to break up in
confusion, Lord Melbourne put his back to the door and said: "Gentlemen,
we can tell the house the truth or we can tell it a lie. I don't give a
damn which it is. All I insist on is that we shall all tell the same
lie, and you shall not leave the room until you have settled what it is
to be."

This seems to characterize the position of our middle-class morality
to-day. Whether a thing be right or wrong, we are all to express the
same opinion on the subject. All must agree on the same lie, and the lie
upon which all agree, more than on any other, is the lie of purity,
which must be kept up at all costs.

How slow our moralists move is best proved by the fact that although the
great scientist Neisser had discovered, as far back as 1879, that
supposedly insignificant venereal afflictions are due to a malignant
micro-organism often disastrous not only to the immediate victim, but
also to those who come in touch with him, the subject is still largely
tabooed and must not be discussed.

To be sure, there is a small contingent of men and women who realize the
necessity of a frank discussion of the very important matter of venereal
disease. But unfortunately they are attempting to drive out the devil
with fire. They are enlightening the public as to the gravity of
gonorrhea and syphilis, but are implanting an evil by no means less
harmful, namely, the element of fear. The result often is that the
victims who contract an infection are as little capable of taking care
of themselves now as in the past when they knew little about the
subject.

Brieux is among the few who treats the question in a frank manner,
showing that the most dangerous phase of venereal disease is ignorance
and fear, and that if treated openly and intelligently, it is perfectly
curable. Brieux also emphasizes the importance of kindness and
consideration for those who contract the affliction, since it has
nothing to do with what is commonly called evil, immorality, or
impurity.

Therein lies the superiority of "Damaged Goods" to most scientific
treatises. Without lacking logic and clarity, it has greater humanity
and warmth.

But "Damaged Goods" contains more than an expos of venereal disease. It
touches upon the whole of our social life. It points out the
cold-blooded indifference of the rich toward those who do not belong to
their class, to the poor, the workers, the disinherited whom they
sacrifice without the slightest compunction on the altar of their own
comforts. Moreover, the play also treats of the contemptible attitude
towards love not backed by property or legal sanction. In short, it
uncovers and exposes not only sexual disease but that which is even more
terrible--our social disease, our social syphilis.

       *       *       *       *       *

_George Dupont_, the son of wealthy people is informed by a specialist
that he has contracted a venereal disease of a most serious nature; but
that with patience and time he will be cured. _Dupont_ is crushed by the
news, and decides to blow out his brains. His only regret is that he
cannot in the least account for his trouble.

  _George._ I'm not a rake, Doctor. My life might be held up as an
  example to all young men. I assure you, no one could possibly be
  more prudent, no one. See here; supposing I told you that in all my
  life I have only had two mistresses, what would you say to that?

  _Doctor._ That would have been enough to bring you here.

  _George._ No, Doctor. Not one of those two. No one in the world has
  dreaded this so much as I have; no one has taken such infinite
  precautions to avoid it. My first mistress was the wife of my best
  friend. I chose her on account of him; and him, not because I cared
  most for him, but because I knew he was a man of the most rigid
  morals, who watched his wife jealously and didn't let her go about
  forming imprudent connections. As for her, I kept her in absolute
  terror of this disease. I told her that almost all men were taken
  with it, so that she mightn't dream of being false to me. My friend
  died in my arms. That was the only thing that could have separated
  me from her. Then I took up with a young seamstress.... Well, this
  was a decent girl with a family in needy circumstances to support.
  Her grandmother was an invalid, and there was an ailing father and
  three little brothers. It was by my means that they all lived.... I
  told her and I let the others know that if she played me false I
  should leave her at once. So then they all watched her for me. It
  became a regular thing that I should spend Sunday with them, and in
  that sort of way I was able to give her a lift up. Church-going was
  a respectable kind of outing for her. I rented a pew for them and
  her mother used to go with her to church; they liked seeing their
  name engraved on the card. She never left the house alone. Three
  months ago, when the question of my marriage came up, I had to leave
  her.

  _Doctor._ You were very happy, why did you want to change?

  _George._ I wanted to settle down. My father was a notary, and
  before his death he expressed a wish that I should marry my cousin.
  It was a good match; her dowry will help to get me a practice.
  Besides, I simply adore her. She's fond of me, too. I had everything
  one could want to make my life happy. And then a lot of idiots must
  give me a farewell dinner and make me gad about with them. See what
  has come of it! I haven't any luck, I've never had any luck! I know
  fellows who lead the most racketty life: nothing happens to them,
  the beasts! But I--for a wretched lark--what is there left for a
  leper like me? My future is ruined, my whole life poisoned. Well
  then, isn't it better for me to clear out of it? Anyway, I shan't
  suffer any more. You see now, no one could be more wretched than I
  am.

The doctor explains to him that there is no need for despair, but that
he must postpone his marriage if he does not wish to ruin his wife and
possibly make her sterile for life. It is imperative especially because
of the offspring, which is certain to be syphilitic.

  _Doctor._ Twenty cases identical with yours have been carefully
  observed--from the beginning to the end. Nineteen times--you hear,
  nineteen times in twenty--the woman was contaminated by her husband.
  You think that the danger is negligible: you think you have the
  right to let your wife take her chance, as you said, of being one of
  the exceptions for which we can do nothing! Very well then; then you
  shall know what you are doing. You shall know what sort of a disease
  it is that your wife will have five chances per cent. of contracting
  without so much as having her leave asked. ... But there is not
  only your wife,--there are her children, your children, whom you may
  contaminate, too. It is in the name of those innocent little ones
  that I appeal to you; it is the future of the race that I am
  defending.

But _George Dupont_ will not postpone the marriage for several years. He
would have to give an explanation, break his word, and lose his
inheritance,--things infinitely more important than any consideration
for the girl he "adores" or for their children, should they have any. In
short, he is actuated by the morality of the bourgeoisie: the silly
conception of honor, the dread of public opinion and, above all, the
greed for property.

       *       *       *       *       *

The second act is laid at the home of _George Dupont_. _George_ and his
wife _Henriette_ are childishly happy, except for the regret that their
marriage could not have taken place six months earlier because poor
George had been declared consumptive. How stupid of doctors to suspect
the healthy strong _George Dupont_ of consumption! But, then, "all
doctors are stupid." But now that they are together, nothing shall part
them in their great happiness, and especially in their great love for
their baby. True, a little cloud obscures their sunny horizon. The baby
is not very strong; but with the care and devotion of the grandmother,
out in the country air, it is sure to recover.

The grandmother unexpectedly arrives, announcing that she has brought
the baby back to town: it is very ill and she has consulted a specialist
who has promised to come at once to examine the child. Presently the
doctor arrives. He insists that the wet nurse be dismissed immediately,
as the child would infect her and she in return would infect her own
husband and baby. _Madame Dupont_ is scandalized. What, leave her
precious grandchild! Rob him of the milk he needs!

  _Mme. Dupont._ If there is one way to save its life, it is to give
  it every possible attention, and you want me to treat it in a way
  that you doctors condemn even for healthy children. You think I will
  let her die like that! Oh, I shall take good care she does not!
  Neglect the one single thing that can save her! It would be
  criminal! As for the nurse, we will indemnify her. We will do
  everything in our power, everything but that.

  _Doctor._ This is not the first time I have found myself in this
  situation, and I must begin by telling you that parents who have
  refused to be guided by my advice have invariably repented of it
  most bitterly.... You propose to profit by her ignorance and her
  poverty. Besides, she could obtain the assistance of the court....
  You can convince yourself. In one or two cases the parents have been
  ordered to pay a yearly pension to the nurse; in the others sums of
  money varying from three to eight thousand francs.

  _Mme. Dupont._ If we had to fight an action, we should retain the
  very best lawyer on our side. Thank heaven we are rich enough. No
  doubt he would make it appear doubtful whether the child hadn't
  caught this disease from the nurse, rather than the nurse from the
  child.

Indeed, what matters a peasant woman! They are so numerous. In vain the
doctor tries to convince _Mme. Dupont_ that it is not a question of
money. It is a question of humanity, of decency; he would not and could
not be a party to such a crime.

After the doctor leaves to examine the child, _Mme. Dupont_ and her
worthy son clinch the bargain with the unsuspecting and ignorant
servant. They tell her that the baby has a cold which it might
communicate to her. The poor peasant girl had lived in the cold all her
life, and as she justly says: "We of the country are not as delicate as
the Parisian ladies." She realizes that a thousand francs would mean a
great fortune to her, and that it would help her people to pay the
mortgage and become independent. She consents to stay and signs away her
health.

The doctor returns with the dreaded news that the child has congenital
syphilis. He informs them that with care and patience the child might be
cured, but that it will have to be put on bottle milk, because otherwise
it would be disastrous to the nurse. When he is told that the nurse has
consented to remain, he grows indignant, declaring:

  "You must not ask me to sacrifice the health of a young and strong
  woman to that of a sickly infant. I will be no party to giving this
  woman a disease that would embitter the lives of her whole family,
  and almost certainly render her sterile. Besides, I cannot even do
  it from a legal standpoint.... _If you do not consent to have the
  child fed by hand, I shall either speak to the nurse or give up the
  case._"

But there is no need for the doctor to interfere. Fortunately for the
servant, she discovers the miserable transaction. She learns from the
butler the real condition of the child, and announces to the Duponts
that she must refuse to stay. "I know your brat isn't going to live. I
know it's rotten through and through because its father's got a beastly
disease that he caught from some woman of the streets."

At this terrible moment the unsuspecting, light-headed and light-hearted
mother, _Henriette_, arrives. She overhears the horrible news and falls
screaming to the floor.

The last act takes place in the hospital--the refuge of the unfortunate
victims of poverty, ignorance and false morality. _M. Loche_, the
Deputy, is announced. The doctor is overjoyed because he believes that
the representative of the people comes to inform himself of the causes
of the widespread misery. But he is mistaken. _M. Loche_ is the
father-in-law of _George Dupont_. He wants to secure the signature of
the doctor as evidence in the divorce sought by his daughter.

  _Doctor._ I regret that I am unable to furnish you with such a
  certificate.... The rule of professional secrecy is absolute. And I
  may add that even were I free, I should refuse your request. I
  should regret having helped you to obtain a divorce. It would be in
  your daughter's own interest that I should refuse. You ask me for a
  certificate in order to prove to the court that your son-in-law has
  contracted syphilis? You do not consider that in doing so you will
  publicly acknowledge that your daughter has been exposed to the
  infection. Do you suppose that after that your daughter is likely to
  find a second husband?... Do you think that this poor little thing
  has not been unlucky enough in her start in life? She has been
  blighted physically. You wish besides indelibly to stamp her with
  the legal proof of congenital syphilis.

  _Loche._ Then what am I to do?

  _Doctor._ Forgive.... When the marriage was proposed you doubtless
  made inquiries concerning your future son-in-law's income; you
  investigated his securities; you satisfied yourself as to his
  character. You only omitted one point, but it was the most important
  of all: you made no inquiries concerning his health.

  _Loche._ No, I did not do that. It is not the custom.... I think a
  law should be passed.

  _Doctor._ No, no! We want no new laws. There are too many already.
  All that is needed is for people to understand the nature of this
  disease rather better. It would soon become the custom for a man who
  proposed for a girl's hand to add to the other things for which he
  is asked a medical statement of bodily fitness, which would make it
  certain that he did not bring this plague into the family with
  him.... Well, there is one last argument which, since I must, I will
  put to you. Are you yourself without sin, that you are so relentless
  to others?

  _Loche._ I have never had any shameful disease, sir.

  _Doctor._ I was not asking you that. I was asking you if you had
  never exposed yourself to catching one. Ah, you see! Then it is not
  virtue that has saved you; it is luck. Few things exasperate me more
  than that term "shameful disease," which you used just now. This
  disease is like all other diseases: it is one of our afflictions.
  There is no shame in being wretched--even if one deserves to be so.
  Come, come, let us have a little plain speaking! I should like to
  know how many of these rigid moralists, who are so shocked with
  their middle-class prudery, that they dare not mention the name
  syphilis, or when they bring themselves to speak of it do so with
  expressions of every sort of disgust, and treat its victims as
  criminals, have never run the risk of contracting it themselves? It
  is those alone who have the right to talk. How many do you think
  there are? Four out of a thousand? Well, leave those four aside:
  between all the rest and those who catch the disease there is no
  difference but chance, and by heavens, those who escape won't get
  much sympathy from me: the others at least have paid their fine of
  suffering and remorse, while they have gone scot free! Let's have
  done, if you please, once for all with this sort of hypocrisy.

The doctor, who is not only a sincere scientist but also a humanitarian,
realizes that as things are to-day no one is exempt from the possibility
of contracting an infection; that those who are responsible for the
spread of the disease are they who constantly excuse themselves with the
inane "I did not know," as if ignorance were not the crime of all
crimes. The doctor demonstrates to _M. Loche_ a number of cases under
his observation, all of them the result of ignorance and of poverty.

There is, for instance, the woman whose husband died of the disease. He
"didn't know"; so he infected her. She, on the other hand, is poor and
cannot afford the treatment she needs. A private physician is beyond her
means, and she has too much pride to stand the indignities heaped upon
the poor who are at the mercy of dispensaries and charity. Therefore she
neglects her disease and perhaps is unconsciously instrumental in
infecting others.

Then there is the man whose young son has contracted the disease. His
father "didn't know," and therefore he did not inform his son, as a
result of which the boy became half paralyzed.

  _Man._ We are small trades-people; we have regularly bled ourselves
  in order to send him to college, and now--I only wish the same thing
  mayn't happen to others. It was at the very college gates that my
  poor boy was got hold of by one of these women. Is it right, sir,
  that that should be allowed? Aren't there enough police to prevent
  children of fifteen from being seduced like that? I ask, is it
  right?

The poor man, in his ignorance, did not know that "these women" are the
most victimized, as demonstrated by the doctor himself in the case of
the poor girl of the street. She was both ignorant and innocent when she
found a place as domestic servant and was seduced by her master. Then
she was kicked out into the street, and in her endless search for work
found every door closed in her face. She was compelled to stifle her
feeling of motherhood, to send her baby to a foundling asylum, and
finally, in order to exist, become a street-walker. If in return she
infected the men who came to her, including her erstwhile seducer, she
was only paying back in a small measure what society had done to
her,--the injury, the bitterness, the misery and tears heaped upon her
by a cruel and self-satisfied world.

It is to be expected that a political representative of the people like
_Loche_ should suggest the same stereotyped measures as his
predecessors: legal enactments, prosecution, imprisonment. But the
doctor, a real social student, knows that "the true remedy lies in a
change of our ways."

  _Doctor._ Syphilis must cease to be treated like a mysterious evil,
  the very name of which cannot be pronounced.... People ought to be
  taught that there is nothing immoral in the act that reproduces life
  by means of love. But for the benefit of our children we organize
  round about it a gigantic conspiracy of silence. A respectable man
  will take his son and daughter to one of these grand music halls,
  where they will hear things of the most loathsome description; but
  he won't let them hear a word spoken seriously on the subject of the
  great act of love. The mystery and humbug in which physical facts
  are enveloped ought to be swept away and young men be given some
  pride in the creative power with which each one of us is endowed.

In other words, what we need is more general enlightenment, greater
frankness and, above all, different social and economic conditions. The
revolutionary significance of "Damaged Goods" consists in the lesson
that not syphilis but the causes that lead to it are the terrible curse
of society. Those who rant against syphilis and clamor for more laws,
for marriage certificates, for registration and segregation, do not
touch even the surface of the evil. Brieux is among the very few modern
dramatists who go to the bottom of this question by insisting on a
complete social and economic change, which alone can free us from the
scourge of syphilis and other social plagues.


MATERNITY

Motherhood to-day is on the lips of every penny-a-liner, every social
patchworker and political climber. It is so much prated about that one
is led to believe that motherhood, in its present condition, is a force
for good. It therefore required a free spirit combined with great
dramatic power to tear the mask off the lying face of motherhood, that
we may see that, whatever its possibilities in a free future, motherhood
is to-day a sickly tree setting forth diseased branches. For its sake
thousands of women are being sacrificed and children sent into a cold
and barren world without the slightest provision for their physical and
mental needs. It was left to Brieux to inscribe with letters of fire the
crying shame of the motherhood of to-day.

_Brignac_, a provincial lawyer and an unscrupulous climber for political
success, represents the typical pillar of society. He believes
implicitly in the supremacy of God over the destiny of man. He swears by
the State and the army, and cringes before the power of money. Naturally
he is the champion of large families as essential to the welfare of
society, and of motherhood, as the most sacred and sole function of
woman.

He is the father of three children, all of whom are in a precarious
condition. He resents the idea that society ought to take care of the
children already in existence, rather than continue indiscriminately
breeding more. _Brignac_ himself wants more children. In vain his wife
_Lucie_, weakened by repeated pregnancies, pleads with him for a
respite.

  _Lucie._ Listen, Julien, since we are talking about this, I wanted
  to tell you--I haven't had much leisure since our marriage. We have
  not been able to take advantage of a single one of your holidays. I
  really have a right to a little rest.... Consider, we have not had
  any time to know one another, or to love one another. Besides,
  remember that we already have to find dowries for three girls.

  _Brignac._ I tell you this is going to be a boy.

  _Lucie._ A boy is expensive.

  _Brignac._ We are going to be rich!

  _Lucie._ How?

  _Brignac._ Luck may come in several ways. I may stay in the civil
  service and get promoted quickly. I may go back to the bar.... I am
  certain we shall be rich. After all, it's not much good your saying
  so, if I say yes.

  _Lucie._ Evidently. My consent was asked for before I was given a
  husband, but my consent is not asked for before I am given a
  child.... This is slavery--yes, _slavery_. After all you are
  disposing of my health, my sufferings, my life--of a year of my
  existence, calmly, without consulting me.

  _Brignac._ Do I do it out of selfishness? Do you suppose I am not a
  most unhappy husband all the time I have a future mother at my side
  instead of a loving wife?... A father is a man all the same.

  _Lucie._ Rubbish! You evidently take me for a fool. I know what you
  do at those times.... Don't deny it. You must see that I know all
  about it.... Do you want me to tell you the name of the person you
  go to see over at Villeneuve, while I am nursing or "a future
  mother," as you call it? We had better say no more about it.

_Brignac_ goes off to his political meeting to proclaim to his
constituency the sacredness of motherhood,--the deepest and highest
function of woman.

_Lucie_ has a younger sister, _Annette_, a girl of eighteen. Their
parents being dead, _Lucie_ takes the place of the mother. She is
passionately fond of her little sister and makes it her purpose to keep
the girl sheltered and protected from the outside world. _Annette_
arrives and announces with great enthusiasm that the son of the wealthy
Bernins has declared his love and asked her to marry him, and that his
mother, _Mme. Bernin_, is coming to talk the matter over with _Lucie_.

_Mme. Bernin_ does arrive, but not for the purpose poor _Annette_ had
hoped. Rather is it to tell _Lucie_ that her son cannot marry the girl.
Oh, not because she isn't beautiful, pure or attractive. Indeed not!
_Mme. Bernin_ herself says that her son could not wish for a more
suitable match. But, then, she has no money, and her son must succeed
in the world. He must acquire social standing and position; that cannot
be had without money. When _Lucie_ pleads with her that after all the
Bernins themselves had begun at the bottom, and that it did not prevent
their being happy, _Mme. Bernin_ replies:

  No, no; we are not happy, because we have worn ourselves out hunting
  after happiness. We wanted to "get on," and we got on. But what a
  price we paid for it! First, when we were both earning wages, our
  life was one long drudgery of petty economy and meanness. When we
  set up on our own account, we lived in an atmosphere of trickery, of
  enmity, of lying; flattering the customers, and always in terror of
  bankruptcy. Oh, I know the road to fortune! It means tears, lies,
  envy, hate; one suffers--and one makes other people suffer. I have
  had to go through it: my children shan't. We've only had two
  children: we meant only to have one. Having two we had to be doubly
  hard upon ourselves. Instead of a husband and wife helping one
  another, we have been partners spying upon one another; calling one
  another to account for every little expenditure or stupidity; and on
  our very pillows disputing about our business. That's how we got
  rich; and now we can't enjoy our money because we don't know how to
  use it; and we aren't happy because our old age is made bitter by
  the memories and the rancor left by the old bad days; because we
  have suffered too much and hated too much. My children shall not go
  through this. I endured it that they might be spared.

Learning the price _Mme. Bernin_ has paid for her wealth, we need not
blame her for turning a deaf ear to the entreaties of _Lucie_ in behalf
of her sister. Neither can _Lucie_ be held responsible for her stupidity
in keeping her sister in ignorance until she was incapable of protecting
herself when the occasion demanded. Poor _Annette_, one of the many
offered up to the insatiable monster of ignorance and social convention!

When _Annette_ is informed of the result of _Mme. Bernin's_ visit, the
girl grows hysterical, and _Lucie_ learns that her little sister is
about to become a mother. Under the pretext of love and marriage young,
pampered _Jaques Bernin_ has taken advantage of the girl's inexperience
and innocence. In her despair _Annette_ rushes out in search of her
lover, only to be repelled by him in a vulgar and cruel manner. She then
attempts suicide by trying to throw herself under the train which is to
carry off her worthless seducer. She is rescued by the faithful nurse
_Catherine_, and brought back to her anxious sister _Lucie_. _Annette_,
in great excitement, relates:

  _Annette._ You'll never guess what he said. He got angry, and he
  began to abuse me. He said he guessed what I was up to; that I
  wanted to make a scandal to force him to marry me--oh, he spared me
  nothing--to force him to marry me because he was rich. And when that
  made me furious, he threatened to call the police! I ought to have
  left him, run away, come home, oughtn't I? But I couldn't believe it
  of him all at once, like that! And I couldn't go away while I had
  any hope.... As long as I was holding to his arm it was as if I was
  engaged. When he was gone I should only be a miserable ruined girl,
  like dozens of others.... My life was at stake: and to save myself I
  went down into the very lowest depths of vileness and cowardice. I
  cried, I implored. I lost all shame.... What he said then I cannot
  tell you--not even you--it was too much--too much--I did not
  understand at first. It was only afterwards, coming back, going over
  all his words, that I made out what he meant.... Then he rushed to
  the train, and jumped into a carriage, and almost crushed my fingers
  in the door; and he went and hid behind his mother, and she
  threatened, too, to have me arrested.... I wish I was dead! Lucie,
  dear, I don't want to go through all that's coming--I am too
  little--I am too weak, I'm too young to bear it. Really, I haven't
  the strength.

But _Lucie_ has faith in her husband. In all the years of their married
life she has heard him proclaim from the very housetops that motherhood
is the most sacred function of woman; that the State needs large
numbers; that commerce and the army require an increase of the
population, and "the government commands you to further this end to the
best of your ability, each one of you in his own commune." She has heard
her husband repeat, over and over again, that the woman who refuses to
abide by the command of God and the laws to become a mother is immoral,
is criminal. Surely he would understand the tragedy of _Annette_, who
had been placed in this condition not through her own fault but because
she had been confiding and trusting in the promise of the man. Surely
_Brignac_ would come to the rescue of _Annette_; would help and comfort
her in her trying and difficult moment. But _Lucie_, like many wives,
does not know her husband; she does not know that a man who is so
hidebound by statutes and codes cannot have human compassion, and that
he will not stand by the little girl who has committed the "unpardonable
sin." _Lucie_ does not know, but she is soon to learn the truth.

  _Lucie._ I tell you Annette is the victim of this wretch. If you are
  going to do nothing but insult her, we had better stop discussing
  the matter.

  _Brignac._ I am in a nice fix now! There is nothing left for us but
  to pack our trunks and be off. I am done for. Ruined! Smashed! I
  tell you if she was caught red handed stealing, the wreck wouldn't
  be more complete.... We must make some excuse. We will invent an
  aunt or cousin who has invited her to stay. I will find a decent
  house for her in Paris to go to. She'll be all right there. When the
  time comes she can put the child out to nurse in the country, and
  come back to us.

  _Lucie._ You seriously propose to send that poor child to Paris,
  where she doesn't know a soul?

  _Brignac._ What do you mean by that? I will go to Paris myself, if
  necessary. There are special boarding houses; very respectable
  ones. I'll inquire: of course without letting out that it is for
  anyone I know. And I'll pay what is necessary. What more can you
  want?

  _Lucie._ Just when the child is most in need of every care, you
  propose to send her off alone; alone, do you understand, alone! To
  tear her away from here, put her into a train, and send her off to
  Paris, like a sick animal you want to get rid of. If I consented to
  that I should feel that I was as bad as the man who seduced her. Be
  honest, Julien: remember it is in our interest you propose to
  sacrifice her. We shall gain peace and quiet at the price of her
  loneliness and despair. To save ourselves--serious troubles, I
  admit--we are to abandon this child to strangers ... away from all
  love and care and comfort, without a friend to put kind arms around
  her and let her sob her grief away. I implore you, Julien, I entreat
  you, for our children's sake, don't keep me from her, don't ask me
  to do this shameful thing.

  _Brignac._ There would have been no question of misery if she had
  behaved herself.

  _Lucie._ She is this man's victim! But she won't go. You'll have to
  drive her out as you drove out the servant.... And then--after
  that--she is to let her child go; to stifle her strongest instinct;
  to silence the cry of love that consoles us all for the tortures we
  have to go through; to turn away her eyes and say, "Take him away, I
  don't want him." And at that price she is to be forgiven for another
  person's crime.... Then that is Society's welcome to the new born
  child?

  _Brignac._ To the child born outside of marriage, yes. If it wasn't
  for that, there would soon be nothing but illegitimate births. It
  is to preserve the family that society condemns the natural child.

  _Lucie._ You say you want a larger number of births, and at the same
  time you say to women: "No motherhood without marriage, and no
  marriage without money." As long as you've not changed that, all
  your circulars will be met with shouts of derision--half from hate,
  half from pity.... If you drive Annette out, I shall go with her.

_Lucie_ and _Annette_ go out into the world. As middle-class girls they
have been taught a little of everything and not much of anything. They
try all kinds of work to enable them to make a living, but though they
toil hard and long hours, they barely earn enough for a meager
existence. As long as _Annette's_ condition is not noticeable, life is
bearable; but soon everybody remarks her state. She and _Lucie_ are
driven from place to place. In her despair _Annette_ does what many
girls in her position have done before her and will do after her so long
as the Brignacs and their morality are dominant. She visits a midwife,
and one more victim is added to the large number slaughtered upon the
altar of morality.

The last act is in the court room. _Mme. Thomas_, the midwife, is on
trial for criminal abortion. With her are a number of women whose names
have been found on her register.

Bit by bit we learn the whole tragedy of each of the defendants; we see
all the sordidness of poverty, the inability to procure the bare
necessities of life, and the dread of the unwelcome child.

A schoolmistress, although earning a few hundred francs, and living with
her husband, is compelled to have an abortion performed because another
child would mean hunger for all of them.

  _Schoolmistress._ We just managed to get along by being most
  careful; and several times we cut down expenses it did not seem
  possible to cut down. A third child coming upset everything. We
  couldn't have lived. We should have all starved. Besides, the
  inspectors and directresses don't like us to have many children,
  especially if we nurse them ourselves. They told me to hide myself
  when I was suckling the last one. I only had ten minutes to do it
  in, at the recreation, at ten o'clock and at two o'clock; and when
  my mother brought baby to me I had to shut myself up with him in a
  dark closet.

The couple _Tupin_ stand before the bar to defend themselves against the
charge of criminal abortion. _Tupin_ has been out of work for a long
time and is driven by misery to drink. He is known to the police as a
disreputable character. One of his sons is serving a sentence for theft,
and a daughter is a woman of the streets. But _Tupin_ is a thinking man.
He proves that his earnings at best are not enough to supply the needs
of an already large family. The daily nourishment of five children
consists of a four-pound loaf, soup of vegetables and dripping, and a
stew which costs 90 centimes. Total, 3f. 75c. This is the expenditure of
the father: Return ticket for tram, 30c. Tobacco, 15c. Dinner, 1f. 25c.
The rent, 300f. Clothing for the whole family, and boots: 16 pairs of
boots for the children at 4f. 50c. each, 4 for the parents at 8f., total
again 300f. Total for the year, 2,600f. _Tupin_, who is an exceptional
workman, earns 160f. a month, that is to say, 2,100f. a year. There is
therefore an annual deficit of 500f., provided _Tupin_ keeps at work all
the time, which never happens in the life of a workingman. Under such
circumstances no one need be surprised that one of his children is
imprisoned for theft, and the other is walking the streets, while
_Tupin_ himself is driven to drink.

  _Tupin._ When we began to get short in the house, my wife and I
  started to quarrel. Every time a child came we were mad at making it
  worse for the others. And so ... I ended up in the saloon. It's warm
  there, and you can't hear the children crying nor the mother
  complaining. And besides, when you have drink in you, you forget....
  And that's how we got poorer and poorer. My fault, if you like....
  Our last child was a cripple. He was born in starvation, and his
  mother was worn out. And they nursed him, and they nursed him, and
  they nursed him. They did not leave him a minute. They made him live
  in spite of himself. And they let the other children--the strong
  ones--go to the bad. With half the money and the fuss they wasted on
  the cripple, they could have made fine fellows of all the others.

  _Mme. Tupin._ I have to add that all this is not my fault. My
  husband and I worked like beasts; we did without every kind of
  pleasure to try and bring up our children. If we had wanted to slave
  more, I declare to you we couldn't have done it. And now that we
  have given our lives for them, the oldest is in hospital, ruined and
  done for because he worked in "a dangerous trade" as they call
  it.... There are too many people in the world.... My little girl had
  to choose between starvation and the street.... I'm only a poor
  woman, and I know what it means to have nothing to eat, so I forgave
  her.

Thus _Mme. Tupin_ also understands that it is a crime to add one more
victim to those who are born ill and for whom society has no place.

Then _Lucie_ faces the court,--_Lucie_ who loved her sister too well,
and who, driven by the same conditions that killed _Annette_, has also
been compelled to undergo an abortion rather than have a fourth child by
the man she did not love any more. Like the _Schoolmistress_ and the
_Tupins_, she is dragged before the bar of justice to explain her crime,
while her husband, who had forced both _Annette_ and _Lucie_ out of the
house, has meanwhile risen to a high position as a supporter of the
State with his favorite slogan, "Motherhood is the highest function of
woman."

Finally the midwife _Thomas_ is called upon for her defense.

  _Thomas._ A girl came to me one day; she was a servant. She had been
  seduced by her master. I refused to do what she asked me to do: she
  went and drowned herself. Another I refused to help was brought up
  before you here for infanticide. Then when the others came, I said,
  "Yes." I have prevented many a suicide and many a crime.

It is not likely that the venerable judge, the State's attorney or the
gentlemen of the jury can see in _Mme. Thomas_ a greater benefactress to
society than they; any more than they can grasp the deep importance of
the concluding words of the counsel for the defense in this great social
tragedy.

  _Counsel for the Defense._ Their crime is not an individual crime;
  it is a social crime.... It is _not_ a crime against nature. It is a
  revolt against nature. And with all the warmth of a heart melted by
  pity, with all the indignation of my outraged reason, I look for
  that glorious hour of liberation when some master mind shall
  discover for us the means of having only the children we need and
  desire, release forever from the prison of hypocrisy and absolve us
  from the profanation of love. That would indeed be a conquest of
  nature--savage nature--which pours out life with culpable
  profusion, and sees it disappear with indifference.

Surely there can be no doubt as to the revolutionary significance of
"Maternity": the demand that woman must be given means to prevent
conception of undesired and unloved children; that she must become free
and strong to choose the father of her child and to decide the number of
children she is to bring into the world, and under what conditions. That
is the only kind of motherhood which can endure.




THE ENGLISH DRAMA




GEORGE BERNARD SHAW


"I am not an ordinary playwright in general practice. I am a specialist
in immoral and heretical plays. My reputation has been gained by my
persistent struggle to force the public to reconsider its morals. In
particular, I regard much current morality as to economic and sexual
relations as disastrously wrong; and I regard certain doctrines of the
Christian religion as understood in England to-day with abhorrence. I
write plays with the deliberate object of converting the nation to my
opinions in these matters."

This confession of faith should leave no doubt as to the place of George
Bernard Shaw in modern dramatic art. Yet, strange to say, he is among
the most doubted of his time. That is partly due to the fact that humor
generally serves merely to amuse, touching only the lighter side of
life. But there is a kind of humor that fills laughter with tears, a
humor that eats into the soul like acid, leaving marks often deeper than
those made by the tragic form.

There is another reason why Shaw's sincerity is regarded lightly: it is
to be found in the difference of his scope as propagandist and as
artist. As the propagandist Shaw is limited, dogmatic, and set. Indeed,
the most zealous Puritan could not be more antagonistic to social
theories differing from his own. But the artist, if he is sincere at
all, must go to life as the source of his inspiration, and life is
beyond dogmas, beyond the House of Commons, beyond even the "eternal and
irrevocable law" of the materialistic conception of history. If, then,
the Socialist propagandist Shaw is often lost in the artist Shaw, it is
not because he lacks sincerity, but because life will not be curtailed.

It may be contended that Shaw is much more the propagandist than the
artist because he paints in loud colors. But that is rather because of
the indolence of the human mind, especially of the Anglo-Saxon mind,
which has settled down snugly to the self-satisfied notion of its
purity, justice, and charity, so that naught but the strongest current
of light will make it wince. In "Mrs. Warren's Profession" and "Major
Barbara," George Bernard Shaw has accomplished even more. He has pulled
off the mask of purity and Christian kindness that we may see their
hidden viciousness at work.


MRS. WARREN'S PROFESSION

Mrs. Warren is engaged in a profession which has existed through all the
ages. It was at home in Egypt, played an important rle in Greece and
Rome, formed one of the influential guilds in the Middle Ages, and has
been one of the main sources of income for the Christian Church.

But it was left to modern times to make of Mrs. Warren's profession a
tremendous social factor, ministering to the needs of man in every
station of life, from the brownstone mansion to the hovel, from the
highest official to the poorest drag.

Time was when the Mrs. Warrens were looked upon as possessed by the
devil,--lewd, depraved creatures who would not, even if they had the
choice, engage in any other profession, because they are vicious at
heart, and should therefore be held up to condemnation and obloquy. And
while we continue to drive them from pillar to post, while we still
punish them as criminals and deny them the simplest humanities one gives
even to the dumb beast, the light turned on this subject by men like
George Bernard Shaw has helped to expose the lie of inherent evil
tendencies and natural depravity. Instead we learn:

  _Mrs. Warren._ Do you think I did what I did because I liked it, or
  thought it right, or wouldn't rather have gone to college and been a
  lady if I'd had the chance?... Oh, it's easy to talk, very easy,
  isn't it? Here!--Would you like to know what my circumstances were?
  D'you know what your gran'mother was? No, you don't. I do. She
  called herself a widow and had a fried-fish shop down by the Mint,
  and kept herself and four daughters out of it. Two of us were
  sisters: that was me and Liz; and we were both good looking and well
  made. I suppose our father was a well fed man: mother pretended he
  was a gentleman; but I don't know. The other two were only half
  sisters--undersized, ugly, starved, hard working, honest poor
  creatures: Liz and I would have half murdered them if mother hadn't
  half murdered us to keep our hands off them. They were the
  respectable ones. Well, what did they get by their respectability?
  I'll tell you. One of them worked in a whitelead factory twelve
  hours a day for nine shillings a week until she died of lead
  poisoning. She only expected to get her hands a little paralyzed;
  but she died. The other was always held up to us as a model because
  she married a Government laborer in the Deptford victualling yard,
  and kept his room and the three children neat and tidy on eighteen
  shillings a week--until he took to drink. That was worth being
  respectable for, wasn't it?

  _Vivie._ Did you and your sister think so?

  _Mrs. Warren._ Liz didn't, I can tell you; she had more spirit. We
  both went to a Church School--that was part of the lady-like airs we
  gave ourselves to be superior to the children that knew nothing and
  went nowhere--and we stayed there until Liz went out one night and
  never came back. I knew the schoolmistress thought I'd soon follow
  her example; for the clergyman was always warning me that Lizzie 'd
  end by jumping off Waterloo Bridge. Poor fool: that was all that he
  knew about it! But I was more afraid of the whitelead factory than
  I was of the river; and so would you have been in my place. That
  clergyman got me a situation as a scullery maid in a temperance
  restaurant where they sent out for anything you liked. Then I was
  waitress; and then I went to the bar at Waterloo Station--fourteen
  hours a day serving drinks and washing glasses for four shillings a
  week and my board. That was considered a great promotion for me.
  Well, one cold, wretched night, when I was so tired I could hardly
  keep myself awake, who should come up for a half of Scotch but
  Lizzie, in a long fur cloak, elegant and comfortable, with a lot of
  sovereigns in her purse.

  _Vivie._ My aunt Lizzie?

  _Mrs. Warren._ Yes.... She's living down at Winchester, now, close
  to the cathedral, one of the most respectable ladies
  there--chaperones girls at the country ball, if you please. No river
  for Liz, thank you! You remind me of Liz a little: she was a
  first-rate business woman--saved money from the beginning--never let
  herself look too like what she was--never lost her head or threw
  away a chance. When she saw I'd grown up good-looking she said to me
  across the bar: "What are you doing there, you little fool? Wearing
  out your health and your appearance for other people's profit!" Liz
  was saving money then to take a house for herself in Brussels: and
  she thought we two could save faster than one. So she lent me some
  money and gave me a start; and I saved steadily and first paid her
  back, and then went into business with her as her partner. Why
  shouldn't I have done it? The house in Brussels was real high
  class--a much better place for a woman to be in than the factory
  where Anne Jane got poisoned. None of our girls were ever treated as
  I was treated in the scullery of that temperance place, or at the
  Waterloo bar, or at home. Would you have had me stay in them and
  become a worn-out old drudge before I was forty?... Yes, saving
  money. But where can a woman get the money to save in any other
  business? Could you save out of four shillings a week and keep
  yourself dressed as well? Not you. Of course, if you're a plain
  woman and can't earn anything more: or if you have a turn for music,
  or the stage, or newspaper writing: that's different. But neither
  Liz nor I had any turn for such things: all we had was our
  appearance and our turn for pleasing men. Do you think we were such
  fools as to let other people trade in our good looks by employing us
  as shop-girls, or barmaids, or waitresses, when we could trade in
  them ourselves and get all the profits instead of starvation wages?
  Not likely.... Everybody dislikes having to work and make money; but
  they have to do it all the same. I'm sure I've often pitied a poor
  girl, tired out and in low spirits, having to try to please some man
  that she doesn't care two straws for--some half-drunken fool that
  thinks he's making himself agreeable when he's teasing and worrying
  and disgusting a woman so that hardly any money could pay her for
  putting up with it. But she has to bear with disagreeables and take
  the rough with the smooth, just like a nurse in a hospital or anyone
  else. It's not work that any woman would do for pleasure, goodness
  knows; though to hear the pious people talk you would suppose it was
  a bed of roses. Of course it's worth while to a poor girl, if she
  can resist temptation and is good looking and well-conducted and
  sensible. It's far better than any other employment open to her. I
  always thought that oughtn't to be. It can't be right, Vivie, that
  there shouldn't be better opportunities for women. I stick to that:
  It's wrong. But it's so, right or wrong; and a girl must make the
  best of it. But, of course, it's not worth while for a lady. If you
  took to it you'd be a fool; but I should have been a fool if I'd
  taken to anything else.... Why am I independent and able to give my
  daughter a first-rate education, when other women that had just as
  good opportunities are in the gutter? Because I always knew how to
  respect myself and control myself. Why is Liz looked up to in a
  cathedral town? The same reason. Where would we be now if we'd
  minded the clergyman's foolishness? Scrubbing floors for one and
  sixpence a day and nothing to look forward to but the workhouse
  infirmary. Don't you be led astray by people who don't know the
  world, my girl. The only way for a woman to provide for herself
  decently is for her to be good to some man that can afford to be
  good to her. If she's in his own station of life, let her make him
  marry her; but if she's far beneath him, she can't expect it--why
  should she? It wouldn't be for her own happiness. Ask any lady in
  London society that has daughters; and she'll tell you the same,
  except that I tell you straight and she'll tell you crooked. That's
  all the difference.... It's only good manners to be ashamed of it;
  it's expected from a woman. Women have to pretend a great deal that
  they don't feel. Liz used to be angry with me for plumping out the
  truth about it. She used to say that when every woman would learn
  enough from what was going on in the world before her eyes, there
  was no need to talk about it to her. But then Liz was such a perfect
  lady! She had the true instinct of it; while I was always a bit of a
  vulgarian. I used to be so pleased when you sent me your photographs
  to see that you were growing up like Liz; you've just her lady-like
  determined way. But I can't stand saying one thing when everyone
  knows I mean another. What's the use in such hypocrisy? If people
  arrange the world that way for women, there's no use pretending that
  it's arranged the other way. I never was a bit ashamed really. I
  consider that I had a right to be proud that we managed everything
  so respectably, and never had a word against us, and that the girls
  were so well taken care of. Some of them did very well: one of them
  married an ambassador. But of course now I daren't talk about such
  things: whatever would they think of us.

No, it is not respectable to talk about these things, because
respectability cannot face the truth. Yet everybody knows that the
majority of women, "if they wish to provide for themselves decently must
be good to some man that can afford to be good to them." The only
difference then between _Sister Liz_, the respectable girl, and _Mrs.
Warren_, is hypocrisy and legal sanction. _Sister Liz_ uses her money to
buy back her reputation from the Church and Society. The respectable
girl uses the sanction of the Church to buy a decent income
legitimately, and _Mrs. Warren_ plays her game without the sanction of
either. Hence she is the greatest criminal in the eyes of the world. Yet
_Mrs. Warren_ is no less human than most other women. In fact, as far as
her love for her daughter _Vivian_ is concerned, she is a superior sort
of mother. That her daughter may not have to face the same alternative
as she,--slave in a scullery for four shillings a week--_Mrs. Warren_
surrounds the girl with comfort and ease, gives her an education, and
thereby establishes between her child and herself an abyss which nothing
can bridge. Few respectable mothers would do as much for their
daughters. However, _Mrs. Warren_ remains the outcast, while all those
who benefit by her profession, including even her daughter _Vivian_,
move in the best circles.

_Sir John Crofts_, _Mrs. Warren's_ business partner, who has invested
40,000 pounds in _Mrs. Warren's_ house, drawing an income of 35 per
cent. out of it in the worst years, is a recognized pillar of society
and an honored member of his class. Why not!

  _Crofts._ The fact is, it's not what would be considered exactly a
  high-class business in my set--the county set, you know.... Not that
  there is any mystery about it: don't think that. Of course you know
  by your mother's being in it that it's perfectly straight and
  honest. I've known her for many years; and I can say of her that
  she'd cut off her hands sooner than touch anything that was not what
  it ought to be.... But you see you can't mention such things in
  society. Once let out the word hotel and everybody says you keep a
  public-house. You wouldn't like people to say that of your mother,
  would you? That's why we're so reserved about it.... Don't turn up
  your nose at business, Miss Vivie: where would your Newnhams and
  Girtons be without it?... You wouldn't refuse the acquaintance of my
  mother's cousin, the Duke of Belgravia, because some of the rents he
  gets are earned in queer ways. You wouldn't cut the Archbishop of
  Canterbury, I suppose, because the Ecclesiastical Commissioners have
  a few publicans and sinners among their tenants? Do you remember
  your Crofts scholarship at Newnham? Well, that was founded by my
  brother the M.P. He gets his 22 per cent. out of a factory with 600
  girls in it, and not one of them getting wages enough to live on.
  How d' ye suppose most of them manage? Ask your mother. And do you
  expect me to turn my back on 35 per cent. when all the rest are
  pocketing what they can, like sensible men? No such fool! If you're
  going to pick and choose your acquaintances on moral principles,
  you'd better clear out of this country, unless you want to cut
  yourself out of all decent society.... The world isn't such a bad
  place as the croakers make out. So long as you don't fly openly in
  the face of society, society doesn't ask any inconvenient questions;
  and it makes precious short work of the cads who do. There are no
  secrets better kept than the secrets that everybody guesses. In the
  society I can introduce you to, no lady or gentleman would so far
  forget themselves as to discuss my business affairs or your
  mother's.

Indeed, no lady or gentleman would discuss the profession of _Mrs.
Warren_ and her confrres. But they partake of the dividends. When the
evil becomes too crying, they engage in vice crusades, and call down the
wrath of the Lord and the brutality of the police upon the Mrs. Warrens
and her victims. While the victimizers, the Crofts, the Canterburys,
Rev. Gardner--_Vivian's_ own father and pious mouthpiece of the
Church--and the other patrons of _Mrs. Warren's_ houses parade as the
protectors of woman, the home and the family.

To-day no one of the least intelligence denies the cruelty, the
injustice, the outrage of such a state of affairs, any more than it is
being denied that the training of woman as a sex commodity has left her
any other source of income except to sell herself to one man within
marriage or to many men outside of marriage. Only bigots and
inexperienced girls like _Vivian_ can say that "everybody has some
choice. The poorest girl alive may not be able to choose between being
Queen of England or Principal of Newnham; but she can choose between
rag-picking and flower-selling, according to her taste."

It is astonishing how little education and college degrees teach people.
Had _Vivian_ been compelled to shift for herself, she would have
discovered that neither rag-picking nor flower-selling brings enough to
satisfy one's "taste." It is not a question of choice, but of necessity,
which is the determining factor in most people's lives.

When Shaw flung _Mrs. Warren_ into the smug midst of society, even the
educated Vivians knew little of the compelling force which whips
thousands of women into prostitution. As to the ignorant, their minds
are a mental and spiritual desert. Naturally the play caused
consternation. It still continues to serve as the red rag to the social
bull. "Mrs. Warren's Profession" infuriates because it goes to the
bottom of our evils; because it places the accusing finger upon the
sorest and most damnable spot in our social fabric--sex as woman's only
commodity in the competitive market of life. "An immoral and heretical
play," indeed, of very deep social significance.


MAJOR BARBARA

"Major Barbara" is of still greater social importance, inasmuch as it
points to the fact that while charity and religion are supposed to
minister to the poor, both institutions derive their main revenue from
the poor by the perpetuation of the evils both pretend to fight.

_Major Barbara_, the daughter of the world renowned cannon manufacturer
_Undershaft_, has joined the Salvation Army. The latter lays claim to
being the most humane religious institution, because--unlike other soul
savers--it does not entirely forget the needs of the body. It also
teaches that the greater the sinner the more glorious the saving. But as
no one is quite as black as he is painted, it becomes necessary for
those who want to be saved, and incidentally to profit by the Salvation
Army, to invent sins--the blacker the better.

  _Rummy._ What am I to do? I can't starve. Them Salvation lasses is
  dear girls; but the better you are the worse they likes to think you
  were before they rescued you. Why shouldn't they 'av' a bit o'
  credit, poor loves? They're worn to rags by their work. And where
  would they get the money to rescue us if we was to let on we're no
  worse than other people? You know what ladies and gentlemen are.

  _Price._ Thievin' swine!... We're companions in misfortune,
  Rummy....

  _Rummy._ Who saved you, Mr. Price? Was it Major Barbara?

  _Price._ No: I come here on my own. I'm goin' to be Bronterre
  O'Brien Price, the converted painter. I know wot they like. I'll
  tell 'em how I blasphemed and gambled and wopped my poor old
  mother--

  _Rummy._ Used you to beat your mother?

  _Price._ Not likely. She used to beat me. No matter: you come and
  listen to the converted painter, and you'll hear how she was a pious
  woman that taught me me prayers at 'er knee, an' how I used to come
  home drunk and drag her out o' bed be 'er snow-white 'airs, and lam
  into 'er with the poker.

  _Rummy._ That's what's so unfair to us women. Your confessions is
  just as big lies as ours: you don't tell what you really done no
  more than us; but you men can tell your lies right out at the
  meetin's and be made much of for it; while the sort o' confessions
  we az to make 'as to be whispered to one lady at a time. It ain't
  right, spite of all their piety.

  _Price._ Right! Do you suppose the Army'd be allowed if it went and
  did right? Not much. It combs our 'air and makes us good little
  blokes to be robbed and put upon. But I'll play the game as good as
  any of 'em. I'll see somebody struck by lightnin', or hear a voice
  sayin', "Snobby Price: where will you spend eternity?" I'll 'ave a
  time of it, I tell you.

It is inevitable that the Salvation Army, like all other religious and
charitable institutions, should by its very character foster cowardice
and hypocrisy as a premium securing entry into heaven.

_Major Barbara_, being a novice, is as ignorant of this as she is
unaware of the source of the money which sustains her and the work of
the Salvation Army. She consistently refuses to accept the "conscience
sovereign" of _Bill Walker_ for beating up a Salvation lassie. Not so
_Mrs. Baines_, the Army Commissioner. She is dyed in the wool in the
profession of begging and will take money from the devil himself "for
the Glory of God,"--the Glory of God which consists in "taking out the
anger and bitterness against the rich from the hearts of the poor," a
service "gratifying and convenient for all large employers." No wonder
the whisky distiller _Bodger_ makes the generous contribution of 5000
pounds and _Undershaft_ adds his own little mite of another 5000.

_Barbara_ is indeed ignorant or she would not protest against a fact so
notorious:

  _Barbara._ Do you know what my father is? Have you forgotten that
  Lord Saxmundham is Bodger the whisky man? Do you remember how we
  implored the County Council to stop him from writing Bodger's Whisky
  in letters of fire against the sky; so that the poor drink-ruined
  creatures on the embankment could not wake up from their snatches of
  sleep without being reminded of their deadly thirst by that wicked
  sky sign? Do you know that the worst thing that I have had to fight
  here is not the devil, but Bodger, Bodger, Bodger with his whisky,
  his distilleries, and his tied houses? Are you going to make our
  shelter another tied house for him, and ask me to keep it?

  _Undershaft._ My dear Barbara: alcohol is a very necessary article.
  It heals the sick-- ... It assists the doctor: that is perhaps a
  less questionable way of putting it. It makes life bearable to
  millions of people who could not endure their existence if they were
  quite sober. It enables Parliament to do things at eleven at night
  that no sane person would do at eleven in the morning.

  _Mrs. Baines._ Barbara: Lord Saxmundham gives us the money to stop
  drinking--to take his own business from him.

  _Undershaft._ I also, Mrs. Baines, may claim a little
  disinterestedness. Think of my business! think of the widows and
  orphans! the men and lads torn to pieces with shrapnel and poisoned
  with lyddite! the oceans of blood, not one drop of which is shed in
  a really just cause! the ravaged crops! the peaceful peasants
  forced, women and men, to till their fields under the fire of
  opposing armies on pain of starvation! the bad blood of the fierce
  cowards at home who egg on others to fight for the gratification of
  national vanity! All this makes money for me: I am never richer,
  never busier than when the papers are full of it. Well, it is your
  work to preach peace on earth and good will to men. Every convert
  you make is a vote against war. Yet I give you this money to hasten
  my own commercial ruin.

  _Barbara._ Drunkenness and Murder! My God, why hast thou forsaked
  me?

However, _Barbara's_ indignation does not last very long, any more than
that of her aristocratic mother, _Lady Britomart_, who has no use for
her plebeian husband except when she needs his money. Similarly
_Stephen_, her son, has become converted, like _Barbara_, not to the
Glory Hallelujah of the Salvation Army but to the power of money and
cannon. Likewise the rest of the family, including the Greek Scholar
_Cusins_, _Barbara's_ suitor.

During the visit to their father's factory the Undershaft family makes
several discoveries. They learn that the best modern method of
accumulating a large fortune consists in organizing industries in such a
manner as to make the workers content with their slavery. It's a model
factory.

  _Undershaft._ It is a spotlessly clean and beautiful hillside town.
  There are two chapels: a Primitive one and a sophisticated one.
  There's even an ethical society; but it is not much patronized, as
  my men are all strongly religious. In the high explosives sheds they
  object to the presence of agnostics as unsafe.

The family further learns that it is not high moral precepts, patriotic
love of country, or similar sentiments that are the backbone of the life
of the nation. It is _Undershaft_ again who enlightens them of the power
of money and its rle in dictating governmental policies, making war or
peace, and shaping the destinies of man.

  _Undershaft._ The government of your country. I am the government of
  your country: I, and Lazarus. Do you suppose that you and a half a
  dozen amateurs like you, sitting in a row in that foolish gabble
  shop, can govern Undershaft and Lazarus? No, my friend: you will do
  what pays us. You will make war when it suits us, and keep peace
  when it doesn't. You will find out that trade requires certain
  measures when we have decided on those measures. When I want
  anything to keep my dividends up, you will discover that my want is
  a national need. When either people want something to keep my
  dividends down, you will call out the police and military. And in
  return you shall have the support and applause of my newspapers, and
  the delight of imagining that you are a great statesman. Government
  of your country! Be off with you, my boy, and play with your
  caucuses and leading articles and historic parties and great leaders
  and burning questions and the rest of your toys. I am going back to
  my counting house to pay the piper and call the tune.... To give
  arms to all men who offer an honest price for them, without respect
  of persons or principles: to Aristocrat and Republican, to Nihilist
  and Tsar, to Capitalist and Socialist, to Protestant and Catholic,
  to burglar and policeman, to black man, white man, and yellow man,
  to all sorts and conditions, all nationalities, all faiths, all
  follies, all causes and all crimes.... I will take an order from a
  good man as cheerfully as from a bad one. If you good people prefer
  preaching and shirking to buying my weapons and fighting the
  rascals, don't blame me. I can make cannons: I cannot make courage
  and conviction.

That is just it. The Undershafts cannot make conviction and courage; yet
both are indispensable if one is to see that, in the words of
_Undershaft_:

  "Cleanliness and respectability do not need justification: they
  justify themselves. There are millions of poor people, abject
  people, dirty people, ill fed, ill clothed people. They poison us
  morally and physically: they kill the happiness of society: they
  force us to do away with our own liberties and to organize unnatural
  cruelties for fear they should rise against us and drag us down into
  their abyss. Only fools fear crime: we all fear poverty. I had
  rather be a thief than a pauper. I had rather be a murderer than a
  slave, I don't want to be either; but if you force the alternative
  on me, then, by Heaven, I'll choose the braver and more moral one. I
  hate poverty and slavery worse than any other crimes whatsoever."

_Cusins_, the scientist, realizes the force of _Undershaft's_ argument.
Long enough have the people been preached at, and intellectual power
used to enslave them.

  _Cusins._ As a teacher of Greek I gave the intellectual man weapons
  against the common man. I now want to give the common man weapons
  against the intellectual man. I love the common people. I want to
  arm them against the lawyer, the doctor, the priest, the literary
  man, the professor, the artist, and the politician, who, once in
  authority, are the most dangerous, disastrous, and tyrannical of all
  the fools, rascals, and impostors.

This thought is perhaps the most revolutionary sentiment in the whole
play, in view of the fact that the people everywhere are enslaved by the
awe of the lawyer, the professor, and the politician, even more than by
the club and gun. It is the lawyer and the politician who poison the
people with "the germ of briefs and politics," thereby unfitting them
for the only effective course in the great social struggle--action,
resultant from the realization that poverty and inequality never have
been, never can be, preached or voted out of existence.

  _Undershaft._ Poverty and slavery have stood up for centuries to
  your sermons and leading articles: they will not stand up to my
  machine guns. Don't preach at them; don't reason with them. Kill
  them.

  _Barbara._ Killing. Is that your remedy for everything?

  _Undershaft._ It is the final test of conviction, the only lever
  strong enough to overturn a social system, the only way of saying
  Must. Let six hundred and seventy fools loose in the street; and
  three policemen can scatter them. But huddle them together in a
  certain house in Westminster; and let them go through certain
  ceremonies and call themselves certain names until at last they get
  the courage to kill; and your six hundred and seventy fools become a
  government. Your pious mob fills up ballot papers and imagines it is
  governing its masters; but the ballot paper that really governs is
  the paper that has a bullet wrapped up in it.... Vote! Bah! When you
  vote you only change the names of the cabinet. When you shoot, you
  pull down governments, inaugurate new epochs, abolish old orders and
  set up new. Is that historically true, Mr. Learned Man, or is it
  not?

  _Cusins._ It is historically true. I loathe having to admit it. I
  repudiate your sentiments. I abhor your nature. I defy you in every
  possible way. Still, it is true. But it ought not to be true.

  _Undershaft._ Ought, ought, ought, ought, ought! Are you going to
  spend your life saying ought, like the rest of our moralists? Turn
  your oughts into shells, man. Come and make explosives with me. The
  history of the world is the history of those who had the courage to
  embrace this truth.

"Major Barbara" is one of the most revolutionary plays. In any other but
dramatic form the sentiments uttered therein would have condemned the
author to long imprisonment for inciting to sedition and violence.

Shaw the Fabian would be the first to repudiate such utterances as rank
Anarchy, "impractical, brain cracked and criminal." But Shaw the
dramatist is closer to life--closer to reality, closer to the historic
truth that the people wrest only as much liberty as they have the
intelligence to want and the courage to take.




JOHN GALSWORTHY


The power of the modern drama as an interpreter of the pressing
questions of our time is perhaps nowhere evident as clearly as it is in
England to-day.

Indeed, while other countries have come almost to a standstill in
dramatic art, England is the most productive at the present time. Nor
can it be said that quantity has been achieved at the expense of
quality, which is only too often the case.

The most prolific English dramatist, John Galsworthy, is at the same
time a great artist whose dramatic quality can be compared with that of
only one other living writer, namely, Gerhart Hauptmann. Galsworthy,
even as Hauptmann, is neither a propagandist nor a moralist. His
background is life, "that palpitating life," which is the root of all
sorrow and joy.

His attitude toward dramatic art is given in the following words:

"I look upon the stage as the great beacon light of civilization, but
the drama should lead the social thought of the time and not direct or
dictate it.

"The great duty of the dramatist is to present life as it really is. A
true story, if told sincerely, is the strongest moral argument that can
be put on the stage. It is the business of the dramatist so to present
the characters in his picture of life that the inherent moral is brought
to light without any lecturing on his part.

"Moral codes in themselves are, after all, not lasting, but a true
picture of life is. A man may preach a strong lesson in a play which may
exist for a day, but if he succeeds in presenting real life itself in
such a manner as to carry with it a certain moral inspiration, the force
of the message need never be lost, for a new interpretation to fit the
spirit of the time can renew its vigor and power."

John Galsworthy has undoubtedly succeeded in presenting real life. It is
this that makes him so thoroughly human and universal.


STRIFE

Not since Hauptmann's "Weavers" was placed before the thoughtful public,
has there appeared anything more stirring than "Strife."

Its theme is a strike in the Trenartha Tin Plate Works, on the borders
of England and Wales. The play largely centers about the two dominant
figures: _John Anthony_, the President of the Company, rigid, autocratic
and uncompromising; he is unwilling to make the slightest concession,
although the men have been out for six months and are in a condition of
semi-starvation. On the other hand there is _David Roberts_, an
uncompromising revolutionist, whose devotion to the workers and the
cause of freedom is at red-white heat. Between them are the strikers,
worn and weary with the terrible struggle, driven and tortured by the
awful sight of poverty at home.

At a directors' meeting, attended by the Company's representatives from
London, _Edgar Anthony_, the President's son and a man of kindly
feeling, pleads in behalf of the strikers.

  _Edgar._ I don't see how we can get over it that to go on like this
  means starvation to the men's wives and families ... It won't kill
  the shareholders to miss a dividend or two; I don't see that
  _that's_ reason enough for knuckling under.

  _Wilder._ H'm! Shouldn't be a bit surprised if that brute Roberts
  hadn't got us down here with the very same idea. I hate a man with a
  grievance.

  _Edgar._ We didn't pay him enough for his discovery. I always said
  that at the time.

  _Wilder._ We paid him five hundred and a bonus of two hundred three
  years later. If that's not enough! What does he want, for goodness'
  sake?

  _Tench._ Company made a hundred thousand out of his brains, and paid
  him seven hundred--that's the way he goes on, sir.

  _Wilder._ The man's a rank agitator! Look here, I hate the Unions.
  But now we've got Harness here let's get him to settle the whole
  thing.

_Harness_, the trade union official, speaks in favor of compromise. In
the beginning of the strike the union had withdrawn its support, because
the workers had used their own judgment in deciding to strike.

  _Harness._ I'm quite frank with you. We were forced to withhold our
  support from your men because some of their demands are in excess of
  current rates. I expect to make them withdraw those demands
  to-day.... Now, I want to see something fixed upon before I go back
  tonight. Can't we have done with this old-fashioned tug-of-war
  business? What good's it doing you? Why don't you recognize once for
  all that these people are men like yourselves, and want what's good
  for them just as you want what's good for you.... There's just one
  very simple question I'd like to put to you. Will you pay your men
  one penny more than they force you to pay them?

Of course not. With trade unionism lacking in true solidarity, and the
workers not conscious of their power, why should the Company pay one
penny more? _David Roberts_ is the only one who fully understands the
situation.

  _Roberts._ Justice from London? What are you talking about, Henry
  Thomas? Have you gone silly? We know very well what we
  are--discontented dogs--never satisfied. What did the Chairman tell
  me up in London? That I didn't know what I was talking about. I was
  a foolish, uneducated man, that knew nothing of the wants of the
  men I spoke for.... I have this to say--and first as to their
  condition.... Ye can't squeeze them any more. Every man of us is
  well nigh starving. Ye wonder why I tell ye that? Every man of us is
  going short. We can't be no worse off than we've been these weeks
  past. Ye needn't think that by waiting ye'll drive us to come in.
  We'll die first, the whole lot of us. The men have sent for ye to
  know, once and for all, whether ye are going to grant them their
  demands.... Ye know best whether ye can afford your tyranny--but
  this I tell ye: If ye think the men will give way the least part of
  an inch, ye're making the worst mistake ye ever made. Ye think
  because the Union is not supporting us--more shame to it!--that
  we'll be coming on our knees to you one fine morning. Ye think
  because the men have got their wives an' families to think of--that
  it's just a question of a week or two--

The appalling state of the strikers is demonstrated by the women: _Anna
Roberts_, sick with heart trouble and slowly dying for want of warmth
and nourishment; _Mrs. Rous_, so accustomed to privation that her
present poverty seems easy compared with the misery of her whole life.

Into this dismal environment comes _Enid_, the President's daughter,
with delicacies and jams for _Annie_. Like many women of her station she
imagines that a little sympathy will bridge the chasm between the
classes, or as her father says, "You think with your gloved hands you
can cure the troubles of the century."

_Enid_ does not know the life of _Annie Roberts'_ class: that it is all
a gamble from the "time 'e's born to the time 'e dies."

  _Mrs. Roberts._ Roberts says workin' folk have always lived from
  hand to mouth. Sixpence to-day is worth more than a shillin'
  to-morrow, that's what they say.... He says that when a working
  man's baby is born, it's a toss-up from breath to breath whether it
  ever draws another, and so on all 'is life; an' when he comes to be
  old, it's the workhouse or the grave. He says that without a man is
  very near, and pinches and stints 'imself and 'is children to save,
  there can be neither surplus nor security. That's why he wouldn't
  have no children, not though I wanted them.

The strikers' meeting is a masterly study of mass psychology,--the men
swayed hither and thither by the different speakers and not knowing
whither to go. It is the smooth-tongued _Harness_ who first weakens
their determination to hold out.

  _Harness._ Cut your demands to the right pattern, and we'll see you
  through; refuse, and don't expect me to waste my time coming down
  here again. I'm not the sort that speaks at random, as you ought to
  know by this time. If you're the sound men I take you for--no matter
  who advises you against it--you'll make up your minds to come in,
  and trust to us to get your terms. Which is it to be? Hands
  together, and victory--or--the starvation you've got now?

Then _Old Thomas_ appeals to their religious sentiments:

  _Thomas._ It iss not London; it iss not the Union--it iss Nature. It
  iss no disgrace whateffer to a potty to give in to Nature. For this
  Nature iss a fery pig thing; it is pigger than what a man is. There
  is more years to my hett than to the hett of anyone here. It is a
  man's pisness to pe pure, honest, just, and merciful. That's what
  Chapel tells you.... We're going the roat to tamnation. An' so I say
  to all of you. If ye co against Chapel I will not pe with you, nor
  will any other Got-fearing man.

At last _Roberts_ makes his plea, _Roberts_ who has given his
all--brain, heart and blood--aye, sacrificed even his wife to the cause.
By sheer force of eloquence and sincerity he stays his fickle comrades
long enough at least to listen to him, though they are too broken to
rise to his great dignity and courage.

  _Roberts._ You don't want to hear me then? You'll listen to Rous and
  to that old man, but not to me. You'll listen to Sim Harness of the
  Union that's treated you so _fair_; maybe you'll listen to those men
  from London.... You love their feet on your necks, don't you?... Am
  I a liar, a coward, a traitor? If only I were, ye'd listen to me,
  I'm sure. Is there a man of you here who has less to gain by
  striking? Is there a man of you that had more to lose? Is there a
  man among you who has given up eight hundred pounds since this
  trouble began? Come, now, is there? How much has Thomas given
  up--ten pounds or five or what? You listened to him, and what had he
  to say? "None can pretend," he said, "that I'm not a believer in
  principle--but when Nature says: 'No further,' 'tes going against
  Nature!" I tell you if a man cannot say to Nature: "Budge me from
  this if ye can!"--his principles are but his belly. "Oh, but,"
  Thomas says, "a man can be pure and honest, just and merciful, and
  take off his hat to Nature." I tell you Nature's neither pure nor
  honest, just nor merciful. You chaps that live over the hill, an' go
  home dead beat in the dark on a snowy night--don't ye fight your way
  every inch of it? Do ye go lyin' down an' trustin' to the tender
  mercies of this merciful Nature? Try it and you'll soon know with
  what ye've got to deal. 'Tes only by that (_he strikes a blow with
  his clenched fist_) in Nature's face that a man can be a man. "Give
  in," says Thomas; "go down on your knees; throw up your foolish
  fight, an' perhaps," he said, "perhaps your enemy will chuck you
  down a crust." ... And what did he say about Chapel? "Chapel's
  against it," he said. "She's against it." Well, if Chapel and Nature
  go hand in hand, it's the first I've ever heard of it.
  Surrendering's the work of cowards and traitors.... You've felt the
  pinch o't in your bellies. You've forgotten what that fight 'as
  been; many times I have told you; I will tell you now this once
  again. The fight o' the country's body and blood against a
  blood-sucker. The fight of those that spend themselves with every
  blow they strike and every breath they draw, against a thing that
  fattens on them, and grows and grows by the law of _merciful_
  Nature. That thing is Capital! A thing that buys the sweat o' men's
  brows, and the tortures o' their brains, at its own price. Don't I
  know that? Wasn't the work o' my brains bought for seven hundred
  pounds, and hasn't one hundred thousand pounds been gained them by
  that seven hundred without the stirring of a finger. It is a thing
  that will take as much and give you as little as it can. That's
  Capital! A thing that will say--"I'm very sorry for you, poor
  fellows--you have a cruel time of it, I know," but will not give one
  sixpence of its dividends to help you have a better time. That's
  Capital! Tell me, for all their talk, is there one of them that will
  consent to another penny on the Income Tax to help the poor? That's
  Capital! A white-faced, stony-hearted monster! Ye have got it on its
  knees; are ye to give up at the last minute to save your miserable
  bodies pain? When I went this morning to those old men from London,
  I looked into their very 'earts. One of them was sitting there--Mr.
  Scantlebury, a mass of flesh nourished on us: sittin' there for all
  the world like the shareholders in this Company, that sit not moving
  tongue nor finger, takin' dividends--a great dumb ox that can only
  be roused when its food is threatened. I looked into his eyes and I
  saw _he was afraid_--afraid for himself and his dividends, afraid
  for his fees, afraid of the very shareholders he stands for; and all
  but one of them's afraid--like children that get into a wood at
  night, and start at every rustle of the leaves. I ask you, men--give
  me a free hand to tell them: "Go you back to London. The men have
  nothing for you!" Give, me that, and I swear to you, within a week
  you shall have from London all you want. 'Tis not for this little
  moment of time we're fighting, not for _ourselves_, our own little
  bodies, and their wants, 'tis for all those that come after
  throughout all time. Oh! men--for the love o' them, don't roll up
  another stone upon their heads, don't help to blacken the sky, an'
  let the bitter sea in over them. They're welcome to the worst that
  can happen to me, to the worst that can happen to us all, aren't
  they--aren't they? If we can shake the white-faced monster with the
  bloody lips, that has sucked the life out of ourselves, our wives,
  and children, since the world began. If we have not the hearts of
  men to stand against it breast to breast, and eye to eye, and force
  it backward till it cry for mercy, it will go on sucking life; and
  we shall stay forever what we are, less than the very dogs.

Consistency is the greatest crime of our commercial age. No matter how
intense the spirit or how important the man, the moment he will not
allow himself to be used or sell his principles, he is thrown on the
dust heap. Such is the fate of _Anthony_, the President of the Company,
and of _David Roberts_. To be sure they represent opposite poles--poles
antagonistic to each other, poles divided by a terrible gap that can
never be bridged over. Yet they share a common fate. _Anthony_ is the
embodiment of conservatism, of old ideas, of iron methods:

  _Anthony._ I have been Chairman of this Company since its inception
  two and thirty years ago.... I have had to do with "men" for fifty
  years; I've always stood up to them; I have never been beaten yet. I
  have fought the men of this Company four times, and four times I
  have beaten them.... The men have been treated justly, they have had
  fair wages, we have always been ready to listen to complaints. It
  has been said that times have changed; if they have, I have not
  changed with them. Neither will I. It has been said that masters and
  men are equal! Cant! There can only be one master in a house! Where
  two men meet the better man will rule. It has been said that Capital
  and Labor have the same interests. Cant! Their interests are as wide
  asunder as the poles. It has been said that the Board is only part
  of a machine. Cant! We _are_ the machine; its brains and sinews; it
  is for us to lead and to determine what is to be done; and to do it
  without fear or favor. Fear of the men! Fear of the shareholders!
  Fear of our own shadows! Before I am like that, I hope to die. There
  is only one way of treating "men"--with the iron hand. This
  half-and-half business, the half-and-half manners of this
  generation, has brought all this upon us. Sentiments and softness
  and what this young man, no doubt, would call his social policy. You
  can't eat cake and have it! This middle-class sentiment, or
  socialism, or whatever it may be, is rotten. Masters are masters,
  men are men! Yield one demand, and they will make it six. They are
  like Oliver Twist, asking for more. If I were in _their_ place I
  should be the same. But I am not in their place.... I have been
  accused of being a domineering tyrant, thinking only of my pride--I
  am thinking of the future of this country, threatened with the black
  waters of confusion, threatened with mob government, threatened with
  what I cannot say. If by any conduct of mine I help to bring this on
  us, I shall be ashamed to look my fellows in the face. Before I put
  this amendment to the Board, I have one more word to say. If it is
  carried, it means that we shall fail in what we set ourselves to do.
  It means that we shall fail in the duty that we owe to all Capital.
  It means that we shall fail in the duty that we owe ourselves.

We may not like this adherence to old, reactionary notions, and yet
there is something admirable in the courage and consistency of this man;
nor is he half as dangerous to the interests of the oppressed as our
sentimental and soft reformers who rob with nine fingers, and give
libraries with the tenth; who grind human beings and spend millions of
dollars in social research work. _Anthony_ is a worthy foe; to fight
such a foe, one must learn to meet him in open battle.

_David Roberts_ has all the mental and moral attributes of his
adversary, coupled with the spirit of revolt and the inspiration of
modern ideas. He, too, is consistent: he wants nothing for his class
short of complete victory.

It is inevitable that compromise and petty interest should triumph until
the masses become imbued with the spirit of a _David Roberts_. Will
they ever? Prophecy is not the vocation of the dramatist, yet the moral
lesson is evident. One cannot help realizing that the workingmen will
have to use methods hitherto unfamiliar to them; that they will have to
discard the elements in their midst that are forever seeking to
reconcile the irreconcilable--Capital and Labor. They will have to learn
that men like _David Roberts_ are the very forces that have
revolutionized the world and thus paved the way for emancipation out of
the clutches of the "white-faced monster with bloody lips," toward a
brighter horizon, a freer life, and a truer recognition of human values.


JUSTICE

No subject of equal social import has received such thoughtful
consideration in recent years as the question of Crime and Punishment. A
number of books by able writers, both in Europe and this
country--preminently among them "Prison Memoirs of an Anarchist," by
Alexander Berkman--discuss this topic from the historic, psychologic,
and social standpoint, the consensus of opinion being that present penal
institutions and our methods of coping with crime have in every respect
proved inadequate as well as wasteful. This new attitude toward one of
the gravest social wrongs has now also found dramatic interpretation in
Galsworthy's "Justice."

The play opens in the office of _James How & Sons_, solicitors. The
senior clerk, _Robert Cokeson_, discovers that a check he had issued for
nine pounds has been forged to ninety. By elimination, suspicion falls
upon _William Falder_, the junior office clerk. The latter is in love
with a married woman, the abused and ill-treated wife of a brutal
drunkard. Pressed by his employer, a severe yet not unkindly man,
_Falder_ confesses the forgery, pleading the dire necessity of his
sweetheart, _Ruth Honeywill_, with whom he had planned to escape to save
her from the unbearable brutality of her husband.

  _Falder._ Oh! sir, look over it! I'll pay the money back--I will, I
  promise.

Notwithstanding the entreaties of young _Walter How_, who holds modern
ideas, his father, a moral and law-respecting citizen, turns _Falder_
over to the police.

The second act, in the court room, shows Justice in the very process of
manufacture. The scene equals in dramatic power and psychologic verity
the great court scene in "Resurrection." Young _Falder_, a nervous and
rather weakly youth of twenty-three, stands before the bar. _Ruth_, his
faithful sweetheart, full of love and devotion, burns with anxiety to
save the young man, whose affection for her has brought about his
present predicament. _Falder_ is defended by _Lawyer Frome_, whose
speech to the jury is a masterpiece of social philosophy. He does not
attempt to dispute the mere fact that his client had altered the check;
and though he pleads temporary aberration in his defense, the argument
is based on a social consciousness as fundamental and all-embracing as
the roots of our social ills--"the background of life, that palpitating
life which always lies behind the commission of a crime." He shows
_Falder_ to have faced the alternative of seeing the beloved woman
murdered by her brutal husband whom she cannot divorce, or of taking the
law into his own hands. He pleads with the jury not to turn the weak
young man into a criminal by condemning him to prison.

  _Frome._ Men like the prisoner are destroyed daily under our law for
  want of that human insight which sees them as they are, patients,
  and not criminals.... Justice is a machine that, when someone has
  given it a starting push, rolls on of itself.... Is this young man
  to be ground to pieces under this machine for an act which, at the
  worst, was one of weakness? Is he to become a member of the luckless
  crews that man those dark, ill-starred ships called prisons?... I
  urge you, gentlemen, do not ruin this young man. For as a result of
  those four minutes, ruin, utter and irretrievable, stares him in
  the face.... The rolling of the chariot wheels of Justice over this
  boy began when it was decided to prosecute him.

But the chariot of Justice rolls mercilessly on, for--as the learned
Judge says--

  "Your counsel has made an attempt to trace your offense back to what
  he seems to suggest is a defect in the marriage law; he has made an
  attempt also to show that to punish you with further imprisonment
  would be unjust. I do not follow him in these flights. _The Law is
  what it is_--a majestic edifice, sheltering all of us, each stone of
  which rests on another. I am concerned only with its administration.
  The crime you have committed is a very serious one. I cannot feel it
  in accordance with my duty to Society to exercise the powers I have
  in your favor. You will go to penal servitude for three years."

In prison the young, inexperienced convict soon finds himself the victim
of the terrible "system." The authorities admit that young _Falder_ is
mentally and physically "in bad shape," but nothing can be done in the
matter: many others are in a similar position, and "the quarters are
inadequate."

The third scene of the third act is heart-gripping in its silent force.
The whole scene is a pantomime, taking place in _Falder's_ prison cell.

"In fast-falling daylight, _Falder_, in his stockings, is seen standing
motionless, with his head inclined towards the door, listening. He
moves a little closer to the door, his stockinged feet making no noise.
He stops at the door. He is trying harder and harder to hear something,
any little thing that is going on outside. He springs suddenly
upright--as if at a sound--and remains perfectly motionless. Then, with
a heavy sigh, he moves to his work, and stands looking at it, with his
head down; he does a stitch or two, having the air of a man so lost in
sadness that each stitch is, as it were, a coming to life. Then, turning
abruptly, he begins pacing his cell, moving his head, like an animal
pacing its cage. He stops again at the door, listens, and, placing the
palms of his hands against it, with his fingers spread out, leans his
forehead against the iron. Turning from it, presently, he moves slowly
back towards the window, tracing his way with his finger along the top
line of the distemper that runs round the wall. He stops under the
window, and, picking up the lid of one of the tins, peers into it. It
has grown very nearly dark. Suddenly the lid falls out of his hand with
a clatter--the only sound that has broken the silence--and he stands
staring intently at the wall where the stuff of the shirt is hanging
rather white in the darkness--he seems to be seeing somebody or
something there. There is a sharp tap and click; the cell light behind
the glass screen has been turned up. The cell is brightly lighted.
_Falder_ is seen gasping for breath.

"A sound from far away, as of distant, dull beating on thick metal, is
suddenly audible. _Falder_ shrinks back, not able to bear this sudden
clamor. But the sound grows, as though some great tumbril were rolling
towards the cell. And gradually it seems to hypnotize him. He begins
creeping inch by inch nearer to the door. The banging sound, travelling
from cell to cell, draws closer and closer; _Falder's_ hands are seen
moving as if his spirit had already joined in this beating; and the
sound swells until it seems to have entered the very cell. He suddenly
raises his clenched fists.

"Panting violently, he flings himself at his door, and beats on it."

       *       *       *       *       *

_Falder_ leaves the prison, a broken ticket-of-leave man, the stamp of
the convict upon his brow, the iron of misery in his soul.

  _Falder._ I seem to be struggling against a thing that's all round
  me. I can't explain it: it's as if I was in a net; as fast as I cut
  it here, it grows up there. I didn't act as I ought to have, about
  references; but what are you to do? You must have them. And that
  made me afraid, and I left. In fact, I'm--I'm afraid all the time
  now.

Thanks to _Ruth's_ pleading, the firm of _James How & Son_ is willing to
take _Falder_ back in their employ, on condition that he give up
_Ruth_. _Falder_ resents this:

  _Falder._ I couldn't give her up. I couldn't! Oh, sir! I'm all she's
  got to look to. And I'm sure she's all I've got.

It is then that _Falder_ learns the awful news that the woman he loves
had been driven by the chariot wheel of Justice to sell herself.

  _Ruth._ I tried making skirts ... cheap things. It was the best I
  could get, but I never made more than ten shillings a week, buying
  my own cotton and working all day; I hardly ever got to bed till
  past twelve. I kept at it for nine months.... It was starvation for
  the children.... And then ... my employer happened--he's happened
  ever since.

At this terrible psychologic moment the police appear to drag _Falder_
back to prison for failing to report to the authorities as
ticket-of-leave man.

Completely overcome by the inexorability of his fate, _Falder_ throws
himself down the stairs, breaking his neck.

The socio-revolutionary significance of "Justice" consists not only in
the portrayal of the inhuman system which grinds the Falders and
Honeywills, but even more so in the utter helplessness of society as
expressed in the words of the Senior Clerk, _Cokeson_, "No one'll touch
him now! Never again! He's safe with gentle Jesus!"


THE PIGEON

John Galsworthy calls this play a fantasy. To me it seems cruelly real:
it demonstrates that the best human material is crushed in the fatal
mechanism of our life. "The Pigeon" also discloses to us the inadequacy
of charity, individual and organized, to cope with poverty, as well as
the absurdity of reformers and experimenters who attempt to patch up
effects while they ignore the causes.

_Christopher Wellwyn_, an artist, a man deeply in sympathy with all
human sorrow and failings, generously shares his meager means with
everyone who applies to him for help.

His daughter _Ann_ is of a more practical turn of mind. She cannot
understand that giving is as natural and necessary to her father as
light and air; indeed, the greatest joy in life.

Perhaps _Ann_ is actuated by anxiety for her father who is so utterly
"hopeless" that he would give away his "last pair of trousers." From her
point of view "people who beg are rotters": decent folk would not stoop
to begging. But _Christopher Wellwyn's_ heart is too full of humanity to
admit of such a straight-laced attitude. "We're not all the same....
One likes to be friendly. What's the use of being alive if one isn't?"

Unfortunately most people are not alive to the tragedies around them.
They are often unthinking mechanisms, mere tabulating machines, like
_Alfred Calway_, the Professor, who believes that "we're to give the
State all we can spare, to make the undeserving deserving." Or as _Sir
Hoxton_, the Justice of the Peace, who insists that "we ought to support
private organizations for helping the deserving, and damn the
undeserving." Finally there is the _Canon_ who religiously seeks the
middle road and "wants a little of both."

When _Ann_ concludes that her father is the despair of all social
reformers, she is but expressing a great truism; namely, that social
reform is a cold and bloodless thing that can find no place in the
glowing humanity of _Christopher Wellwyn_.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is Christmas Eve, the birth of Him who came to proclaim "Peace on
earth, good will to all." _Christopher Wellwyn_ is about to retire when
he is disturbed by a knock on the door.

The snow-covered, frost-pinched figure of _Guinevere Megan_ appears. She
is a flower-seller to whom _Wellwyn_ had once given his card that she
might find him in case of need. She comes to him when the rest of the
world has passed her by, forlorn and almost as dead as her violets
which no one cares to buy.

At sight of her misery _Wellwyn_ forgets his daughter's practical
admonition and his promise to her not to be "a fool." He treats the
flower-seller tenderly, makes her warm and comfortable. He has barely
time to show _Guinevere_ into his model's room, when another knock is
heard. This time it is _Ferrand_, "an alien," a globe trotter without
means,--a tramp whom _Wellwyn_ had once met in the Champs-Elyses.
Without food for days and unable to endure the cold, _Ferrand_ too comes
to the artist.

  _Ferrand._ If I had not found you, Monsieur--I would have been a
  little hole in the river to-night--I was so discouraged.... And to
  think that in a few minutes He will be born!... The world would
  reproach you for your goodness to me. Monsieur, if He himself were
  on earth now, there would be a little heap of gentlemen writing to
  the journals every day to call him sloppee sentimentalist! And what
  is veree funny, these gentlemen they would all be most strong
  Christians. But that will not trouble you. Monsieur; I saw well from
  the first that you are no Christian. You have so kind a face.

_Ferrand_ has deeper insight into the character of _Christopher Wellwyn_
than his daughter. He knows that the artist would not judge nor could
he refuse one whom misery stares in the face. Even the third visitor of
_Wellwyn_, the old cabman _Timson_, with more whisky than bread in his
stomach, receives the same generous reception as the other two.

The next day _Ann_ calls a council of war. The learned Professor,
_Alfred Calway_; the wise judge, _Sir Thomas Hoxton_; and the
professional Christian, _Edward Bertley_--the Canon--are summoned to
decide the fate of the three outcasts.

There are few scenes in dramatic literature so rich in satire, so deep
in the power of analysis as the one in which these eminent gentlemen
discuss human destiny. _Canon Bertley_ is emphatic that it is necessary
to "remove the temptation and reform the husband of the flower-seller."

  _Bertley._ Now, what is to be done?

  _Mrs. Megan._ I could get an unfurnished room, if I'd the money to
  furnish it.

  _Bertley._ Never mind the money. What I want to find in you is
  repentance.

Those who are engaged in saving souls cannot be interested in such
trifles as money matters, nor to understand the simple truth that if the
Megans did not have to bother with making a "livin'," repentance would
take care of itself.

The other two gentlemen are more worldly, since law and science cannot
experiment with such elusive things as the soul. _Professor Calway_
opines that _Timson_ is a congenital case, to be put under observation,
while _Judge Hoxton_ decides that he must be sent to prison.

  _Calway._ Is it, do you think, chronic unemployment with a vagrant
  tendency? Or would it be nearer the mark to say: Vagrancy-- ...
  Dipsomaniac?... By the look of his face, as far as one can see it, I
  should say there was a leaning towards mania. I know the treatment.

  _Hoxton._ Hundreds of these fellows before me in my time. The only
  thing is a sharp lesson!

  _Calway._ I disagree. I've seen the man; what he requires is steady
  control, and the Dobbins treatment.

  _Hoxton._ Not a bit of it! He wants one for his knob! Bracing him
  up! It's the only thing!

  _Calway._ You're moving backwards, Sir Thomas. I've told you before,
  convinced reactionaryism, in these days--The merest sense of
  continuity--a simple instinct for order--

  _Hoxton._ The only way to get order, sir, is to bring the disorderly
  up with a round turn. You people without practical experience--

  _Calway._ The question is a much wider one, Sir Thomas.

  _Hoxton._ No, sir, I repeat, if the country once commits itself to
  your views of reform, it's as good as doomed.

  _Calway._ I seem to have heard that before, Sir Thomas. And let me
  say at once that your hitty-missy cart-load of bricks rgime--

  _Hoxton._ Is a deuced sight better, sir, than your grandmotherly
  methods. What the old fellow wants is a shock! With all this
  socialistic molly-coddling, you're losing sight of the individual.

  _Calway._ You, sir, with your "devil take the hindmost," have never
  seen him.

The farce ends by each one insisting on the superiority of his own pet
theory, while misery continues to stalk white-faced through the streets.

Three months later _Ann_ determines to rescue her father from his
disreputable proclivities by removing with him to a part of the city
where their address will remain unknown to his beggar friends and
acquaintances.

While their belongings are being removed, _Canon Bertley_ relates the
trouble he had with _Mrs. Megan_.

  _Bertley._ I consulted with Calway and he advised me to try a
  certain institution. We got her safely in--excellent place; but,
  d'you know, she broke out three weeks ago. And since--I've
  heard--hopeless, I'm afraid--quite!... I'm sometimes tempted to
  believe there's nothing for some of these poor folk but to pray for
  death.

  _Wellwyn._ The Professor said he felt there was nothing for some of
  these poor devils but a lethal chamber.

What is science for if not to advise a lethal chamber? It's the easiest
way to dispose of "the unfit" and to supply learned professors with the
means of comfortable livelihood.

Yet there is _Ferrand_, the vagabond, the social outcast who has never
seen the inside of a university, propounding a philosophy which very few
professors even dream of:

  _Ferrand._ While I was on the road this time I fell ill of a fever.
  It seemed to me in my illness that I saw the truth--how I was
  wasting in this world--I would never be good for anyone--nor anyone
  for me--all would go by, and I never of it--fame, and fortune, and
  peace, even the necessities of life, ever mocking me. And I saw, so
  plain, that I should be vagabond all my days, and my days short; I
  dying in the end the death of a dog. I saw it all in my fever--clear
  as that flame--there was nothing for us others, but the herb of
  death. And so I wished to die. I told no one of my fever. I lay out
  on the ground--it was verree cold. But they would not let me die on
  the roads of their parishes--They took me to an Institution. I
  looked in their eyes while I lay there, and I saw more clear than
  the blue heaven that they thought it best that I should die,
  although they would not let me. Then naturally my spirit rose, and I
  said: "So much the worse for you. I will live a little more." One is
  made like that! Life is sweet. That little girl you had here,
  Monsieur--in her too there is something of wild savage. She must
  have joy of life. I have seen her since I came back. She has
  embraced the life of joy. It is not quite the same thing. She is
  lost, Monsieur, as a stone that sinks in water. I can see, if she
  cannot.... For the great part of mankind, to see anything--is fatal.
  No, Monsieur. To be so near to death has done me good; I shall not
  lack courage any more till the wind blows on my grave. Since I saw
  you, Monsieur, I have been in three Institutions. They are
  palaces.... One little thing they lack--those palaces. It is
  understanding of the 'uman heart. In them tame birds pluck wild
  birds naked. Ah! Monsieur, I am loafer, waster--what you like--for
  all that, poverty is my only crime. If I were rich, should I not be
  simply verree original, 'ighly respected, with soul above commerce,
  traveling to see the world? And that young girl, would she not be
  "that charming ladee," "veree chic, you know!" And the old
  Tims--good old-fashioned gentleman--drinking his liquor well. Eh!
  bien--what are we now? Dark beasts, despised by all. That is life,
  Monsieur. Monsieur, it is just that. You understand. When we are
  with you we feel something--here--[he touches his heart] If I had
  one prayer to make, it would be, "Good God, give me to understand!"
  Those sirs, with their theories, they can clean our skins and chain
  our 'abits--that soothes for them the sthetic sense; it gives them
  too their good little importance. But our spirits they cannot touch,
  for they nevare understand. Without that, Monsieur, all is dry as a
  parched skin of orange. Monsieur, of their industry I say nothing.
  They do a good work while they attend with their theories to the
  sick and the tame old, and the good unfortunate deserving. Above all
  to the little children. But, Monsieur, when all is done, there are
  always us hopeless ones. What can they do with me, Monsieur, with
  that girl, or with that old man? Ah! Monsieur, we too, 'ave our
  qualities, we others--it wants you courage to undertake a career
  like mine, or like that young girl's. We wild ones--we know a
  thousand times more of life than ever will those sirs. They waste
  their time trying to make rooks white. Be kind to us if you will, or
  let us alone like Mees Ann, but do not try to change our skins.
  Leave us to live, or leave us to die when we like in the free air.
  If you do not wish of us, you have but to shut your pockets and your
  doors--we shall die the faster.... If you cannot, how is it our
  fault? The harm we do to others--is it so much? If I am criminal,
  dangerous--shut me up! I would not pity myself--nevare. But we in
  whom something moves--like that flame, Monsieur, that cannot keep
  still--we others--we are not many--that must have motion in our
  lives, do not let them make us prisoners, with their theories,
  because we are not like them--it is life itself they would
  enclose!... The good God made me so that I would rather walk a whole
  month of nights, hungry, with the stars, than sit one single day
  making round business on an office stool! It is not to my advantage.
  I cannot help it that I am a vagabond. What would you have? It is
  stronger than me. Monsieur, I say to you things I have never said.
  Monsieur! Are you really English? The English are so civilized.

Truly the English are highly "civilized"; else it would be impossible to
explain why of all the nations on earth, the Anglo-Saxons should be the
only ones to punish attempts at suicide.

Society makes no provision whatever for the Timsons, the Ferrands and
Mrs. Megans. It has closed the door in their face, denying them a seat
at the table of life. Yet when _Guinevere Megan_ attempts to drown
herself, a benevolent constable drags her out and a Christian Judge
sends her to the workhouse.

  _Constable._ Well, sir, we can't get over the facts, can we?... You
  know what soocide amounts to--it's an awkward job.

  _Wellwyn._ But look here, Constable, as a reasonable man--This poor
  wretched little girl--_you_ know what that life means better than
  anyone! Why! It's to her credit to try and jump out of it!

  _Constable._ Can't neglect me duty, sir; that's impossible.

  _Wellwyn._ Of all the d----d topsy-turvy--! Not a soul in the world
  wants her alive--and now she is to be prosecuted for trying to go
  where everyone wishes her.

Is it necessary to dwell on the revolutionary significance of this cruel
reality? It is so all-embracing in its sweep, so penetrating of the
topsy-turviness of our civilization, with all its cant and artifice, so
powerful in its condemnation of our cheap theories and cold
institutionalism which freezes the soul and destroys the best and finest
in our being. The Wellwyns, Ferrands, and Megans are the stuff out of
which a real humanity might be fashioned. They feel the needs of their
fellows, and whatever is in their power to give, they give as nature
does, unreservedly. But the Hoxtons, Calways and Bertleys have turned
the world into a dismal prison and mankind into monotonous, gray, dull
shadows.

The professors, judges, and preachers cannot meet the situation. Neither
can _Wellwyn_, to be sure. And yet his very understanding of the
differentiation of human nature, and his sympathy with the inevitable
reaction of conditions upon it, bring the Wellwyns much closer to the
solution of our evils than all the Hoxtons, Calways and Bertleys put
together. This deep conception of social factors is in itself perhaps
the most significant lesson taught in "The Pigeon."




STANLEY HOUGHTON


HINDLE WAKES

In Stanley Houghton, who died last year, the drama lost a talented and
brave artist. Brave, because he had the courage to touch one of the most
sensitive spots of Puritanism--woman's virtue. Whatever else one may
criticise or attack, the sacredness of virtue must remain untouched. It
is the last fetich which even so-called liberal-minded people refuse to
destroy.

To be sure, the attitude towards this holy of holies has of late years
undergone a considerable change. It is beginning to be felt in
ever-growing circles that love is its own justification, requiring no
sanction of either religion or law. The revolutionary idea, however,
that woman may, even as man, follow the urge of her nature, has never
before been so sincerely and radically expressed.

The message of "Hindle Wakes" is therefore of inestimable value,
inasmuch as it dispels the fog of the silly sentimentalism and
disgusting bombast that declares woman a thing apart from nature--one
who neither does nor must crave the joys of life permissible to man.

Hindle is a small weaving town, symbolically representing the
wakefulness of every small community to the shortcomings of its
neighbors.

_Christopher Hawthorne_ and _Nathaniel Jeffcote_ had begun life together
as lads in the cotton mill. But while _Christopher_ was always a timid
and shrinking boy, _Nathaniel_ was aggressive and ambitious. When the
play opens, _Christopher_, though an old man, is still a poor weaver;
_Nathaniel_, on the contrary, has reached the top of financial and
social success. He is the owner of the biggest mill; is wealthy,
influential, and withal a man of power. For _Nathaniel Jeffcote_ always
loved power and social approval. Speaking of the motor he bought for his
only son _Alan_, he tells his wife:

  _Jeffcote._ Why did I buy a motor-car? Not because I wanted to go
  motoring. I hate it. I bought it so that people could see Alan
  driving about in it, and say, "There's Jeffcote's lad in his new
  car. It cost five hundred quid."

However, _Nathaniel_ is a "square man," and when facing an emergency,
not chary with justice and always quick to decide in its favor.

The _Jeffcotes_ center all their hopes on _Alan_, their only child, who
is to inherit their fortune and business. _Alan_ is engaged to
_Beatrice_, the lovely, sweet daughter of _Sir Timothy Farrar_, and all
is joyous at the Jeffcotes'.

Down in the valley of Hindle live the _Hawthornes_, humble and content,
as behooves God-fearing workers. They too have ambitions in behalf of
their daughter _Fanny_, strong, willful and self-reliant,--qualities
molded in the hard grind of _Jeffcote's_ mill, where she had begun work
as a tot.

During the "bank holiday" _Fanny_ with her chum _Mary_ goes to a
neighboring town for an outing. There they meet two young men, _Alan
Jeffcote_ and his friend. _Fanny_ departs with _Alan_, and they spend a
glorious time together. On the way home _Mary_ is drowned. As a result
of the accident the _Hawthornes_ learn that their daughter had not spent
her vacation with _Mary_. When _Fanny_ returns, they question her, and
though she at first refuses to give an account of herself, they soon
discover that the girl had passed the time with a man,--young _Alan
Jeffcote_. Her parents are naturally horrified, and decide to force the
_Jeffcotes_ to have _Alan_ marry _Fanny_.

In the old mother of _Fanny_ the author has succeeded in giving a most
splendid characterization of the born drudge, hardened by her long
struggle with poverty, and grown shrewd in the ways of the world. She
knows her daughter so little, however, that she believes _Fanny_ had
schemed the affair with _Alan_ in the hope that she might force him to
marry her. In her imagination the old woman already sees _Fanny_ as the
mistress of the Jeffcote estate. She persuades her husband to go
immediately to the _Jeffcotes_, and though it is very late at night, the
old man is forced to start out on his disagreeable errand.

_Jeffcote_, a man of integrity, is much shocked at the news brought to
him by old _Hawthorne_. Nevertheless he will not countenance the wrong.

  _Jeffcote._ I'll see you're treated right. Do you hear?

  _Christopher._ I can't ask for more than that.

  _Jeffcote._ I'll see you're treated right.

Young _Alan_ had never known responsibility. Why should he, with so much
wealth awaiting him? When confronted by his father and told that he must
marry _Fanny_, he fights hard against it. It may be said, in justice to
_Alan_, that he really loves his betrothed, _Beatrice_, though such a
circumstance has never deterred the Alans from having a lark with
another girl.

The young man resents his father's command to marry the mill girl. But
when even _Beatrice_ insists that he belongs to _Fanny_, _Alan_
unwillingly consents. _Beatrice_, a devout Christian, believes in
renunciation.

  _Beatrice._ I do need you, Alan. So much that nothing on earth could
  make me break off our engagement, if I felt that it was at all
  possible to let it go on. But it isn't. It's impossible.

  _Alan._ And you want me to marry Fanny?

  _Beatrice._ Yes. Oh, Alan! can't you see what a splendid sacrifice
  you have it in your power to make? Not only to do the right thing,
  but to give up so much in order to do it.

The _Jeffcotes_ and the _Hawthornes_ gather to arrange the marriage of
their children. It does not occur to them to consult _Fanny_ in the
matter. Much to their consternation, _Fanny_ refuses to abide by the
decision of the family council.

  _Fanny._ It's very good of you. You'll hire the parson and get the
  license and make all the arrangements on your own without consulting
  me, and I shall have nothing to do save turn up meek as a lamb at
  the church or registry office or whatever it is.... That's just
  where you make the mistake. I don't want to marry Alan.... I mean
  what I say, and I'll trouble you to talk to me without swearing at
  me. I'm not one of the family yet.

The dismayed parents, and even _Alan_, plead with her and threaten. But
_Fanny_ is obdurate. At last _Alan_ asks to be left alone with her,
confident that he can persuade the girl.

  _Alan._ Look here, Fanny, what's all this nonsense about?... Why
  won't you marry me?

  _Fanny._ You can't understand a girl not jumping at you when she
  gets the chance, can you?... How is it that you aren't going to
  marry Beatrice Farrar? Weren't you fond of her?

  _Alan._ Very.... I gave her up because my father made me.

  _Fanny._ Made you? Good Lord, a chap of your age!

  _Alan._ My father's a man who will have his own way.... He can keep
  me short of brass.

  _Fanny._ Earn some brass.

  _Alan._ I can earn some brass, but it will mean hard work and it'll
  take time. And, after all, I shan't earn anything like what I get
  now.

  _Fanny._ Then all you want to wed me for is what you'll get with me?
  I'm to be given away with a pound of tea, as it were?

  _Alan._ I know why you won't marry me.... You're doing it for my
  sake.

  _Fanny._ Don't you kid yourself, my lad! It isn't because I'm afraid
  of spoiling your life that I'm refusing you, but because I'm afraid
  of spoiling mine! That didn't occur to you?

  _Alan._ Look here, Fanny, I promise you I'll treat you fair all the
  time. You don't need to fear that folk'll look down on you. We shall
  have too much money for that.

  _Fanny._ I can manage all right on twenty-five bob a week.

  _Alan._ I'm going to fall between two stools. It's all up with
  Beatrice, of course. And if you won't have me I shall have parted
  from her to no purpose; besides getting kicked out of the house by
  my father, more than likely! You said you were fond of me once, but
  it hasn't taken you long to alter.

  _Fanny._ All women aren't built alike. Beatrice is religious.
  She'll be sorry for you. I was fond of you in a way.

  _Alan._ But you didn't ever really love me?

  _Fanny._ Love you? Good heavens, of course not! Why on earth should
  I love you? You were just someone to have a bit of fun with. You
  were an amusement--a lark. How much more did you care for me?

  _Alan._ But it's not the same. I'm a man.

  _Fanny._ You're a man, and I was your little fancy. Well, I'm a
  woman, and you were my little fancy. You wouldn't prevent a woman
  enjoying herself as well as a man, if she takes it into her head?

  _Alan._ But do you mean to say that you didn't care any more for me
  than a fellow cares for any girl he happens to pick up?

  _Fanny._ Yes. Are you shocked?

  _Alan._ It's a bit thick; it is really!

  _Fanny._ You're a beauty to talk!

  _Alan._ It sounds so jolly immoral. I never thought of a girl
  looking on a chap just like that! I made sure you wanted to marry me
  if you got the chance.

  _Fanny._ No fear! You're not good enough for me. The chap Fanny
  Hawthorn weds has got to be made of different stuff from you, my
  lad. _My_ husband, if ever I have one, will be a man, not a fellow
  who'll throw over his girl at his father's bidding! Strikes me the
  sons of these rich manufacturers are all much alike. They seem a bit
  weak in the upper story. It's their father's brass that's too much
  for them, happen!... You've no call to be afraid. I'm not going to
  disgrace you. But so long as I've to live my own life I don't see
  why I shouldn't choose what it's to be.

Unheard of, is it not, that a Fanny should refuse to be made a "good
woman," and that she should dare demand the right to live in her own
way? It has always been considered the most wonderful event in the life
of a girl if a young man of wealth, of position, of station came into
her life and said, "I will take you as my wife until death do us part."

But a new type of girlhood is in the making. We are developing the
Fannies who learn in the school of life, the hardest, the crudest and at
the same time the most vital and instructive school. Why should _Fanny_
marry a young man in order to become "good," any more than that he
should marry her in order to become good? Is it not because we have gone
on for centuries believing that woman's value, her integrity and
position in society center about her sex and consist only in her virtue,
and that all other usefulness weighs naught in the balance against her
"purity"? If she dare express her sex as the Fannies do, we deny her
individual and social worth, and stamp her fallen.

The past of a man is never questioned: no one inquires how many Fannies
have been in his life. Yet man has the impudence to expect the Fannies
to abstain till he is ready to bestow on them his name.

"Hindle Wakes" is a much needed and important social lesson,--not
because it necessarily involves the idea that every girl must have sex
experience before she meets the man she loves, but rather that she has
the right to satisfy, if she so chooses, her emotional and sex demands
like any other need of her mind and body. When the Fannies become
conscious of that right, the relation of the sexes will lose the shallow
romanticism and artificial exaggeration that mystery has surrounded it
with, and assume a wholesome, natural, and therefore healthy and normal
expression.




GITHA SOWERBY


RUTHERFORD AND SON

The women's rights women who claim for their sex the most wonderful
things in the way of creative achievement, will find it difficult to
explain the fact that until the author of "Rutherford and Son" made her
appearance, no country had produced a single woman dramatist of note.

That is the more remarkable because woman has since time immemorial been
a leading figure in histrionic art. Rachel, Sarah Bernhardt, Eleanore
Duse, and scores of others have had few male peers.

It can hardly be that woman is merely a reproducer and not a creator. We
have but to recall such creative artists as Charlotte and Emily Bront,
George Sand, George Eliot, Mary Wollstonecraft, Marie Bashkirtshev, Rosa
Bonheur, Sophia Kovalevskaya and a host of others, to appreciate that
woman has been a creative factor in literature, art and science. Not so
in the drama, so far the stronghold exclusively of men.

It is therefore an event for a woman to come to the fore who possesses
such dramatic power, realistic grasp and artistic penetration as
evidenced by Githa Sowerby.

The circumstance is the more remarkable because Githa Sowerby is,
according to her publishers, barely out of her teens; and though she be
a genius, her exceptional maturity is a phenomenon rarely observed.
Generally maturity comes only with experience and suffering. No one who
has not felt the crushing weight of the Rutherford atmosphere could have
painted such a vivid and life-like picture.

The basic theme in "Rutherford and Son" is not novel. Turgenev, Ibsen
and such lesser artists as Sudermann and Stanley Houghton have dealt
with it: the chasm between the old and the young,--the tragic struggle
of parents against their children, the one frantically holding on, the
other recklessly letting go. But "Rutherford and Son" is more than that.
It is a picture of the paralyzing effect of tradition and
institutionalism on all human life, growth, and change.

_John Rutherford_, the owner of the firm "Rutherford and Son," is
possessed by the phantom of the past--the thing handed down to him by
his father and which he must pass on to his son with undiminished
luster; the thing that has turned his soul to iron and his heart to
stone; the thing for the sake of which he has never known joy and
because of which no one else must know joy,--"Rutherford and Son."

The crushing weight of this inexorable monster on Rutherford and his
children is significantly summed up by young John:

  _John._ Have you ever heard of Moloch? No.... Well, Moloch was a
  sort of a God ... some time ago, you know, before Dick and his kind
  came along. They built his image with an ugly head ten times the
  size of a real head, with great wheels instead of legs, and set him
  up in the middle of a great dirty town. And they thought him a very
  important person indeed, and made sacrifices to him ... human
  sacrifices ... to keep him going, you know. Out of every family they
  set aside one child to be an offering to him when it was big enough,
  and at last it became a sort of honor to be dedicated in this way,
  so much so, that the victims came themselves gladly to be crushed
  out of life under the great wheels. That was Moloch.

  _Janet._ Dedicated--we are dedicated--all of us--to Rutherfords'.

Not only the Rutherford children, their withered _Aunt Ann_, and old
_Rutherford_ himself, but even _Martin_, the faithful servant in the
employ of the Rutherfords for twenty-five years, is "dedicated," and
when he ceases to be of use to their Moloch, he is turned into a thief
and then cast off, even as _Janet_ and _John_.

Not love for _John_, his oldest son, or sympathy with the latter's wife
and child induces old _Rutherford_ to forgive his son's marriage with a
mere shop-girl, but because he needs _John_ to serve the house of
Rutherford. The one inexorable purpose, always and ever!

His second son _Richard_, who is in the ministry, and "of no use" to old
_Rutherford's_ God of stone, receives the loving assurance: "You were no
good for my purpose, and there's the end; for the matter o' that, you
might just as well never ha' been born."

For that matter, his daughter _Janet_ might also never have been born,
except that she was "good enough" to look after her father's house,
serve him, even helping take off his boots, and submitting without a
murmur to the loveless, dismal life in the Rutherford home. Her father
has sternly kept every suitor away, "because no one in Grantley's good
enough for us." _Janet_ has become faded, sour and miserable with
yearning for love, for sunshine and warmth, and when she at last dares
to partake of it secretly with her father's trusted man _Martin_, old
_Rutherford_ sets his iron heel upon her love, and drags it through the
mud till it lies dead.

Again, when he faces the spirit of rebellion in his son _John_,
_Rutherford_ crushes it without the slightest hesitation in behalf of
his one obsession, his one God--the House of Rutherford.

_John_ has made an invention which holds great possibilities. By means
of it he hopes to shake of the deadly grip of the Rutherfords'. He wants
to become a free man and mold a new life for himself, for his wife and
child. He knows his father will not credit the value of his invention.
He dare not approach him: the Rutherford children have been held in
dread of their parent too long.

_John_ turns to _Martin_, the faithful servant, the only one in the
confidence of _Rutherford_. _John_ feels himself safe with _Martin_. But
he does not know that _Martin_, too, is dedicated to Moloch, broken by
his twenty-five years of service, left without will, without purpose
outside of the Rutherfords'.

_Martin_ tries to enlist _Rutherford's_ interest in behalf of _John_.
But the old man decides that _John_ must turn over his invention to the
House of Rutherford.

  _Rutherford._ What's your receipt?

  _John._ I want to know where I stand.... I want my price.

  _Rutherford._ Your price--your price? Damn your impudence, sir....
  So that's your line, is it?... This is what I get for all I've done
  for you.... This is the result of the schooling I gave you. I've
  toiled and sweated to give you a name you'd be proud to own--worked
  early and late, toiled like a dog when other men were taking their
  ease--plotted and planned to get my chance, taken it and held it
  when it come till I could ha' burst with the struggle. Sell! You
  talk o' selling to me, when everything you'll ever make couldn't pay
  back the life I've given to you!

  _John._ Oh, I know, I know. I've been both for five years. Only I've
  had no salary.

  _Rutherford._ You've been put to learn your business like any other
  young fellow. I began at the bottom--you've got to do the same....
  Your father has lived here, and your grandfather before you. It's
  your inheritance--can't you realize that?--what you've got to come
  to when I'm under ground. We've made it for you, stone by stone,
  penny by penny, fighting through thick and thin for close on a
  hundred years.... It's what you've got to do--or starve. You're my
  son--you've got to come after me.

_Janet_ knows her father better than _John_; she knows that "no one ever
stands out against father for long--or else they get so knocked about,
they don't matter any more." _Janet_ knows, and when the moment arrives
that brings her father's blow upon her head, it does not come as a
surprise to her. When old _Rutherford_ discovers her relation with
_Martin_, his indignation is as characteristic of the man as everything
else in his life. It is not outraged morality or a father's love. It is
always and forever the House of Rutherford. Moreover, the discovery of
the affair between his daughter and his workman comes at a psychologic
moment: _Rutherford_ is determined to get hold of _John's_
invention--for the Rutherfords, of course--and now that _Martin_ has
broken faith with his master, his offense serves an easy pretext for
_Rutherford_ to break faith with _Martin_. He calls the old servant to
his office and demands the receipt of _John's_ invention, entrusted to
_Martin_. On the latter's refusal to betray _John_, the master plays on
the man's loyalty to the Rutherfords.

  _Rutherford._ Rutherfords' is going down--down. I got to pull her
  up, somehow. There's one way out.... Mr. John's made this metal--a
  thing, I take your word for it, that's worth a fortune. And we're
  going to sit by and watch him fooling it away--selling it for a song
  to Miles or Jarvis, that we could break to-morrow if we had half a
  chance.... You've got but to put your hand in your pocket to save
  the place and you don't do it. You're with them--you're with the
  money-grubbing little souls that can't see beyond the next shilling
  they put in their pockets.... When men steal, Martin, they do it to
  gain something. If I steal this, what'll I gain by it? If I make
  money, what'll I buy with it? Pleasure, maybe? Children to come
  after me--glad o' what I done? Tell me anything in the wide world
  that'd bring me joy, and I'll swear to you never to touch it.... If
  you give it to me what'll you gain by it? Not a farthing shall you
  ever have from me--no more than I get myself.

  _Martin._ And what will Mr. John get for it?

  _Rutherford._ Rutherfords'--when I'm gone. He'll thank you in ten
  years--he'll come to laugh at himself--him and his price. He'll see
  the Big Thing one day, mebbe, like what I've done. He'll see that it
  was no more his than 'twas yours to give nor mine to take.... It's
  Rutherfords'.... Will you give it to me?

  _Martin._ I take shame to be doing it now.... He worked it out along
  o' me. Every time it changed he come running to show me like a bairn
  wi' a new toy.

  _Rutherford._ It's for Rutherfords'....

Rutherfords' ruthlessly marches on. If the Rutherford purpose does not
shrink from corrupting its most trusted servant, it surely will not bend
before a daughter who has dared, even once in her life, to assert
herself.

  _Rutherford._ How far's it gone?

  _Janet._ Right at first--I made up my mind that if you ever found
  out, I'd go right away, to put things straight. He wanted to tell
  you at the first. But I knew that it would be no use.... It was _I_
  said not to tell you.

  _Rutherford._ Martin ... that I trusted as I trust myself.

  _Janet._ You haven't turned him away--you couldn't do that!

  _Rutherford._ That's my business.

  _Janet._ You couldn't do that ... not Martin....

  _Rutherford._ Leave it--leave it ... Martin's my servant, that I pay
  wages to. I made a name for my children--a name respected in all the
  countryside--and you go with a workingman.... To-morrow you leave
  my house. D'ye understand? I'll have no light ways under my roof. No
  one shall say I winked at it. You can bide the night. To-morrow when
  I come in I'm to find ye gone.... Your name shan't be spoken in my
  house ... never again.

  _Janet._ Oh, you've no pity.... I was thirty-six. Gone sour.
  Nobody'd ever come after me. Not even when I was young. You took
  care o' that. Half of my life was gone, well-nigh all of it that
  mattered.... Martin loves me honest. Don't you come near! Don't you
  touch that!... You think that I'm sorry you've found out--you think
  you've done for me when you use shameful words on me and turn me out
  o' your house. You've let me out o' jail! Whatever happens to me
  now, I shan't go on living as I lived here. Whatever Martin's done,
  he's taken me from you. You've ruined my life, you with your getting
  on. I've loved in wretchedness, all the joy I ever had made wicked
  by the fear o' you.... Who are you? Who are you? A man--a man that
  takes power to himself, power to gather people to him and use them
  as he wills--- a man that'd take the blood of life itself and put it
  into the Works--into Rutherfords'. And what ha' you got by it--what?
  You've got Dick, that you've bullied till he's a fool--John, that's
  waiting for the time when he can sell what you've done--and you got
  me--me to take your boots off at night--to well-nigh wish you dead
  when I had to touch you.... Now!... Now you know it!

But for the great love in her heart, _Janet_ could not have found
courage to face her father as she did. But love gives strength; it
instills hope and faith, and kindles anew the fires of life. Why, then,
should it not be strong enough to break the fetters of even
Rutherfords'? Such a love only those famished for affection and warmth
can feel, and _Janet_ was famished for life.

  _Janet._ I had a dream--a dream that I was in a place wi' flowers,
  in the summer-time, white and thick like they never grow on the
  moor--but it was the moor--a place near Martin's cottage. And I
  dreamt that he came to me with the look he had when I was a little
  lass, with his head up and the lie gone out of his eyes. All the
  time I knew I was on my bed in my room here--but it was as if
  sweetness poured into me, spreading and covering me like the water
  in the tarn when the rains are heavy in the fells.... That's why I
  dreamt of him so last night. It was as if all that was best in me
  was in that dream--what I was as a bairn and what I'm going to be.
  He couldn't help but love me. It was a message--I couldn't have
  thought of it by myself. It's something that's come to me--here
  (_putting her hands on her breast_). Part of me!

All that lay dormant in _Janet_ now turns into glowing fire at the touch
of Spring. But in _Martin_ life has been marred, strangled by the iron
hand of Rutherfords'.

  _Martin._ Turned away I am, sure enough. Twenty-five years. And in a
  minute it's broke. Wi' two words.

  _Janet._ You say that now because your heart's cold with the
  trouble. But it'll warm again--it'll warm again. I'll warm it out of
  my own heart, Martin--my heart that can't be made cold.

  _Martin._ I'd rather ha' died than he turn me away. I'd ha' lost
  everything in the world to know that I was true to 'm, like I was
  till you looked at me wi' the love in your face. It was a great love
  ye gave me--you in your grand hoose wi' your delicate ways. But it's
  broke me.

  _Janet._ But--it's just the same with us. Just the same as ever it
  was.

  _Martin._ Aye. But there's no mending, wi' the likes o' him.

  _Janet._ What's there to mend? What's there to mend except what's
  bound you like a slave all the years? You're free--free for the
  first time since you were a lad mebbe. We'll begin again. We'll be
  happy--happy. You and me, free in the world! All the time that's
  been 'll be just like a dream that's past, a waiting time afore we
  found each other--the long winter afore the flowers come out white
  and thick on the moors--

  _Martin._ Twenty-five years ago he took me.... It's too long to
  change.... I'll never do his work no more; but it's like as if he'd
  be my master just the same--till I die--

  _Janet._ Listen, Martin. Listen to me. You've worked all your life
  for him, ever since you were a little lad. Early and late you've
  been at the Works--working--working--for him.

  _Martin._ Gladly!

  _Janet._ Now and then he give you a kind word--when you were wearied
  out mebbe--and your thoughts might ha' turned to what other men's
  lives were, wi' time for rest and pleasure. You didn't see through
  him, you wi' your big heart, Martin. You were too near to see, like
  I was till Mary came. You worked gladly maybe--but all the time your
  life was going into Rutherfords'--your manhood into the place he's
  built. He's had you, Martin,--like he's had me, and all of us. We
  used to say he was hard and ill-tempered. Bad to do with in the
  house--we fell silent when he came in--we couldn't see for the
  little things,--we couldn't see the years passing because of the
  days. And all the time it was our lives he was taking bit by
  bit--our lives that we'll never get back.... Now's our chance at
  last! He's turned us both away, me as well as you. We two he's sent
  out into the world together. Free. He's done it himself of his own
  will. It's ours to take, Martin--our happiness. We'll get it in
  spite of him. He'd kill it if he could.

The cruelty of it, that the Rutherfords never kill with one blow: never
so merciful are they. In their ruthless march they strangle inch by
inch, shed the blood of life drop by drop, until they have broken the
very spirit of man and made him as helpless and pitiful as _Martin_,--a
trembling leaf tossed about by the winds.

A picture of such stirring social and human importance that no one,
except he who has reached the stage of _Martin_, can escape its effect.
Yet even more significant is the inevitability of the doom of the
Rutherfords as embodied in the wisdom of _Mary_, _John's_ wife.

When her husband steals his father's money--a very small part indeed
compared with what the father had stolen from him--he leaves the hateful
place and _Mary_ remains to face the master. For the sake of her child
she strikes a bargain with _Rutherford_.

  _Mary._ A bargain is where one person has something to sell that
  another wants to buy. There's no love in it--only money--money that
  pays for life. I've got something to sell that you want to buy.

  _Rutherford._ What's that?

  _Mary._ My son. You've lost everything you've had in the world.
  John's gone--and Richard--and Janet. They won't come back. You're
  alone now and getting old, with no one to come after you. When you
  die Rutherfords' will be sold--somebody'll buy it and give it a new
  name perhaps, and no one will even remember that you made it.
  That'll be the end of all your work. Just--nothing. You've thought
  of that.... It's for my boy. I want--a chance of life for him--his
  place in the world. John can't give him that, because he's made so.
  If I went to London and worked my hardest I'd get twenty-five
  shillings a week. We've failed. From you I can get when I want for
  my boy. I want--all the good common things: a good house, good
  food, warmth. He's a delicate little thing now, but he'll grow
  strong like other children.... Give me what I ask, and in return
  I'll give you--him. On one condition. I'm to stay on here. I won't
  trouble you--you needn't speak to me or see me unless you want to.
  For ten years he's to be absolutely mine, to do what I like with.
  You mustn't interfere--you mustn't tell him to do things or frighten
  him. He's mine for ten years more.

  _Rutherford._ And after that?

  _Mary._ He'll be yours.

  _Rutherford._ To train up. For Rutherfords'?

  _Mary._ Yes.

  _Rutherford._ After all? After Dick, that I've bullied till he's a
  fool? John, that's wished me dead?

  _Mary._ In ten years you'll be an old man; you won't be able to make
  people afraid of you any more.

When I saw the masterly presentation of the play on the stage, _Mary's_
bargain looked unreal and incongruous. It seemed impossible to me that a
mother who really loves her child should want it to be in any way
connected with the Rutherfords'. But after repeatedly rereading the
play, I was convinced by _Mary's_ simple statement: "In ten years you'll
be an old man; you won't be able to make people afraid of you any more."
Most deeply true. The Rutherfords are bound by time, by the eternal
forces of change. Their influence on human life is indeed terrible.
Notwithstanding it all, however, they are fighting a losing game. They
are growing old, already too old to make anyone afraid. Change and
innovation are marching on, and the Rutherfords must make place for the
young generation knocking at the gates.




THE IRISH DRAMA




WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS


Most Americans know about the Irish people only that they are not averse
to drink, and that they make brutal policemen and corrupt politicians.
But those who are familiar with the revolutionary movements of the past
are aware of the fortitude and courage, aye, of the heroism of the
Irish, manifested during their uprisings, and especially in the Fenian
movement--the people's revolt against political despotism and land
robbery.

And though for years Ireland has contributed to the very worst features
of American life, those interested in the fate of its people did not
despair; they knew that the spirit of unrest in Ireland was not
appeased, and that it would make itself felt again in no uncertain form.

The cultural and rebellious awakening in that country within the last
twenty-five years once more proves that neither God nor King can for
long suppress the manifestation of the latent possibilities of a people.
The possibilities of the Irish must indeed be great if they could
inspire the rich humor of a Lady Gregory, the deep symbolism of a Yeats,
the poetic fancy of a Synge, and the rebellion of a Robinson and Murray.

Only a people unspoiled by the dulling hand of civilization and free
from artifice can retain such simplicity of faith and remain so
imaginative, so full of fancy and dreams, wild and fiery, which have
kindled the creative spark in the Irish dramatists of our time. It is
true that the work of only the younger element among them is of social
significance, yet all of them have rendered their people and the rest of
the world a cultural service of no mean value. William Butler Yeats is
among the latter, together with Synge and Lady Gregory; his art, though
deep in human appeal, has no bearing on the pressing questions of our
time. Mr. Yeats himself would repudiate any implication of a social
character, as he considers such dramas too "topical" and therefore "half
bad" plays. In view of this attitude, it is difficult to reconcile his
standard of true art with the repertoire of the Abbey Theater, which
consists mainly of social dramas. Still more difficult is it to account
for his work, "Where There is Nothing," which is no less social in its
philosophy and tendency than Ibsen's "Brand."


WHERE THERE IS NOTHING

"Where There Is Nothing" is as true an interpretation of the philosophy
of Anarchism as could be given by its best exponents. I say this not out
of any wish to tag Mr. Yeats, but because the ideal of _Paul Ruttledge_,
the hero of the play, is nothing less than Anarchism applied to everyday
life.

_Paul Ruttledge_, a man of wealth, comes to the conclusion, after a long
process of development and growth, that riches are wrong, and that the
life of the propertied is artificial, useless and inane.

  _Paul Ruttledge._ When I hear these people talking I always hear
  some organized or vested interest chirp or quack, as it does in the
  newspapers. I would like to have great iron claws, and to put them
  about the pillars, and to pull and pull till everything fell into
  pieces.... Sometimes I dream I am pulling down my own house, and
  sometimes it is the whole world that I am pulling down.... When
  everything was pulled down we would have more room to get drunk in,
  to drink contentedly out of the cup of life, out of the drunken cup
  of life.

He decides to give up his position and wealth and cast his lot in with
the tinkers--an element we in America know as "hoboes," men who tramp
the highways making their living as they go about, mending kettles and
pots, earning an honest penny without obligation or responsibility to
anyone. _Paul Ruttledge_ longs for the freedom of the road,--to sleep
under the open sky, to count the stars, to be free. He throws off all
artificial restraint and is received with open arms by the tinkers. To
identify himself more closely with their life, he marries a tinker's
daughter--not according to the rites of State or Church, but in true
tinker fashion--in freedom--bound only by the promise to be faithful and
"not hurt each other."

In honor of the occasion, _Paul_ tenders to his comrades and the people
of the neighborhood a grand feast, full of the spirit of life's joy,--an
outpouring of gladness that lasts a whole week.

_Paul's_ brother, his friends, and the authorities are incensed over the
carousal. They demand that he terminate the "drunken orgy."

  _Mr. Joyce._ This is a disgraceful business, Paul; the whole
  countryside is demoralized. There is not a man who has come to
  sensible years who is not drunk.

  _Mr. Dowler._ This is a flagrant violation of all propriety. Society
  is shaken to its roots. My own servants have been led astray by the
  free drinks that are being given in the village. My butler, who has
  been with me for seven years, has not been seen for the last two
  days.

  _Mr. Algie._ I endorse his sentiments completely. There has not been
  a stroke of work done for the last week. The hay is lying in ridges
  where it has been cut, there is not a man to be found to water the
  cattle. It is impossible to get as much as a horse shod in the
  village.

  _Paul Ruttledge._ I think _you_ have something to say, Colonel
  Lawley?

  _Colonel Lawley._ I have undoubtedly. I want to know when law and
  order are to be restablished. The police have been quite unable to
  cope with the disorder. Some of them have themselves got drunk. If
  my advice had been taken the military would have been called in.

  _Mr. Green._ The military are not indispensable on occasions like
  the present. There are plenty of police coming now. We have wired to
  Dublin for them, they will be here by the four o'clock train.

  _Paul Ruttledge._ But you have not told me what you have come here
  for. Is there anything I can do for you?

  _Mr. Green._ We have come to request you to go to the public-houses,
  to stop the free drinks, to send the people back to their work. As
  for those tinkers, the law will deal with them when the police
  arrive.

  _Paul Ruttledge._ I wanted to give a little pleasure to my
  fellow-creatures.

  _Mr. Dowler._ This seems rather a low form of pleasure.

  _Paul Ruttledge._ I daresay it seems to you a little violent. But
  the poor have very few hours in which to enjoy themselves; they must
  take their pleasure raw; they haven't the time to cook it. Have we
  not tried sobriety? Do you like it? I found it very dull.... Think
  what it is to them to have their imagination like a blazing
  tar-barrel for a whole week. Work could never bring them such
  blessedness as that.

  _Mr. Dowler._ Everyone knows there is no more valuable blessing than
  work.

_Paul Ruttledge_ decides to put his visitors "on trial," to let them see
themselves as they are in all their hypocrisy, all their corruption.

He charges the military man, _Colonel Lawley_, with calling himself a
Christian, yet following the business of man-killing. The Colonel is
forced to admit that he had ordered his men to fight in a war, of the
justice of which they knew nothing, or did not believe in, and yet it is
"the doctrine of your Christian church, of your Catholic church, that he
who fights in an unjust war, knowing it to be unjust, loses his own
soul." Of the rich man _Dowler_, _Paul Ruttledge_ demands whether he
could pass through the inside of a finger ring, and on _Paul's_
attention being called by one of the tinkers to the fine coat of _Mr.
Dowler_, he tells him to help himself to it. Threatened by _Mr. Green_,
the spokesman of the law, with encouraging robbery, _Ruttledge_
admonishes him.

  _Ruttledge._ Remember the commandment, "Give to him that asketh
  thee"; and the hard commandment goes even farther, "Him that taketh
  thy cloak forbid not to take thy coat also."

But the worst indictment _Ruttledge_ hurls against _Mr. Green_. The
other professed Christians kill, murder, do not love their enemies, and
do not give to any man that asks of them. But the Greens, _Rutledge_
says, are the worst of all. For the others break the law of Christ for
their own pleasure, but "you take pay for breaking it; when their goods
are taken away you condemn the taker; when they are smitten on one cheek
you punish the smiter. You encourage them in their breaking of the Law
of Christ."

For several years _Ruttledge_ lives the life of the tinkers. But of weak
physique, he finds himself unable to withstand the rigors of the road.
His health breaks down, and his faithful comrades carry him to his
native town and bring him to a monastery where _Paul_ is cared for by
the priests. While there he begins to preach a wonderful gospel, a
gospel strange to the friars and the superior,--so rebellious and
terrible that he is declared a dissenter, a heathen and a dangerous
character.

  _Paul Ruttledge._ Now I can give you the message that has come to
  me.... Lay down your palm branches before this altar; you have
  brought them as a sign that the walls are beginning to be broken up,
  that we are going back to the joy of the green earth.... For a long
  time after their making men and women wandered here and there, half
  blind from the drunkenness of Eternity; they had not yet forgotten
  that the green Earth was the Love of God, and that all Life was the
  Will of God, and so they wept and laughed and hated according to
  the impulse of their hearts. They gathered the great Earth to their
  breasts and their lips, ... in what they believed would be an
  eternal kiss. It was then that the temptation began. The men and
  women listened to them, and because when they had lived ... in
  mother wit and natural kindness, they sometimes did one another an
  injury, they thought that it would be better to be safe than to be
  blessed, they made the Laws. The Laws were the first sin. They were
  the first mouthful of the apple; the moment man had made them he
  began to die; we must put out the Laws as I put out this candle. And
  when they had lived amidst the green Earth that is the Love of God,
  they were sometimes wetted by the rain, and sometimes cold and
  hungry, and sometimes alone from one another; they thought it would
  be better to be comfortable than to be blessed. They began to build
  big houses and big towns. They grew wealthy and they sat chattering
  at their doors; and the embrace that was to have been eternal
  ended.... We must put out the towns as I put out this candle. But
  that is not all, for man created a worse thing.... Man built up the
  Church. We must destroy the Church, we must put it out as I put out
  this candle.... We must destroy everything that has Law and Number.

The rebel is driven from the monastery. He is followed by only two
faithful friars, his disciples, who go among the people to disseminate
the new gospel. But the people fail to understand them. Immersed in
darkness and superstition, they look upon these strange men as
evildoers. They accuse them of casting an evil spell on their cattle and
disturbing the people's peace. The path of the crusader is thorny, and
_Colman_, the friar disciple of _Paul_, though faithful for a time,
become discouraged in the face of opposition and persecution. He
weakens.

  _Colman._ It's no use stopping waiting for the wind; if we have
  anything to say that's worth the people listening to, we must bring
  them to hear it one way or another. Now, it is what I was saying to
  Aloysius, we must begin teaching them to make things, they never had
  the chance of any instruction of this sort here. Those and other
  things, we got a good training in the old days. And we'll get a
  grant from the Technical Board. The Board pays up to four hundred
  pounds to some of its instructors.

  _Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, I understand; you will sell them. And what
  about the dividing of the money? You will need to make laws about
  that. Oh, we will grow quite rich in time.

  _Colman._ We'll build workshops and houses for those who come to
  work from a distance, good houses, slated, not thatched.... They
  will think so much more of our teaching when we have got them under
  our influence by other things. Of course we will teach them their
  meditations, and give them a regular religious life. We must settle
  out some little place for them to pray in--there's a high gable over
  there where we could hang a bell--

  _Paul Ruttledge._ Oh, yes, I understand. You would weave them
  together like this, you would add one thing to another, laws and
  money and church and bells, till you had got everything back again
  that you have escaped from. But it is my business to tear things
  asunder.

  _Aloysius._ Brother Paul, it is what I am thinking; now the tinkers
  have come back to you, you could begin to gather a sort of an army;
  you can't fight your battle without an army. They would call to the
  other tinkers, and the tramps and the beggars, and the sieve-makers
  and all the wandering people. It would be a great army.

  _Paul Ruttledge._ Yes, that would be a great army, a great wandering
  army.

  _Aloysius._ The people would be afraid to refuse us then; we would
  march on--

  _Paul Ruttledge._ We could march on. We could march on the towns,
  and we could break up all settled order; we could bring back the old
  joyful, dangerous, individual life. We would have banners. We will
  have one great banner that will go in front, it will take two men to
  carry it, and on it we will have Laughter--

  _Aloysius._ That will be the banner for the front. We will have
  different troops, we will have captains to organize them, to give
  them orders.

  _Paul Ruttledge._ To organize? That is to bring in law and number.
  Organize--organize--that is how all the mischief has been done. I
  was forgetting,--we cannot destroy the world with armies; it is
  inside our minds that it must be destroyed.

Deserted, _Paul Ruttledge_ stands alone in his crusade, like most
iconoclasts. Misunderstood and persecuted, he finally meets his death at
the hands of the infuriated mob.

"Where There Is Nothing" is of great social significance, deeply
revolutionary in the sense that it carries the message of the
destruction of every institution--State, Property, and Church--that
enslaves humanity. _For where there is nothing, there man begins._

A certain critic characterized this play as a "statement of revolt
against the despotism of facts." Is there a despotism more compelling
and destructive than that of the facts of property, of the State and
Church? But "Where There Is Nothing" is not merely a "statement" of
revolt. It embodies the spirit of revolt itself, of that most
constructive revolt which begins with the destruction of every obstacle
in the path of the new life that is to grow on the dbris of the old,
when the paralyzing yoke of institutionalism shall have been broken, and
man left free to enjoy Life and Laughter.




LENOX ROBINSON


HARVEST

_Timothy Hurley_, an old farmer, slaves all his life and mortgages his
farm in order to enable his children to lead an idle, parasitic life.

Started on this road toward so-called culture by the school-master,
_William Lordan_, _Hurley's_ children leave their father's farm and in
due time establish themselves in society as priest, lawyer, secretary
and chemist, respectively.

The secretary son is ashamed of his lowly origin and denies it. The
lawyer son is much more concerned with his motor car than with the
condition of the farm that has helped him on his feet. The priest has
departed for America, there to collect funds for Church work. Only
_Maurice_, the youngest son of _Timothy Hurley_, remains at home as the
farm drudge, the typical man with the hoe.

_Jack Hurley_, the chemist, and _Timothy's_ only daughter _Mary_, retain
some loyalty to the old place, but when they return after an absence of
years, they find themselves out of touch with farm life, and they too
turn their back on their native heath. _Jack Hurley's_ notion of the
country is that of most city people: nature is beautiful, the scenery
lovely, so long as it is someone else who has to labor in the scorching
sun, to plow and toil in the sweat of his brow.

_Jack_ and his wife _Mildred_ are both extremely romantic about the
farm.

  _Jack._ It stands to reason farming must pay enormously. Take a
  field of oats, for instance; every grain that's sown gives a huge
  percentage in return.... I don't know exactly how many grains a
  stalk carries, but several hundred I'm sure ... why, there's no
  investment in the world would give you a return like that.

But soon they discover that every grain of corn does not yield hundreds
of dollars.

  _Maurice._ You can't have a solicitor, and a priest, and a chemist
  in a family without spending money, and for the last ten years
  you've been all drawing money out of the farm ... there's no more to
  drain now.... Oh, I suppose you think I'm a bloody fool not to be
  able to make it pay; but sure what chance have I and I never taught
  how to farm? There was money and education wanted to make priests
  and doctors and gentlemen of you all, and wasn't there money and
  education wanted to make a farmer of me? No; nothing taught me only
  what I picked up from my father and the men, and never a bit of
  fresh money to put into the farm only it all kept to make a
  solicitor of Bob and a chemist of you.

During _Jack's_ visit to the farm a fire breaks out and several
buildings on the place are destroyed. Much to the horror of the
well-bred _Jack_, he learns that his father himself had lit the match in
order to get "compensation." He sternly upbraids the old farmer.

  _Jack._ Didn't you see yourself how dishonest it was?

  _Timothy._ Maybe I did, but I saw something more, and that was that
  I was on the way to being put out of the farm.

_Jack_ is outraged; he threatens to inform on his own people and offers
to stay on the farm to help with the work. But two weeks' experience in
the field beneath the burning sun is more than delicate _Jack_ can
stand. He suffers fainting spells, and is in the end prevailed upon by
his wife to leave.

_Mary_, old _Hurley's_ daughter, also returns to the farm for rest and
quiet. But she finds no peace there, for the city is too much in her
blood. There is, moreover, another lure she cannot escape.

  _Mary._ I was too well educated to be a servant, and I was never
  happy as one, so to better myself I learned typing.... It's a hard
  life, Jack, and I soon found out how hard it was, and I was as
  dissatisfied as ever. Then there only seemed one way out of it ...
  and he ... my employer, I mean.... I went into it deliberately with
  my eyes open. You see, a woman I knew chucked typing and went in for
  this ... and I saw what a splendid time she had, and how happy she
  was--and I was so miserably unhappy--and how she had everything she
  wanted and I had nothing, and ... and.... But this life made me
  unhappy, too, and so in desperation I came home; but I've grown too
  far away from it all, and now I'm going back. Don't you see, Jack,
  I'm not happy here. I thought if I could get home to the farm and
  the old simple life it would be all right, but it isn't. Everything
  jars on me, the roughness and the hard living and the coarse
  food--oh, it seems ridiculous--but they make me physically ill. I
  always thought, if I could get away home to Knockmalgloss I could
  start fair again.... So I came home, and everything is the same, and
  everyone thinks that I'm as pure and innocent as when I went away,
  but ... but ... But, Jack, the dreadful thing is I want to go
  back.... I'm longing for that life, and its excitement and splendor
  and color.

In her misery and struggle a great faith sustains _Mary_ and keeps her
from ruin. It is the thought of her father, in whom she believes
implicitly as her ideal of honesty, strength and incorruptibility. The
shock is terrible when she learns that her father, even her father, has
fallen a victim to the cruel struggle of life,--that her father himself
set fire to the buildings.

  _Mary._ And I thought he was so simple, so innocent, so
  unspoiled!... Father, the simple, honest peasant, the only decent
  one of us. I cried all last night at the contrast! His
  unselfishness, his simplicity.... Why, we're all equally bad now--he
  and I--we both sell ourselves, he for the price of those old houses
  and I for a few years of splendor and happiness....

The only one whom life seems to teach nothing is _Schoolmaster Lordan_.
Oblivious of the stress and storm of reality, he continues to be
enraptured with education, with culture, with the opportunities offered
by the large cities. He is particularly proud of the Hurley children.

  _Lordan._ The way you've all got on! I tell you what, if every boy
  and girl I ever taught had turned out a failure I'd feel content and
  satisfied when I looked at all of you and saw what I've made of you.

  _Mary._ What you've made of us? I wonder do you really know what
  you've made of us?

  _Lordan._ Isn't it easily seen? One with a motor car, no less.... It
  was good, sound seed I sowed long ago in the little schoolhouse and
  it's to-day you're all reaping the harvest.

"Harvest" is a grim picture of civilization in its especially
demoralizing effects upon the people who spring from the soil. The mock
culture and shallow education which inspire peasant folk with awe, which
lure the children away from home, only to crush the vitality out of them
or to turn them into cowards and compromisers. The tragedy of a
civilization that dooms the tillers of the soil to a dreary monotony of
hard toil with little return, or charms them to destruction with the
false glow of city culture and ease! Greater still this tragedy in a
country like Ireland, its people taxed to the very marrow and exploited
to the verge of starvation, leaving the young generation no opening, no
opportunity in life.

It is inevitable that the sons and daughters of Ireland, robust in body
and spirit, yearning for things better and bigger, should desert her.
For as _Mary_ says, "When the sun sets here, it's all so dark and cold
and dreary." But the young need light and warmth--and these are not in
the valley of ever-present misery and want.

"Harvest" is an expressive picture of the social background of the Irish
people, a background somber and unpromising but for the streak of dawn
that pierces that country's dark horizon in the form of the inherent and
irrepressible fighting spirit of the true Irishman, the spirit of the
Fenian revolt whose fires often slumber but are never put out, all the
ravages of our false civilization notwithstanding.




T. G. MURRAY


MAURICE HARTE

"Maurice Harte" portrays the most sinister force which holds the Irish
people in awe--that heaviest of all bondage, priestcraft.

_Michael Harte_, his wife _Ellen_, and their son _Owen_ are bent on one
purpose; to make a priest of their youngest child _Maurice_. The mother
especially has no other ambition in life than to see her son "priested."
No higher ideal to most Catholic mothers than to consecrate their
favorite son to the glory of God.

What it has cost the Hartes to attain their ambition and hope is
revealed by _Ellen Harte_ in the conversation with her sister and later
with her husband, when he informs her that he cannot borrow any more
money to continue the boy in the seminary.

  _Mrs. Harte._ If Michael and myself have our son nearly a priest
  this day, 'tis no small price at all we have paid for it.... Isn't
  it the terrible thing, every time you look through that window, to
  have the fear in your heart that 'tis the process-server you'll see
  and he coming up the boreen?

_Old Harte_ impoverishes himself to enable his son to finish his
studies. He has borrowed right and left, till his resources are now
entirety exhausted. But he is compelled to try another loan.

  _Michael._ He made out 'twas as good as insulting him making such a
  small payment, and the money that's on us to be so heavy. "If you
  don't wish to sign that note," says he, "you needn't. It don't
  matter at all to me one way or the other, for before the next
  Quarter Sessions 'tis Andy Driscoll, the process-server, will be
  marching up to your door." So what could I do but sign? Why, 'twas
  how he turned on me in a red passion. "And isn't it a scandal,
  Michael Harte," says he, "for the like o' you, with your name on
  them books there for a hundred and fifty pounds, and you with only
  the grass of nine or ten cows, to be making your son a priest? The
  like of it," says he, "was never heard of before."

  _Mrs. Harte._ What business was it of his, I'd like to know? Jealous
  of us! There's no fear any of his sons will ever be anything much!

  _Michael._ I was thinking it might do Maurice some harm with the
  Bishop if it came out on the papers that we were up before the judge
  for a civil bill.

  _Mrs. Harte._ ... 'Tisn't once or twice I told you that I had my
  heart set on hearing Maurice say the marriage words over his own
  brother.

_Maurice_ comes home for the summer vacation, looking pale and
emaciated. His mother ascribes his condition to the bad city air and
hard study at school. But _Maurice_ suffers from a different cause. His
is a mental struggle: the maddening struggle of doubt, the realization
that he has lost his faith, that he has no vocation, and that he must
give up his divinity studies. He knows how fanatically bent his people
are on having him ordained, and he is tortured by the grief his decision
will cause his parents. His heart is breaking as he at last determines
to inform them.

He reasons and pleads with his parents and implores them not to drive
him back to college. But they cannot understand. They remain deaf to his
arguments; pitifully they beg him not to fail them, not to disappoint
the hope of a lifetime. When it all proves of no avail, they finally
disclose to _Maurice_ their gnawing secret: the farm has been mortgaged
and many debts incurred for the sake of enabling him to attain to the
priesthood.

  _Michael._ Maurice, would you break our hearts?

  _Maurice._ Father, would you have your son live a life of sacrilege?
  Would you, Father? Would you?

  _Mrs. Harte._ That's only foolish talk. Aren't you every bit as good
  as the next?

  _Maurice._ I may be, but I haven't a vocation.... My mind is finally
  made up.

  _Mrs. Harte._ Maurice, listen to me--listen to me! ... If it went
  out about you this day, isn't it destroyed forever we'd be? Look!
  The story wouldn't be east in Macroom when we'd have the bailiffs
  walking in that door. The whole world knows he is to be priested
  next June, and only for the great respect they have for us through
  the means o' that, 'tisn't James McCarthy alone, but every other one
  o' them would come down on us straight for their money. In one week
  there wouldn't be a cow left by us, nor a horse, nor a lamb, nor
  anything at all!... Look at them books. 'Tis about time you should
  know how we stand here.... God knows, I wouldn't be hard on you at
  all, but look at the great load o' money that's on us this day, and
  mostly all on your account.

  _Maurice._ Mother, don't make my cross harder to bear.

  _Mrs. Harte._ An' would you be seeing a heavier cross put on them
  that did all that mortal man and woman could do for you?

  _Maurice._ Look! I'll wear the flesh off my bones, but in pity spare
  me!

  _Mrs. Harte._ And will you have no pity at all on us and on Owen
  here, that have slaved for you all our lives?

  _Maurice._ Mother! Mother!

  _Mrs. Harte._ You'll go back? 'Tis only a mistake?

  _Maurice._ Great God of Heaven!...you'll kill me.

  _Michael._ You'll go back, Maurice? The vocation will come to you in
  time with the help of God. It will, surely.

  _Maurice._ Don't ask me! Don't ask me!

  _Mrs. Harte._ If you don't how can I ever face outside this door or
  lift my head again?... How could I listen to the neighbors making
  pity for me, and many a one o' them only glad in their hearts? How
  could I ever face again into town o' Macroom?

  _Maurice._ Oh, don't.

  _Mrs. Harte._ I tell you, Maurice, I'd rather be lying dead a
  thousand times in the graveyard over Killnamartyra--

  _Maurice._ Stop, Mother, stop! I'll--I'll go back--as--as you all
  wish it.

Nine months later there is general rejoicing at the Hartes': _Maurice_
has passed his examinations with flying colors; he is about to be
ordained, and he is to officiate at the wedding of his brother _Owen_
and his wealthy bride.

_Ellen Harte_ plans to give her son a royal welcome. Great preparations
are on foot to greet the return of _Maurice_. He comes back--not in the
glory and triumph expected by his people, but a driveling idiot. His
mental struggle, the agony of whipping himself to the hated task, proved
too much for him, and _Maurice_ is sacrificed on the altar of
superstition and submission to paternal authority.

In the whole range of the Irish drama "Maurice Harte" is the most Irish,
because nowhere does Catholicism demand so many victims as in that
unfortunate land. But in a deeper sense the play is of that social
importance that knows no limit of race or creed.

There is no boundary of land or time to the resistance of the human mind
to coercion; it is worldwide. Equally so is the rebellion of youth
against the tyranny of parents. But above all does this play mirror the
self-centered, narrow, ambitious love of the mother, so disastrous to
the happiness and peace of her child. For it is _Ellen Harte_, rather
than the father, who forces _Maurice_ back to his studies. From whatever
viewpoint, however, "Maurice Harte" be considered, it carries a
dramatically powerful message of wide social significance.




THE RUSSIAN DRAMA


People outside of Russia, especially Anglo-Saxons, have one great
objection to the Russian drama: it is too sad, too gloomy. It is often
asked, "Why is the Russian drama so pessimistic?" The answer is: the
Russian drama, like all Russian culture, has been conceived in the
sorrow of the people; it was born in their woe and struggle. Anything
thus conceived cannot be very joyous or amusing.

It is no exaggeration to say that in no other country are the creative
artists so interwoven, so much at one with the people. This is not only
true of men like Turgenev, Tolstoy and the dramatists of modern times.
It applies also to Gogol, who in "The Inspector" and "Dead Souls" spoke
in behalf of the people, appealing to the conscience of Russia. The same
is true of Dostoyevsky, of the poets Nekrassov, Nadson, and others. In
fact, all the great Russian artists have gone to the people for their
inspiration, as to the source of all life. That explains the depth and
the humanity of Russian literature.

The modern drama naturally suggests Henrik Ibsen as its pioneer. But
prior to him, Gogol utilized the drama as a vehicle for popularizing the
social issues of his time. In "The Inspector," (_Revizor_) he portrays
the corruption, graft and extortion rampant in the governmental
departments. If we were to Anglicize the names of the characters in "The
Inspector," and forget for a moment that it was a Russian who wrote the
play, the criticism contained therein would apply with similar force to
present-day America, and to every other modern country. Gogol touched
the deepest sores of social magnitude and marked the beginning of the
realistic drama in Russia.

However, it is not within the scope of this work to discuss the drama of
Gogol's era. I shall begin with Tolstoy, because he is closer to our own
generation, and voices more definitely the social significance of the
modern drama.




TOLSTOY


When Leo Tolstoy died, the representatives of the Church proclaimed him
as their own. "He was with us," they said. It reminds one of the Russian
fable about the fly and the ox. The fly was lazily resting on the horn
of the ox while he plowed the field, but when the ox returned home
exhausted with toil, the fly bragged, "_We_ have been plowing." The
spokesmen of the Church are, in relation to Tolstoy, in the same
position. It is true that Tolstoy based his conception of human
relationships on a new interpretation of the Gospels. But he was as far
removed from present-day Christianity as Jesus was alien to the
institutional religion of his time.

Tolstoy was the last true Christian, and as such he undermined the
stronghold of the Church with all its pernicious power of darkness, with
all its injustice and cruelty.

For this he was persecuted by the Holy Synod and excommunicated from the
Church; for this he was feared by the Tsar and his henchmen; for this
his works have been condemned and prohibited.

The only reason Tolstoy himself escaped the fate of other great Russians
was that he was mightier than the Church, mightier than the ducal
clique, mightier even than the Tsar. He was the powerful conscience of
Russia exposing her crimes and evils before the civilized world.

How deeply Tolstoy felt the grave problems of his time, how closely
related he was to the people, he demonstrated in various works, but in
none so strikingly as in "The Power of Darkness."


THE POWER OF DARKNESS

"The Power of Darkness" is the tragedy of sordid misery and dense
ignorance. It deals with a group of peasants steeped in poverty and
utter darkness. This appalling condition, especially in relation to the
women folk, is expressed by one of the characters in the play:

  _Mitrich._ There are millions of you women and girls, but you are
  all like the beasts of the forest. Just as one has been born, so she
  dies. She has neither seen or heard anything. A man will learn
  something; if nowhere else, at least in the inn, or by some chance,
  in prison, or in the army, as I have. But what about a woman? She
  does not know a thing about God,--nay, she does not know one day
  from another. They creep about like blind pups, and stick their
  heads into the manure.

_Peter_, a rich peasant, is in a dying condition. Yet he clings to his
money and slave-drives his young wife, _Anisya_, his two daughters by a
first marriage, and his peasant servant _Nikita_. He will not allow them
any rest from their toil, for the greed of money is in his blood and the
fear of death in his bones. _Anisya_ hates her husband: he forces her to
drudge, and he is old and ill. She loves _Nikita_. The latter, young and
irresponsible, cannot resist women, who are his main weakness and final
undoing. Before he came to old _Peter's_ farm, he had wronged an orphan
girl. When she becomes pregnant, she appeals to _Nikita's_ father,
_Akim_, a simple and honest peasant. He urges his son to marry the girl,
because "it is a sin to wrong an orphan. Look out, Nikita! A tear of
offense does not flow past, but upon a man's head. Look out, or the same
will happen with you."

_Akim's_ kindness and simplicity are opposed by the viciousness and
greed of his wife _Matrena_. _Nikita_ remains on the farm, and _Anisya_,
urged and influenced by his mother, poisons old _Peter_ and steals his
money.

When her husband dies, _Anisya_ marries _Nikita_ and turns the money
over to him. _Nikita_ becomes the head of the house, and soon proves
himself a rake and a tyrant. Idleness and affluence undermine whatever
good is latent in him. Money, the destroyer of souls, together with the
consciousness that he has been indirectly a party to _Anisya's_ crime,
turn _Nikita's_ love for the woman into bitter hatred. He takes for his
mistress _Akulina_, _Peter's_ oldest daughter, a girl of sixteen, deaf
and silly, and forces _Anisya_ to serve them. She had strength to resist
her old husband, but her love for _Nikita_ has made her weak. "The
moment I see him my heart softens. I have no courage against him."

Old _Akim_ comes to ask for a little money from his newly rich son. He
quickly senses the swamp of corruption and vice into which _Nikita_ has
sunk. He tries to save him, to bring him back to himself, to arouse the
better side of his nature. But he fails.

The ways of life are too evil for _Akim_. He leaves, refusing even the
money he needs so badly to purchase a horse.

  _Akim._ One sin holds on to another and pulls you along. Nikita, you
  are stuck in sins. You are stuck, I see, in sins. You are stuck
  fast, so to speak. I have heard that nowadays they pull fathers'
  beards, so to speak,--but this leads only to ruin, to ruin, so to
  speak.... There is your money. I will go and beg, so to speak, but I
  will not, so to speak, take the money.... Let me go! I will not
  stay! I would rather sleep near the fence than in your nastiness.

The type of _Akim_ is most vividly characterized by Tolstoy in the talk
between the old peasant and the new help on the farm.

  _Mitrich._ Let us suppose, for example, you have money, and I, for
  example, have my land lying fallow; it is spring, and I have no
  seed; or I have to pay the taxes. So I come to you, and say: "Akim,
  give me ten roubles! I will have the harvest in by St. Mary's
  Intercession and then I will give it back to you, with a tithe for
  the accommodation." You, for example, see that I can be flayed,
  having a horse or a cow, so you say: "Give me two or three roubles
  for the accommodation." The noose is around my neck, and I cannot
  get along without it. "Very well," says I, "I will take the ten
  roubles." In the fall I sell some things, and I bring you the money,
  and you skin me in addition for three roubles.

  _Akim._ But this is, so to speak, a wrong done to a peasant. If one
  forgets God, so to speak, it is not good.

  _Mitrich._ Wait a minute! So remember what you have done: you have
  fleeced me, so to speak, and Anisya, for example, has some money
  which is lying idle. She has no place to put it in and, being a
  woman, does not know what to do with it. So she comes to you: "Can't
  I," says she, "make some use of my money?" "Yes, you can," you say.
  And so you wait. Next summer I come to you once more. "Give me
  another ten roubles," says I, "and I will pay you for the
  accommodation." So you watch me to see whether my hide has not been
  turned yet, whether I can be flayed again, and if I can, you give
  me Anisya's money. But if I have not a blessed thing, and nothing to
  eat, you make your calculations, seeing that I cannot be skinned,
  and you say: "God be with you, my brother!" and you look out for
  another man to whom to give Anisya's money, and whom you can flay.
  Now this is called a bank. So it keeps going around. It is a very
  clever thing, my friend.

  _Akim._ What is this? This is a nastiness, so to speak. If a
  peasant, so to speak, were to do it, the peasants would regard it as
  a sin, so to speak. This is not according to the Law, not according
  to the Law, so to speak. It is bad. How can the learned men, so to
  speak-- ... As I look at it, so to speak, there is trouble without
  money, so to speak, and with money the trouble is double, so to
  speak. God has commanded to work. But you put the money in the bank,
  so to speak, and lie down to sleep, and the money will feed you, so
  to speak, while you are lying. This is bad,--not according to the
  Law, so to speak.

  _Mitrich._ Not according to the Law? The Law does not trouble people
  nowadays, my friend. All they think about is how to clean out a
  fellow. That's what!

As long as _Akulina's_ condition is not noticeable, the relation of
_Nikita_ with his dead master's daughter remains hidden from the
neighbors. But the time comes when she is to give birth to a child. It
is then that _Anisya_ becomes mistress of the situation again. Her
hatred for _Akulina_, her outraged love for _Nikita_ and the evil spirit
of _Nikita's_ mother all combine to turn her into a fiend. _Akulina_ is
driven to the barn, where her terrible labor pains are stifled by the
dread of her stepmother. When the innocent victim is born, _Nikita's_
vicious mother and _Anisya_ persuade him that the child is dead and
force him to bury it in the cellar.

While _Nikita_ is digging the grave, he discovers the deception. The
child is alive! The terrible shock unnerves the man, and in temporary
madness he presses a board over the little body till its bones crunch.
Superstition, horror and the perfidy of the women drive _Nikita_ to
drink in an attempt to drown the baby's cries constantly ringing in his
ears.

The last act deals with _Akulina's_ wedding to the son of a neighbor.
She is forced into the marriage because of her misfortune. The peasants
all gather for the occasion, but _Nikita_ is missing: he roams the place
haunted by the horrible phantom of his murdered child. He attempts to
hang himself but fails, and finally decides to go before the entire
assembly to confess his crimes.

  _Nikita._ Father, listen to me! First of all, Marina, look at me! I
  am guilty toward you: I had promised to marry you, and I seduced
  you. I deceived you and abandoned you; forgive me for Christ's sake!

  _Matrena._ Oh, oh, he is bewitched. What is the matter with him? He
  has the evil eye upon him. Get up and stop talking nonsense!

  _Nikita._ I killed your father, and I, dog, have ruined his
  daughter. I had the power over her, and I killed also her baby....
  Father dear! Forgive me, sinful man! You told me, when I first
  started on this life of debauch: "When the claw is caught, the whole
  bird is lost." But, I, dog, did not pay any attention to you, and so
  everything turned out as you said. Forgive me, for Christ's sake.

The "Power of Darkness" is a terrible picture of poverty, ignorance and
superstition. To write such a work it is not sufficient to be a creative
artist: it requires a deeply sympathetic human soul. Tolstoy possessed
both. He understood that the tragedy of the peasants' life is due not to
any inherent viciousness but to the power of darkness which permeates
their existence from the cradle to the grave. Something heavy is
oppressing them--in the words of _Anisya_--weighing them down, something
that saps all humanity out of them and drives them into the depths.

"The Power of Darkness" is a social picture at once appalling and
gripping.




ANTON TCHEKHOF


When Anton Tchekhof first came to the fore, no less an authority than
Tolstoy said: "Russia has given birth to another Turgenev." The estimate
was not overdrawn. Tchekhof was indeed a modern Turgenev. Perhaps not as
universal, because Turgenev, having lived in western Europe, in close
contact with conditions outside of Russia, dealt with more variegated
aspects of life. But as a creative artist Tchekhof is fitted to take his
place with Turgenev.

Tchekhof is preminently the master of short stories. Within the limits
of a few pages he paints the drama of human life with its manifold
tragic and comic colors, in its most intimate reflex upon the characters
who pass through the panorama. He has been called a pessimist. As if one
could miss the sun without feeling the torture of utter darkness!

Tchekhof wrote during the gloomiest period of Russian life, at a time
when the reaction had drowned the revolution in the blood of the young
generation,--when the Tsar had choked the very breath out of young
Russia. The intellectuals were deprived of every outlet: all the social
channels were closed to them, and they found themselves without hope or
faith, not having yet learned to make common cause with the people.

Tchekhof could not escape the atmosphere which darkened the horizon of
almost the whole of Russia. It was because he so intensely felt its
oppressive weight that he longed for air, for light, for new and vital
ideas. To awaken the same yearning and faith in others, he had to
picture life as it was, in all its wretchedness and horror.

This he did in "The Seagull," while in "The Cherry Orchard" he holds out
the hope of a new and brighter day.


THE SEAGULL

In "The Seagull" the young artist, _Constantine Treplef_, seeks new
forms, new modes of expression. He is tired of the old academic ways,
the beaten track; he is disgusted with the endless imitative methods, no
one apparently capable of an original thought.

_Constantine_ has written a play; the principal part is to be acted by
_Nina_, a beautiful girl with whom _Constantine_ is in love. He arranges
the first performance to take place on the occasion of his mother's
vacation in the country.

She herself--known as _Mme. Arcadina_--is a famous actress of the old
school. She knows how to show off her charms to advantage, to parade her
beautiful gowns, to faint and die gracefully before the footlights; but
she does not know how to live her part on the stage. _Mme. Arcadina_ is
the type of artist who lacks all conception of the relation between art
and life. Barren of vision and empty of heart, her only criterion is
public approval and material success. Needless to say, she cannot
understand her son. She considers him decadent, a foolish rebel who
wants to undermine the settled canons of dramatic art. _Constantine_
sums up his mother's personality in the following manner:

  _Treplef._ She is a psychological curiosity, is my mother. A clever
  and gifted woman, who can cry over a novel, will reel you off all
  Nekrassov's poems by heart, and is the perfection of a sick nurse;
  but venture to praise Eleonora Duse before her! Oho! ho! You must
  praise nobody but her, write about her, shout about her, and go into
  ecstasies over her wonderful performance in _La Dame aux Camlias_,
  or _The Fumes of Life_; but as she cannot have these intoxicating
  pleasures down here in the country, she's bored and gets
  spiteful.... She loves the stage; she thinks that she is advancing
  the cause of humanity and her sacred art; but I regard the stage of
  to-day as mere routine and prejudice. When the curtain goes up and
  the gifted beings, the high priests of the sacred art, appear by
  electric light, in a room with three sides to it, representing how
  people eat, drink, love, walk and wear their jackets; when they
  strive to squeeze out a moral from the flat, vulgar pictures and the
  flat, vulgar phrases, a little tiny moral, easy to comprehend and
  handy for home consumption, when in a thousand variations they offer
  me always the same thing over and over and over again--then I take
  to my heels and run, as Maupassant ran from the Eiffel Tower, which
  crushed his brain by its overwhelming vulgarity.... We must have new
  formul. That's what we want. And if there are none, then it's
  better to have nothing at all.

With _Mme. Arcadina_ is her lover, _Trigorin_, a successful writer. When
he began his literary career, he possessed originality and strength. But
gradually writing became a habit: the publishers constantly demand new
books, and he supplies them.

Oh, the slavery of being an "arrived" artist, forging new chains for
oneself with every "best seller"! Such is the position of _Trigorin_: he
hates his work as the worst drudgery. Exhausted of ideas, all life and
human relations serve him only as material for copy.

_Nina_, innocent of the ways of the world and saturated with the false
romanticism of _Trigorin's_ works, does not see the man but the
celebrated artist. She is carried away by his fame and stirred by his
presence; an infatuation with him quickly replaces her affection for
_Constantine_. To her _Trigorin_ embodies her dream of a brilliant and
interesting life.

  _Nina._ How I envy you, if you but knew it! How different are the
  lots of different people! Some can hardly drag on their tedious,
  insignificant existence; they are all alike, all miserable; others,
  like you, for instance--you are one in a million--are blessed with a
  brilliant, interesting life, all full of meaning.... You are
  happy.... What a delightful life yours is!

  _Trigorin._ What is there so fine about it? Day and night I am
  obsessed by the same persistent thought; I must write, I must write,
  I must write.... No sooner have I finished one story than I am
  somehow compelled to write another, then a third, and after the
  third a fourth.... I have no rest for myself; I feel that I am
  devouring my own life.... I've never satisfied _myself_.... I have
  the feeling for nature; it wakes a passion in me, an irresistible
  desire to write. But I am something more than a landscape painter;
  I'm a citizen as well; I love my country, I love the people; I feel
  that if I am a writer I am bound to speak of the people, of its
  suffering, of its future, to speak of science, of the rights of man,
  etc., etc.; and I speak about it all, volubly, and am attacked
  angrily in return by everyone; I dart from side to side like a fox
  run down by hounds; I see that life and science fly farther and
  farther ahead of me, and I fall farther and farther behind, like the
  countryman running after the train; and in the end I feel that the
  only thing I can write of is the landscape, and in everything else I
  am untrue to life, false to the very marrow of my bones.

_Constantine_ realizes that _Nina_ is slipping away from him. The
situation is aggravated by the constant friction with his mother and his
despair at the lack of encouragement for his art. In a fit of
despondency he attempts suicide, but without success. His mother,
although nursing him back to health, is infuriated at her son's
"foolishness," his inability to adapt himself to conditions, his
impractical ideas. She decides to leave, accompanied by _Trigorin_. On
the day of their departure _Nina_ and _Trigorin_ meet once more. The
girl tells him of her ambition to become an actress, and, encouraged by
him, follows him to the city.

Two years later _Mme. Arcadina_, still full of her idle triumphs,
returns to her estate. _Trigorin_ is again with her still haunted by the
need of copy.

_Constantine_ has in the interim matured considerably. Although he has
made himself heard as a writer, he nevertheless feels that life to-day
has no place for such as he: that sincerity in art is not wanted. His
mother is with him, but she only serves to emphasize the flatness of his
surroundings. He loves her, but her ways jar him and drive him into
seclusion.

_Nina_, too, has returned to her native place, broken in body and
spirit. Partly because of the memory of her past affection for
_Constantine_, and mainly because she learns of _Trigorin's_ presence,
she is drawn to the place where two years before she had dreamed of the
beauty of an artistic career. The cruel struggle for recognition, the
bitter disappointment in her relation with _Trigorin_, the care of a
child and poor health have combined to change the romantic child into a
sad woman.

_Constantine_ still loves her. He pleads with her to go away with him,
to begin a new life. But it is too late. The lure of the footlights is
beckoning to _Nina_; she returns to the stage. _Constantine_, unable to
stand the loneliness of his life and the mercenary demands upon his art,
kills himself.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the Anglo-Saxon mind such an ending is pessimism,--defeat. Often,
however, apparent defeat is in reality the truest success. For is not
success, as commonly understood, but too frequently bought at the
expense of character and idealism?

"The Seagull" is not defeat. As long as there is still such material in
society as the Constantines--men and women who would rather die than
compromise with the sordidness of life--there is hope for humanity. If
the Constantines perish, it is the social fault,--our indifference to,
and lack of appreciation of, the real values that alone advance the
fuller and more complete life of the race.


THE CHERRY ORCHARD

"The Cherry Orchard" is Tchekhof's prophetic song. In this play he
depicts three stages of social development and their reflex in
literature.

_Mme. Ranevsky_, the owner of the cherry orchard, an estate celebrated
far and wide for its beauty and historic traditions, is deeply attached
to the family place. She loves it for its romanticism: nightingales sing
in the orchard, accompanying the wooing of lovers. She is devoted to it
because of the memory of her ancestors and because of the many tender
ties which bind her to the orchard. The same feeling and reverence is
entertained by her brother _Leonid Gayef_. They are expressed in the
_Ode to an Old Family Cupboard_:

  _Gayef._ Beloved and venerable cupboard; honor and glory to your
  existence, which for more than a hundred years has been directed to
  the noble ideals of justice and virtue. Your silent summons to
  profitable labor has never weakened in all these hundred years. You
  have upheld the courage of succeeding generations of human kind; you
  have upheld faith in a better future and cherished in us ideals of
  goodness and social consciousness.

But the social consciousness of _Gayef_ and of his sister is of a
paternal nature: the attitude of the aristocracy toward its serfs. It is
a paternalism that takes no account of the freedom and happiness of the
people,--the romanticism of a dying class.

_Mme. Ranevsky_ is impoverished. The cherry orchard is heavily mortgaged
and as romance and sentiment cannot liquidate debts, the beautiful
estate falls into the cruel hands of commercialism.

The merchant _Yermolai Lopakhin_ buys the place. He is in ecstasy over
his newly acquired possession. He the owner--he who had risen from the
serfs of the former master of the orchard!

  _Lopakhin._ Just think of it! The cherry orchard is mine! Mine! Tell
  me that I'm drunk; tell me that I'm off my head; tell me that it's
  all a dream!... If only my father and my grandfather could rise from
  their graces and see the whole affair, how their Yermolai, their
  flogged and ignorant Yermolai, who used to run about barefooted in
  the winter, how this same Yermolai had bought a property that hasn't
  its equal for beauty anywhere in the whole world! I have bought the
  property where my father and grandfather were slaves, where they
  weren't even allowed into the kitchen.

A new epoch begins in the cherry orchard. On the ruins of romanticism
and aristocratic ease there rises commercialism, its iron hand yoking
nature, devastating her beauty, and robbing her of all radiance.

With the greed of rich returns, _Lopakhin_ cries, "Lay the ax to the
cherry orchard, come and see the trees fall down! We'll fill the place
with villas."

Materialism reigns supreme; it lords the orchard with mighty hand, and
in the frenzy of its triumph believes itself in control of the bodies
and souls of men. But in the madness of conquest it has discounted a
stubborn obstacle--the spirit of idealism. It is symbolized in _Peter
Trophimof_, "the perpetual student," and _Anya_, the young daughter of
_Mme. Ranevsky_. The "wonderful achievements" of the materialistic age
do not enthuse them; they have emancipated themselves from the Lopakhin
idol as well as from their aristocratic traditions.

  _Anya._ Why is it that I no longer love the cherry orchard as I did?
  I used to love it so tenderly; I thought there was no better place
  on earth than our garden.

  _Trophimof._ All Russia is our garden. The earth is great and
  beautiful; it is full of wonderful places. Think, Anya, your
  grandfather, your great-grandfather and all your ancestors were
  serf-owners, owners of living souls. Do not human spirits look out
  at you from every tree in the orchard, from every leaf and every
  stem? Do you not hear human voices?... Oh! it is terrible. Your
  orchard frightens me. When I walk through it in the evening or at
  night, the rugged bark on the trees glows with a dim light, and the
  cherry trees seem to see all that happened a hundred and two hundred
  years ago in painful and oppressive dreams. Well, well, we have
  fallen at least two hundred years beyond the times. We have achieved
  nothing at all as yet; we have not made up our minds how we stand
  with the past; we only philosophize, complain of boredom, or drink
  vodka. It is so plain that, before we can live in the present, we
  must first redeem the past, and have done with it.

  _Anya._ The house we live in has long since ceased to be our house;
  I shall go away.

  _Trophimof._ If you have the household keys, throw them in the well
  and go away. Be free, be free as the wind.... I am hungry as the
  winter; I am sick, anxious, poor as a beggar. Fate has tossed me
  hither and thither; I have been everywhere, everywhere. But
  everywhere I have been, every minute, day and night, my soul has
  been full of mysterious anticipations. I feel the approach of
  happiness, Anya; I see it coming ... it is coming towards us, nearer
  and nearer; I can hear the sound of its footsteps.... And if we do
  not see it, if we do not know it, what does it matter? Others will
  see it.

The new generation, on the threshold of the new epoch, hears the
approaching footsteps of the Future. And even if the Anyas and
Trophimofs of to-day will not see it, others will.

It was not given to Anton Tchekhof to see it with his bodily eyes. But
his prophetic vision beheld the coming of the New Day, and with powerful
pen he proclaimed it, that others might see it. Far from being a
pessimist, as charged by unintelligent critics, his faith was strong in
the possibilities of liberty.

This is the inspiring message of "The Cherry Orchard."




MAXIM GORKI


A NIGHT'S LODGING

We in America are conversant with tramp literature. A number of writers
of considerable note have described what is commonly called the
underworld, among them Josiah Flynt and Jack London, who have ably
interpreted the life and psychology of the outcast. But with all due
respect for their ability, it must be said that, after all, they wrote
only as onlookers, as observers. They were not tramps themselves, in the
real sense of the word. In "The Children of the Abyss" Jack London
relates that when he stood in the breadline, he had money, a room in a
good hotel, and a change of linen at hand. He was therefore not an
integral part of the underworld, of the homeless and hopeless.

Never before has anyone given such a true, realistic picture of the
social depths as Maxim Gorki, himself a denizen of the underworld from
his early childhood. At the age of eight he ran away from his
poverty-stricken, dismal home, and for many years thereafter he lived
the life of the _bosyaki_. He tramped through the length and breadth of
Russia; he lived with the peasant, the factory worker and the outcast.
He knew them intimately; he understood their psychology, for he was not
only with them, but of them. Therefore Gorki has been able to present
such a vivid picture of the underworld.

"A Night's Lodging" portrays a lodging house, hideous and foul, where
gather the social derelicts,--the thief, the gambler, the ex-artist, the
ex-aristocrat, the prostitute. All of them had at one time an ambition,
a goal, but because of their lack of will and the injustice and cruelty
of the world, they were forced into the depths and cast back whenever
they attempted to rise. They are the superfluous ones, dehumanized and
brutalized.

In this poisonous air, where everything withers and dies, we
nevertheless find character. _Natasha_, a young girl, still retains her
wholesome instincts. She had never known love or sympathy, had gone
hungry all her days, and had tasted nothing but abuse from her brutal
sister, on whom she was dependent. _Vaska Pepel_, the young thief, a
lodger in the house, strikes a responsive chord in her the moment he
makes her feel that he cares for her and that she might be of spiritual
and moral help to him. _Vaska_, like _Natasha_, is a product of his
social environment.

  _Vaska._ From childhood, I have been--only a thief.... Always I was
  called Vaska the pickpocket, Vaska the son of a thief! See, it was
  of no consequence to me, as long as they would have it so ... so
  they would have it.... I was a thief, perhaps, only out of spite ...
  because nobody came along to call me anything--thief.... You call me
  something else, Natasha.... It is no easy life that I
  lead--friendless; pursued like a wolf.... I sink like a man in a
  swamp ... whatever I touch is slimy and rotten ... nothing is firm
  ... but you are like a young fir-tree; you are prickly, but you give
  support.

There is another humane figure illuminating the dark picture in "A
Night's Lodging",--_Luka_. He is the type of an old pilgrim, a man whom
the experiences of life have taught wisdom. He has tramped through
Russia and Siberia, and consorted with all sorts of people; but
disappointment and grief have not robbed him of his faith in beauty, in
idealism. He believes that every man, however low, degraded, or
demoralized can yet be reached, if we but know how to touch his soul.
_Luka_ inspires courage and hope in everyone he meets, urging each to
begin life anew. To the former actor, now steeped in drink, he says:

  _Luka._ The drunkard, I have heard, can now be cured, without
  charge. They realize now, you see, that the drunkard is also a man.
  You must begin to make ready. Begin a new life!

_Luka_ tries also to imbue _Natasha_ and _Vaska_ with new faith. They
marvel at his goodness. In simplicity of heart _Luka_ gives his
philosophy of life.

  _Luka._ I am good, you say. But you see, there must be some one to
  be good.... We must have pity on mankind.... Have pity while there
  is still time, believe me, it is very good. I was once, for example,
  employed as a watchman, at a country place which belonged to an
  engineer, not far from the city of Tomsk, in Siberia. The house
  stood in the middle of the forest, an out-of-the-way location ...
  and it was winter and I was all alone in the country house. It was
  beautiful there ... magnificent! And once ... I heard them
  scrambling up!...

  _Natasha._ Thieves!

  _Luka._ Yes. They crept higher and I took my rifle and went outside.
  I looked up: two men ... as they were opening a window and so busy
  that they did not see anything of me at all. I cried to them: "Heh
  there ... get out of that" ... and would you think it, they fell on
  me with a hand ax.... I warned them--"Halt," I cried, "or else I
  fire" ... then I aimed first at one and then at the other. They fell
  on their knees, saying, "Pardon us." I was pretty hot ... on account
  of the hand ax, you remember. "You devils," I cried, "I told you to
  clear out and you didn't ... and now," I said, "one of you go into
  the brash and get a switch." It was done. "And now," I commanded,
  "one of you stretch out on the ground, and the other thrash him"
  ... and so they whipped each other at my command. And when they had
  each had a sound beating, they said to me: "Grandfather," said they,
  "for the sake of Christ give us a piece of bread. We haven't a bite
  in our bodies." They were the thieves, who had fallen upon me with
  the hand ax. Yes ... they were a pair of splendid fellows.... I said
  to them, "If you had asked for bread." Then they answered: "We had
  gotten past that.... We had asked and asked and nobody would give us
  anything ... endurance was worn out," ... and so they remained with
  me the whole winter. One of them, Stephen by name, liked to take the
  rifle and go into the woods ... and the other, Jakoff, was
  constantly ill, always coughing ... the three of us watched the
  place, and when spring came, they said, "Farewell, grandfather," and
  went away--to Russia....

  _Natasha._ Were they convicts, escaping?

  _Luka._ They were ... fugitives ... they had left their colony ... a
  pair of splendid fellows.... If I had not had pity on them--who
  knows what would have happened. They might have killed me.... Then
  they would be taken to court again, put in prison, sent back to
  Siberia.... Why all that? You learn nothing good in prison, nor in
  Siberia ... but a man, what can he not learn. Man may teach his
  fellowman something good ... very simply.

Impressed and strengthened by _Luka's_ wonderful faith and vision, the
unfortunates make an attempt to rise from the social swamp. But he has
come too late into their lives. They have been robbed of energy and
will; and conditions always conspire to thrust them back into the
depths. When _Natasha_ and _Vaska_ are about to start out on the road to
a new life, fate overtakes them. The girl, during a scene with her
heartless sister, is terribly scalded by the latter, and _Vaska_,
rushing to the defense of his sweetheart, encounters her brutal
brother-in-law, whom he accidentally kills. Thus these "superfluous
ones" go down in the struggle. Not because of their vicious or degrading
tendencies; on the contrary, it is their better instincts that cause
them to be swept back into the abyss. But though they perish, the
inspiration of _Luka_ is not entirely lost. It is epitomized in the
words of one of the victims.

  _Sahtin._ The old man--he lived from within.... He saw everything
  with his own eyes.... I asked him once: "Grandfather, why do men
  really live?" ... "Man lives ever to give birth to strength. There
  live, for example, the carpenters, noisy, miserable people ... and
  suddenly in their midst is a carpenter born ... such a carpenter as
  the world has never seen: he is above all, no other carpenter can be
  compared to him. He gives a new face to the whole trade ... his own
  face, so to speak ... and with that simple impulse it has advanced
  twenty years ... and so the others live ... the locksmiths and the
  shoemakers, and all the rest of the working people ... and the same
  is true of other classes--all to give birth to strength. Everyone
  thinks that he for himself takes up room in the world, but it turns
  out that he is here for another's benefit--for someone better ... a
  hundred years ... or perhaps longer ... if we live so long ... for
  the sake of genius.... All, my children, all, live only to give
  birth to strength. For that reason we must respect everybody. We
  cannot know who he is, for what purpose born, or what he may yet
  fulfill ... perhaps he has been born for our good fortune ... or
  great benefit."

No stronger indictment than "A Night's Lodging" is to be found in
contemporary literature of our perverse civilization that condemns
thousands--often the very best men and women--to the fate of the Vaskas
and Anyas, doomed as superfluous and unnecessary in society. And yet
they are necessary, aye, they are vital, could we but see beneath the
veil of cold indifference and stupidity to discover the deep humanity,
the latent possibilities in these lowliest of the low. If within our
social conditions they are useless material, often vicious and
detrimental to the general good, it is because they have been denied
opportunity and forced into conditions that kill their faith in
themselves and all that is best in their natures.

The so-called depravity and crimes of these derelicts are fundamentally
the depravity and criminal anti-social attitude of Society itself that
first creates the underworld and, having created it, wastes much energy
and effort in suppressing and destroying the menacing phantom of its own
making,--forgetful of the elemental brotherhood of man, blind to the
value of the individual, and ignorant of the beautiful possibilities
inherent in even the most despised children of the depths.




LEONID ANDREYEV


KING-HUNGER

Leonid Andreyev is the youngest and at the present time the most
powerful dramatist of Russia. Like Tchekhof and Gorki, he is very
versatile: his sketches and stories possess as fine a literary quality
and stirring social appeal as his plays.

No one who has read his terrible picture of war, "The Red Laugh," or his
unsurpassed arraignment of capital punishment, "The Seven Who Were
Hanged," can erase from memory the effect of Leonid Andreyev's forceful
pen.

The drama "King-Hunger" deals with most powerful king on
earth,--_King-Hunger_. In the presence of _Time_ and _Death_ he pleads
with _Time_ to ring the alarm, to call the people to rebellion, because
the earth is replete with suffering: cities, shops, mines, factories and
fields resound with the moans and groans of the people. Their agony is
unbearable.

  _King-Hunger._ Strike the bell, old man; rend to ears its copper
  mouth. Let no one slumber!

But _Time_ has no faith in _King-Hunger_. He knows that _Hunger_ had
deceived the people on many occasions: "You will deceive again,
King-Hunger. You have many a time deluded your children and me." Yet
_Time_ is weary with waiting. He consents to strike the bell.

_King-Hunger_ calls upon the workingmen to rebel. The scene is in a
machine shop; the place is filled with deafening noises as of men's
groans. Every machine, every tool, every screw, holds its human forms
fettered to it and all keep pace with the maddening speed of their
tormentors. And through the thunder and clatter of iron there rises the
terrible plaint of the toilers.

  ---- We are starving.

  ---- We are crushed by machines.

  ---- Their weight smothers us.

  ---- The iron crushes.

  ---- The steel oppresses.

  ---- Oh, what a furious weight! As a mountain upon me!

  ---- The whole earth is upon me.

  ---- The iron hammer flattens me. It crushes the blood out of my
  veins, it fractures my bones, it makes me flat as sheet iron.

  ---- Through the rollers my body is pressed and drawn thin as wire.
  Where is my body? Where is my blood? Where is my soul?

  ---- The wheel is twirling me.

  ---- Day and night screaks the saw cutting steel. Day and night in
  my ears the screeching of the saw cutting steel. All the dreams that
  I see, all the sounds and songs that I hear, is the screeching of
  the saw cutting steel. What is the earth? It is the screeching of
  the saw. What is the sky? it is the screeching of the saw cutting
  steel. Day and night.

  ---- Day and night.

  ---- We are crushed by the machines.

  ---- We ourselves are parts of the machines.

  ---- Brothers! We forge our own chains!

The crushed call upon _King-Hunger_ to help them, to save them from the
horror of their life. Is he not the most powerful king on earth?

_King-Hunger_ comes and exhorts them to rebel. All follow his call
except three. One of these is huge of body, of Herculean built, large of
muscle but with small, flat head upon his massive shoulders. The second
workingman is young, but with the mark of death already upon his brow.
He is constantly coughing and the hectic flush on his cheeks betrays the
wasting disease of his class. The third workingman is a worn-out old
man. Everything about him, even his voice, is deathlike, colorless, as
if in his person a thousand lives had been robbed of their bloom.

  _First Workingman._ I am as old as the earth. I have performed all
  the twelve labors, cleansed stables, cut off the hydra's heads, dug
  and vexed the earth, built cities, and have so altered its face,
  that the Creator himself would not readily recognize her. But I
  can't say why I did all this. Whose will did I shape? To what end
  did I aspire? My head is dull. I am dead tired. My strength
  oppresses me. Explain it to me, O King! Or I'll clutch this hammer
  and crack the earth as a hollow nut.

  _King-Hunger._ Patience, my son! Save your powers for the last great
  revolt. Then you'll know all.

  _First Workingman._ I shall wait.

  _Second Workingman._ He cannot comprehend it, O King. He thinks that
  we must crack the earth. It is a gross falsehood, O King! The earth
  is fair as the garden of God. We must guard and caress her as a
  little girl. Many that stand there in the darkness say, there is no
  sky, no sun, as if eternal night is upon the earth. Just think:
  eternal night!

  _King-Hunger._ Why, coughing blood, do you smile and gaze to heaven?

  _Second Workingman._ Because flowers will blossom on my blood, and I
  see them now. On the breast of a beautiful rich lady I saw a red
  rose--she didn't know it was my blood.

  _King-Hunger._ You are a poet, my son. I suppose you write verses,
  as they do.

  _Second Workingman._ King, O King, sneer not at me. In darkness I
  learned to worship fire. Dying I understood that life is enchanting.
  Oh, how enchanting! King, it shall become a great garden, and there
  shall walk in peace, unmolested, men and animals. Dare not ruffle
  the animals! Wrong not any man! Let them play, embrace, caress one
  another--let them! But where is the path? Where is the path?
  Explain, King-Hunger.

  _King-Hunger._ Revolt.

  _Second Workingman._ Through violence to freedom? Through blood to
  love and kisses?

  _King-Hunger._ There is no other way.

  _Third Workingman._ You lie, King-Hunger. Then you have killed my
  father and grandfather and great-grandfather, and would'st thou kill
  us? Where do you lead us, unarmed? Don't you see how ignorant we
  are, how blind and impotent. You are a traitor. Only here you are a
  king, but there you lackey upon their tables. Only here you wear a
  crown, but there you walk about with a napkin.

_King-Hunger_ will not listen to their protest. He gives them the
alternative of rebellion or starvation for themselves and their
children. They decide to rebel, for _King-Hunger_ is the most powerful
king on earth.

The subjects of _King-Hunger_, the people of the underworld, gather to
devise ways and means of rebellion. A gruesome assembly this, held in
the cellar. Above is the palace ringing with music and laughter, the
fine ladies in gorgeous splendor, bedecked with flowers and costly
jewels, the tables laden with rich food and delicious wines. Everything
is most exquisite there, joyous and happy. And underneath, in the
cellar, the underworld is gathered, all the dregs of society: the robber
and the murderer, the thief and the prostitute, the gambler and the
drunkard. They have come to consult with each other how poverty is to
rebel, how to throw off the yoke, and what to do with the rich.

Various suggestions are made. One advises poisoning the supply of water.
But this is condemned on the ground that the people also have to drink
from the same source.

Another suggests that all books should be burned for they teach the rich
how to oppress. But the motion fails. What is the use of burning the
books? The wealthy have money; they will buy writers, poets and
scientists to make new books.

A third proposes that the children of the rich be killed. From the
darkest, most dismal corner of the cellar comes the protest of an old
woman: "Oh, not the children. Don't touch the children. I have buried
many of them myself. I know the pain of the mother. Besides, the
children are not to blame for the crimes of their parents. Don't touch
the children! The child is pure and sacred. Don't hurt the child!"

A little girl rises, a child of twelve with the face of the aged. She
announces that for the last four years she has given her body for money.
She had been sold by her mother because they needed bread for the
smaller children. During the four years of her terrible life, she has
consorted with all kinds of men, influential men, rich men, pious men.
They infected her. Therefore she proposes that the rich should be
infected.

The underworld plans and plots, and the gruesome meeting is closed with
a frenzied dance between _King-Hunger_ and _Death_, to the music of the
dance above.

       *       *       *       *       *

_King-Hunger_ is at the trial of the _Starving_. He is the most powerful
king on earth: he is at home everywhere, but nowhere more so than at the
trial of the _Starving_. On high chairs sit the judges, in all their
bloated importance. The courtroom is filled with curiosity seekers, idle
ladies dressed as if for a ball; college professors and students looking
for object lessons in criminal depravity; rich young girls are there, to
satisfy a perverted craving for excitement.

The first starveling is brought in muzzled.

  _King-Hunger._ What is your offense, starveling?

  _Old Man._ I stole a five-pound loaf, but it was wrested from me. I
  had only time to bite a small piece of it. Forgive me, I will never
  again--

He is condemned in the name of the _Law_ and _King-Hunger_, the most
powerful king on earth.

Another starveling is brought before the bar of justice. It is a woman,
young and beautiful, but pale and sad. She is charged with killing her
child.

  _Young Woman._ One night my baby and I crossed the long bridge over
  the river. And since I had long before decided, so then approaching
  the middle, where the river is deep and swift, I said: "Look, baby
  dear, how the water is a-roaring below." She said, "I can't reach,
  mamma, the railing is so high." I said, "Come, let me lift you, baby
  dear." And when she was gazing down into the black deep, I threw her
  over. That's all.

The _Law_ and _King-Hunger_ condemn the woman to "blackest hell," there
to be "tormented and burned in everlasting, slackless fires."

The heavy responsibility of meting out justice has fatigued the judges.
The excitement of the trial has sharpened the appetite of the
spectators. _King-Hunger_, at home with all people, proposes that the
court adjourn for luncheon.

The scene in the restaurant represents Hunger devouring like a wild
beast the produce of toil, ravenous, famished, the victim of his own
gluttonous greed.

The monster fed, his hunger and thirst appeased, he now returns to sit
in self-satisfied judgment over the _Starving_. The judges are more
bloated than before, the ladies more eager to bask in the misery of
their fellows. The college professors and students, mentally heavy with
food, are still anxious to add data to the study of human criminality.

A lean boy is brought in, muzzled; he is followed by a ragged woman.

  _Woman._ Have mercy! He stole an apple for me, your Honor. I was
  sick, thought he. "Let me bring her a little apple." Pity him! Tell
  them that you won't any more. Well! Speak!

  _Starveling._ I won't any more.

  _Woman._ I've already punished him myself. Pity his youth, cut not at
  the root his bright little days!

  _Voices._ Indeed, pity one and then the next. Cut the evil at its
  roots.

  ---- One needs courage to be ruthless.

  ---- It is better for them.

  ---- Now he is only a boy, but when he grows up--

  _King-Hunger._ Starveling, you are condemned.

A starveling, heavily muzzled, is dragged in. He is big and strong. He
protests to the court: he has always been a faithful slave. But
_King-Hunger_ announces that the man is dangerous, because the faithful
slave, being strong and honest, is "obnoxious to people of refined
culture and less brawny." The slave is faithful to-day, _King-Hunger_
warns the judges, but "who can trust the to-morrow? Then in his strength
and integrity we will encounter a violent and dangerous enemy."

In the name of justice the faithful slave is condemned. Finally the last
starveling appears. He looks half human, half beast.

  _King-Hunger._ Who are you, starveling? Answer. Do you understand
  human speech?

  _Starveling._ We are the peasants.

  _King-Hunger._ What's your offense?

  _Starveling._ We killed the devil.

  _King-Hunger._ It was a man whom you burnt.

  _Starveling._ No, it was the devil. The priest told us so, and then we
burnt him.

The peasant is condemned. The session of the Court closes with a brief
speech by _King-Hunger_:

  _King-Hunger._ To-day you witnessed a highly instructive spectacle.
  Divine, eternal justice has found in us, as judges and your
  retainers, its brilliant reflection on earth. Subject only to the
  laws of immortal equity, unknown to culpable compassion, indifferent
  to cursing and entreating prayers, obeying the voice of our
  conscience alone--we illumed this earth with the light of human
  wisdom and sublime, sacred truth. Not for a single moment forgetting
  that justice is the foundation of life, we have crucified the Christ
  in days gone by and since, to this very day, we cease not to grace
  Golgotha with new crosses. But, certainly, only ruffians, only
  ruffians are hanged. We showed no mercy to God himself, in the name
  of the laws of immortal justice--would we be now disconcerted by the
  howling of this impotent, starving rabble, by their cursing and
  raging? Let them curse! Life herself blesses us, the great sacred
  truth will screen us with her veil, and the very decree of history
  will not be more just than our own. What have they gained by
  cursing? What? They are there, we're here. They are in dungeons, in
  galleys, on crosses, but we will go to the theater. They perish, but
  we will devour them--devour--devour.

The court has fulfilled its mission. _King-Hunger_ is the most powerful
king on earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The starvelings break out in revolt. The bells peal with deafening
thunder; all is confusion and chaos. The city is immersed in the
blackness of despair, and all is dark. Now and then gusts of fire sweep
the sky illuminating the scene of battle. The air is filled with cries
and groans; there is the thud of falling bodies, and still the fight
goes on.

In a secluded part of the town stands the castle. In its most
magnificent ballroom the rich and their lackeys--scientists, teachers
and artists--are gathered. They tremble with fear at the ominous sounds
outside. To silence the loud beat of their terror they command the
musicians to strike up the liveliest tunes, and the guests whirl about
in a mad dance.

From time to time the door is forced open and someone drops exhausted to
the floor. An artist rushes in, crying out that the art gallery is in
flames.

"Murillo is burning! Velasquez is burning! Giorgione is burning!"

He is not in the least concerned with living values; he dwells in the
past and he wildly bewails the dead weight of the past.

One after another men rush in to report the burning of libraries, the
breaking of statues, and the destruction of monuments. No one among the
wealthy mob regrets the slaughter of human life.

Panic-stricken the mighty fall from their thrones. The Starving,
infuriated and vengeful, are marching on the masters! They must not see
the craven fear of the huddled figures in the mansions,--the lights are
turned off. But darkness is even more terrible to the frightened palace
mob. In the madness of terror they begin to accuse and denounce each
other. They feel as helpless as children before the approaching
avalanche of vengeance.

At this critical moment a man appears. He is small, dirty, and unwashed;
he smells of cheap whisky and bad tobacco; he blows his nose with a red
handkerchief and his manners are disgusting. He is the engineer. He
looks calmly about him, presses a button, and the place is flooded with
light. He brings the comforting news that the revolt is crushed.

  _Engineer._ On Sunny Hill we planted a line of immense machine guns
  of enormous power.... A few projectiles of a specially destructive
  power ... A public square filled with people ... Enough one or two
  such shells.... And should the revolt still continue, we'll shower
  the city.

The revolt is over. All is quiet--the peace of death. The ground is
strewn with bodies, the streets are soaked with blood. Fine ladies flit
about. They lift their children and bid them kiss the mouth of the
cannon, for the cannon have saved the rich from destruction. Prayers and
hymns are offered up to the cannon, for they have saved the masters and
punished the starvelings. And all is quiet, with the stillness of the
graveyard where sleep the dead.

_King-Hunger_, with hollow cheeks and sunken eyes, makes a desperate
last appeal to his children.

  _King-Hunger._ Oh, my son, my son! You clamored so loud--why are you
  mute? Oh, my daughter, my daughter, you hated so profoundly, so
  intensely, you most miserable on earth--arise. Arise from the dust!
  Rend the shadowy bonds of death! Arise! I conjure you in the name of
  Life! You're silent?

For a brief moment all remains silent and immovable. Suddenly a sound is
heard, distant at first, then nearer and nearer, till a
thousand-throated roar breaks forth like thunder:

  ---- We shall yet come!

  ---- We shall yet come!

  ---- Woe unto the victorious!

The Victors pale at the ghostly cry. Seized with terror, they run,
wildly howling:

  ---- The dead arise!

  ---- The dead arise!

"We shall yet come!" cry the dead. For they who died for an ideal never
die in vain. They must come back, they shall come back. And then--woe be
to the victorious! _King-Hunger_ is indeed the most terrible king on
earth, but only for those who are driven by blind forces alone.

But they who can turn on the light, know the power of the things they
have created. They will come, and take possession,--no longer the
wretched scum, but the masters of the world.

A message revolutionary, deeply social in its scope, illumining with
glorious hope the dismal horizon of the disinherited of the earth.



       *       *       *       *       *

  ANARCHISM
  _AND OTHER ESSAYS_
  By EMMA GOLDMAN

Including a biographic SKETCH of the author's interesting career, a
splendid PORTRAIT, and twelve of her most important lectures, some of
which have been suppressed by the police authorities of various cities.
This book expresses the most advanced ideas on social
questions--economics, politics, education and sex.

  Price $1.00     By Mail $1.10

       *       *       *       *       *

  The Selected Works of
  Voltairine de Cleyre

This volume of America's foremost literary rebel and Anarchist
propagandist contains a choice selection of her poems, essays,
sociological discourses, sketches and stories, which have proved a
source of great inspiration to the revolutionary movement during the
last twenty years.

  Edited by ALEXANDER BERKMAN

  Biographical sketch by HIPPOLYTE HAVEL

  Over 500 pp., cloth, with portrait of the author.
  Tastefully printed and bound.

  $1.00 Net.      By Mail, $1.10

  MOTHER EARTH PUBLISHING ASSOCIATION
  74 West 119th Street
  NEW YORK

       *       *       *       *       *

WORKS BY PETER KROPOTKIN

  The Great French Revolution, 1789-1793      $2.00
  Mutual Aid                                   2.00
  Memoirs of a Revolutionist                   2.00
  Russian Literature                           2.00
  Conquest of Bread                            1.00
  Fields, Factories and Workshops (cloth)       .75
  Modern Science and Anarchism (new enlarged
    edition)                                    .50
  The Terror in Russia                          .15
  The State: Its Historic Rle                  .10
  Anarchism: Its Philosophy and Ideal           .05
  Anarchist Communism                           .05
  The Place of Anarchism in Social Evolution    .05
  The Commune of Paris                          .05
  The Wage System                               .05
  Expropriation                                 .05
  Law and Authority                             .05
  War                                           .05
  An Appeal to the Young                        .05

  The First Five Books, 10 Cents Postage Extra
  The Complete Set, $9.00

       *       *       *       *       *

MISCELLANEOUS

  Anarchism--An able and impartial exposition of
    Anarchism                    Paul Eltzbacher      $1.50
  What is Property?--A brilliant arraignment of
    property and the State       Pierre Proudhon       2.00
  The Ego and His Own                Max Stirner        .75
  The Life of Albert Parsons                           1.50
  Speeches of the Chicago Anarchists       Cloth        .75
                                     Paper cover        .30
  God and the State              Michael Bakunin        .25
  Psychology of Political Violence  Emma Goldman        .10
  Anarchism: What It Really Stands for
                                    Emma Goldman        .10
  Syndicalism: The Modern Menace to Capitalism
                                    Emma Goldman        .05
  Marriage and Love                 Emma Goldman        .10
  Patriotism                        Emma Goldman        .05
  Victims of Morality and the Failure of Christianity
                                    Emma Goldman        .10

  Mother Earth Publishing Association
  74 West 119th Street, New York

  Orders for literature should be accompanied by check or money order.
  Special discount on large quantities.

       *       *       *       *       *

HENRIK IBSEN
                                                 Price  Mail
  The Pillars of Society                         $ .25 $ .30
  A Doll's House                                   .25   .30
  Ghosts                                           .25   .30
  An Enemy of Society                              .25   .30

AUGUST STRINDBERG
  The Father; Countess Julia                      1.50  1.62
  Plays: Comrades; Facing Death; Pariah; Easter   1.50  1.62
  The Dream Play; The Link; The Dance of Death    1.50  1.62

HERMANN SUDERMANN
  Magda                                            .50   .55
  The Fires of St. John                           1.25  1.35

GERHART HAUPTMANN
  Volume III--Domestic Dramas
  The Reconciliation; Lonely Lives; Colleague
    Crampton; Michael Kramer                      1.50  1.65
  The Weavers                                     1.00  1.10
  The Sunken Bell                                 1.25  1.35

F. WEDEKIND
  The Awakening of Spring                         1.25  1.35

MAURICE MAETERLINCK
  Joyzelle, and Monna Vanna (Plays)               1.25  1.35

EDMOND ROSTAND
  Chantecler                                      1.25  1.35

BRIEUX
  Three Plays, containing: Maternity; Damaged
    Goods; The Three Daughters of Mons. Dupont    1.50  1.65

GEORGE BERNARD SHAW
  Mrs. Warren's Profession                         .40   .45
  Major Barbara                                    .40   .45

JOHN GALSWORTHY
  Silver Box, Joy, Strife                         1.35  1.50
  The Pigeon                                       .60   .65
  Justice                                          .60   .65
  The Eldest Son                                   .60   .65
  The Fugitive                                     .60   .65

STANLEY HOUGHTON
  Hindle Wakes                                     .75   .80

GITHA SOWERBY
  Rutherford and Son                              1.00  1.10

LENNOX ROBINSON
  Harvest                                         1.00  1.10

T. G. MURRAY
  Maurice Harte                                    .60   .65

LYOF TOLSTOI
  The Power of Darkness                           1.25  1.30

ANTON TCHEKHOV
  I Vol: The Seagull; The Cherry Orchard          1.25  1.30

MAXIM GORKI
  The Lower Depths                                1.50  1.65
  The Smug Citizen                                1.50  1.65

LEONID ANDREYEV
  King Hunger                                     1.50  1.65

  MOTHER EARTH PUBLISHING ASSOCIATION
  74 West 119th Street, New York

  Orders for literature should be accompanied by check or money order.
  Special discount on large quantities.

       *       *       *       *       *

  _An Important Human Document_

  PRISON MEMOIRS
  OF AN ANARCHIST

  BY
  ALEXANDER BERKMAN

The whole truth about prisons has never before been told as this book
tells it. The MEMOIRS deal frankly and intimately with prison life in
its various phases.

  $1.25 By mail $1.40

       *       *       *       *       *

  The Only Anarchist Monthly in America

  MOTHER EARTH

A revolutionary literary magazine devoted to Anarchist thought in
sociology, economics, education, and life.

  Ten Cents a Copy. One Dollar a Year

  EMMA GOLDMAN        _Publisher_
  ALEXANDER BERKMAN   _Editor_

  Bound Volumes 1906-1914, Two Dollars per Volume.

  Order Through Your Book Dealer or Send to
  Mother Earth Publishing Association
  74 West 119th Street, New York







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SOCIAL SIGNIFICANCE OF THE MODERN DRAMA ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The place of the individual in society
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The place of the individual in society

Author: Emma Goldman

Release date: August 16, 2023 [eBook #71418]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: Free Society Forum, 1940

Credits: Fritz Ohrenschall, Louise Pattison and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLACE OF THE INDIVIDUAL IN SOCIETY ***





                 _The_
        PLACE OF THE INDIVIDUAL
               IN SOCIETY

    [Illustration: Author Photograph]

            By EMMA GOLDMAN




NATIONALISM AND ITS RELATION TO CULTURE

_By_ RUDOLF ROCKER


This profound work will revolutionize the intellectual world of thought
by showing that the heretofore accepted notions as to the underlying
causes of Social Phenomena are only partially true and therefore,
inadequate to explain how social changes are affected.

Many great thinkers have sought to formulate a Philosophy of History
which would enable us to analyze and explain, as well as predict social
and historical events. Buckle, Hegel, Marx and Spengler are just a few
among the great thinkers who have contributed to this great task, but
Rocker with his profound understanding and in his illuminating style
shows why the Hegelian Dialectics, Marxs Economic Determinism and
The Spenglerian Philosophy of Destiny have failed.

In this veritable encyclopedia of knowledge, we see before us, in a
living procession, the great cultures of all ages. The thoughts and
ideals of the Ancient Egyptians, Babylonians, Greeks and Romans become
accessible to us with the same clarity and understanding as the thoughts
and ideals of our contemporaries. No intelligent person regardless of
his school of thought, can afford to miss reading this great work.

Nationalism and Its Relation to Culture will be published in two
volumes and sold at $7.50 for both volumes. We offer You this great work
at a price of $5.00, if you SUBSCRIBE IN ADVANCE.

This monumental work will soon be off the press. We urge you to send
your subscriptions now--in advance. By so doing, you will help our
committee complete the work and you will save $2.50.

SUBSCRIBE TODAY.

Subscriptions can be mailed to the following committees:

    ADELAIDE SCHULKIND
    104 Fifth Avenue
    New York, New York

    B. YELENSKY
    3332 Potomac Ave.
    Chicago, Illinois

    C. V. COOK
    1038 S. Alvarado St.
    Los Angeles, Calif.




THE INDIVIDUAL, SOCIETY AND THE STATE

By

EMMA GOLDMAN


The minds of men are in confusion, for the very foundations of our
civilization seem to be tottering. People are losing faith in the
existing institutions, and the more intelligent realize that capitalist
industrialism is defeating the very purpose it is supposed to serve.

The world is at a loss for a way out. Parliamentarism and democracy are
on the decline. Salvation is being sought in Fascism and other forms of
strong government.

The struggle of opposing ideas now going on in the world involves social
problems urgently demanding a solution. The welfare of the individual
and the fate of human society depend on the right answer to those
questions. The crisis, unemployment, war, disarmament, international
relations, etc., are among those problems.

The State, government with its functions and powers, is now the subject
of vital interest to every thinking man. Political developments in all
civilized countries have brought the questions home. Shall we have a
strong government? Are democracy and parliamentary government to be
preferred, or is Fascism of one kind or another,
dictatorship--monarchical, bourgeois or proletarian--the solution of the
ills and difficulties that beset society today?

In other words, shall we cure the evils of democracy by more democracy,
or shall we cut the Gordian knot of popular government with the sword of
dictatorship?

My answer is neither the one nor the other. I am against dictatorship
and Fascism as I am opposed to parliamentary regimes and so-called
political democracy.

Nazism has been justly called an attack on civilization. This
characterization applies with equal force to every form of dictatorship;
indeed, to every kind of suppression and coercive authority. For what is
civilization in the true sense? All progress has been essentially an
enlargement of the liberties of the individual with a corresponding
decrease of the authority wielded over him by external forces. This
holds good in the realm of physical as well as of political and economic
existence. In the physical world man has progressed to the extent in
which he has subdued the forces of nature and made them useful to
himself. Primitive man made a step on the road to progress when he first
produced fire and thus triumphed over darkness, when he chained the wind
or harnessed water.

What role did authority or government play in human endeavor for
betterment, in invention and discovery? None whatever, or at least none
that was helpful. It has always been the =individual= that has
accomplished every miracle in that sphere, usually in spite of the
prohibition, persecution and interference by authority, human and
divine.

Similarly, in the political sphere, the road of progress lay in getting
away more and more from the authority of the tribal chief or of the
clan, of prince and king, of government, of the State. Economically,
progress has meant greater well-being of ever larger numbers.
Culturally, it has signified the result of all the other
achievements--greater independence, political, mental and psychic.

Regarded from this angle, the problems of mans relation to the State
assumes an entirely different significance. It is no more a question of
whether dictatorship is preferable to democracy, or Italian Fascism
superior to Hitlerism. A larger and far more vital question poses
itself: Is political government, is the State beneficial to mankind, and
how does it affect the individual in the social scheme of things?

The individual is the true reality in life. A cosmos in himself, he does
not exist for the State, nor for that abstraction called society, or
the nation, which is only a collection of individuals. Man, the
individual, has always been and, necessarily is the sole source and
motive power of evolution and progress. Civilization has been a
continuous struggle of the individual or of groups of individuals
against the State and even against society, that is, against the
majority subdued and hypnotized by the State and State worship. Mans
greatest battles have been waged against man-made obstacles and
artificial handicaps imposed upon him to paralyze his growth and
development. Human thought has always been falsified by tradition and
custom, and perverted false education in the interests of those who held
power and enjoyed privileges. In other words, by the State and the
ruling classes. This constant incessant conflict has been the history of
mankind.

Individuality may be described as the consciousness of the individual as
to what he is and how he lives. It is inherent in every human being and
is a thing of growth. The State and social institutions come and go, but
individuality remains and persists. The very essence of individuality is
expression; the sense of dignity and independence is the soil wherein it
thrives. Individuality is not the impersonal and mechanistic thing that
the State treats as an individual. The individual is not merely the
result of heredity and environment, of cause and effect. He is that and
a great deal more, a great deal else. The living man cannot be defined;
he is the fountain-head of all life and all values; he is not a part of
this or of that; he is a whole, an individual whole, a growing,
changing, yet always constant whole.

Individuality is not to be confused with the various ideas and concepts
of Individualism; much less with that rugged individualism which is
only a masked attempt to repress and defeat the individual and his
individuality. So-called Individualism is the social and economic
=laissez faire=: the exploitation of the masses by the classes by means of
legal trickery, spiritual debasement and systematic indoctrination of
the servile spirit, which process is known as education. That corrupt
and perverse individualism is the strait-jacket of individuality. It
has converted life into a degrading race for externals, for possession,
for social prestige and supremacy. Its highest wisdom is the devil take
the hindmost.

This rugged individualism has inevitably resulted in the greatest
modern slavery, the crassest class distinctions, driving millions to the
breadline. Rugged individualism has meant all the individualism for
the masters, while the people are regimented into a slave caste to serve
a handful of self-seeking supermen. America is perhaps the best
representative of this kind of individualism, in whose name political
tyranny and social oppression are defended and held up as virtues; while
every aspiration and attempt of man to gain freedom and social
opportunity to live is denounced as un-American and evil in the name
of that same individualism.

There was a time when the State was unknown. In his natural condition
man existed without any State or organized government. People lived as
families in small communities; They tilled the soil and practiced the
arts and crafts. The individual, and later the family, was the unit of
social life where each was free and the equal of his neighbor. Human
society then was not a State but an =association=; a =voluntary=
association for mutual protection and benefit. The elders and more
experienced members were the guides and advisers of the people. They
helped to manage the affairs of life, not to rule and dominate the
individual.

Political government and the State were a much later development,
growing out of the desire of the stronger to take advantage of the
weaker, of the few against the many. The State, ecclesiastical and
secular, served to give an appearance of legality and right to the wrong
done by the few to the many. That =appearance= of right was necessary the
=easier= to rule the people, because no government can exist without the
=consent= of the people, consent open, tacit or assumed. Constitutionalism
and democracy are the modern forms of that alleged consent; the consent
being inoculated and indoctrinated by what is called education, at
home, in the church, and in every other phase of life.

That consent is the belief in authority, in the necessity for it. At its
base is the doctrine that man is evil, vicious, and too incompetent to
know what is good for him. On this all government and oppression is
built. God and the State exist and are supported by this dogma.

Yet the State is nothing but a =name=. It is an abstraction. Like other
similar conceptions--nation, race, humanity--it has no organic reality.
To call the State an organism shows a diseased tendency to make a fetish
of words.

The State is a term for the legislative and administrative machinery
whereby certain business of the people is transacted, and badly so.
There is nothing sacred, holy or mysterious about it. The State has no
more conscience or moral mission than a commercial company for working a
coal mine or running a railroad.

The State has no more existence than gods and devils have. They are
equally the reflex and creation of man, for man, the =individual=, is the
only reality. The State is but the shadow of man, the shadow of his
opaqueness of his ignorance and fear.

Life begins and ends with man, the individual. Without him there is no
race, no humanity, no State. No, not even society is possible without
man. It is the individual who lives, breathes and suffers. His
development, his advance, has been a continuous struggle against the
fetishes of his own creation and particularly so against the State.

In former days religious authority fashioned political life in the image
of the Church. The authority of the State, the rights of rulers came
from on high; power, like faith, was divine. Philosophers have written
thick volumes to prove the sanctity of the State; some have even clad it
with infallibility and with god-like attributes. Some have talked
themselves into the insane notion that the State is superhuman, the
supreme reality, the absolute.

Enquiry was condemned as blasphemy. Servitude was the highest virtue. By
such precepts and training certain things came to be regarded as
self-evident, as sacred of their truth, but because of constant and
persistent repetition.

All progress has been essentially an unmasking of divinity and
mystery, of alleged sacred, eternal truth; it has been a gradual
elimination of the abstract and the substitution in its place of the
real, the concrete. In short, of facts against fancy, of knowledge
against ignorance, of light against darkness.

That slow and arduous liberation of the individual was not accomplished
by the aid of the State. On the contrary, it was by continuous conflict,
by a life-and-death struggle with the State, that even the smallest
vestige of independence and freedom has been won. It has cost mankind
much time and blood to secure what little it has gained so far from
kings, tsars and governments.

The great heroic figure of that long Golgotha has been Man. It has
=always= been the individual, often alone and singly, at other times in
unity and co-operation with others of his kind, who has fought and bled
in the age-long battle against suppression and oppression, against the
powers that enslave and degrade him.

More than that and more significant: It was man, the individual, whose
soul first rebelled against injustice and degradation; it was the
individual who first conceived the idea of resistance to the conditions
under which he chafed. In short, it is always the individual who is the
parent of the liberating =thought= as well as of the =deed=.

This refers not only to political struggles, but to the entire gamut of
human life and effort, in all ages and climes. It has always been the
individual, the man of strong mind and will to liberty, who paved the
way for every human advance, for every step toward a freer and better
world; in science, philosophy and art, as well as in industry, whose
genius rose to the heights, conceiving the impossible, visualizing its
realization and imbuing others with his enthusiasm to work and strive
for it. Socially speaking, it was always the prophet, the seer, the
idealist, who dreamed of a world more to his hearts desire and who
served as the beacon light on the road to greater achievement.

The State, every government whatever its form, character or color--be it
absolute or constitutional, monarchy or republic, Fascist, Nazi or
Bolshevik--is by its very nature conservative, static, intolerant of
change and opposed to it. Whatever changes it undergoes are always the
result of pressure exerted upon it, pressure strong enough to =compel= the
ruling powers to submit peaceably or otherwise, generally
otherwise--that is, by revolution. Moreover, the inherent conservatism
of government, of authority of any kind, unavoidably becomes
reactionary. For two reasons: first, because it is in the nature of
government not only to retain the power it has, but also to strengthen,
widen and perpetuate it, nationally as well as internationally. The
stronger authority grows, the greater the State and its power, the less
it can tolerate a similar authority or political power along-side of
itself. The psychology of government demands that its influence and
prestige constantly grow, at home and abroad, and it exploits every
opportunity to increase it. This tendency is motivated by the financial
and commercial interests back of the government, represented and served
by it. The fundamental =raison detre= of every government to which,
incidentally, historians of former days wilfully shut their eyes, has
become too obvious now even for professors to ignore.

The other factor which impels governments to become even more
conservative and reactionary is their inherent distrust of the
individual and fear of individuality. Our political and social scheme
cannot afford to tolerate the individual and his constant quest for
innovation. In self-defense the State therefore suppresses,
persecutes, punishes and even deprives the individual of life. It is
aided in this by every institution that stands for the preservation of
the existing order. It resorts to every form of violence and force, and
its efforts are supported by the moral indignation of the majority
against the heretic, the social dissenter and the political rebel--the
majority for centuries drilled in State worship, trained in discipline
and obedience and subdued by the awe of authority in the home, the
school, the church and the press.

The strongest bulwark of authority is uniformity; the least divergence
from it is the greatest crime. The wholesale mechanisation of modern
life has increased uniformity a thousandfold. It is everywhere present,
in habits, tastes, dress, thoughts and ideas. Its most concentrated
dullness is public opinion. Few have the courage to stand out against
it. He who refuses to submit is at once labelled queer, different
and decried as a disturbing element in the comfortable stagnancy of
modern life.

Perhaps even more than constituted authority, it is social uniformity
and sameness that harass the individual mast. His very uniqueness,
separateness and differentiation make him an alien, not only in his
native place, but even in his own home. Often more so than the foreign
born who generally falls in with the established.

In the true sense ones native land, with its background of tradition,
early impressions, reminiscences and other things dear to one, is not
enough to make sensitive human beings feel =at home=. A certain atmosphere
of belonging, the consciousness of being at one with the people and
environment, is more essential to ones feeling of home. This holds good
in relation to ones family, the smaller local circle, as well as the
larger phase of the life and activities commonly called ones country.
The individual whose vision encompasses the whole world often feels
nowhere so hedged in and out of touch with his surroundings than in his
native land.

In pre-war time the individual could at least escape national and family
boredom. The whole world was open to his longings and his quests. Now
the world has become a prison, and life continual solitary confinement.
Especially is this true since the advent of dictatorship, right and
left.

Friedrich Nietzsche called the State a cold monster. What would he have
called the hideous beast in the garb of modern dictatorship? Not that
government had ever allowed much scope to the individual; but the
champions of the new State ideology do not grant even that much. The
individual is nothing, they declare, it is the collectivity which
counts. Nothing less than the complete surrender of the individual will
satisfy the insatiable appetite of the new deity.

Strangely enough, the loudest advocates of this new gospel are to be
found among the British and American intelligentsia. Just now they are
enamored with the dictatorship of the proletariat. In theory only, to
be sure. In practice, they still prefer the few liberties in their own
respective countries. They go to Russia for a short visit or as salesmen
of the revolution, but they feel safer and more comfortable at home.

Perhaps it is not only lack of courage which keeps these good Britishers
and Americans in their native lands rather than in the millenium come.
Subconsciously there may lurk the feeling that individuality remains the
most fundamental fact of all human association, suppressed and
persecuted yet never defeated, and in the long run the victor.

The genius of man, which is but another name for personality and
individuality, bores its way through all the caverns of dogma, through
the thick walls of tradition and custom, defying all taboos, setting
authority at naught, facing contumely and the scaffold--ultimately to be
blessed as prophet and martyr by succeeding generations. But for the
genius of man, that inherent, persistent quality of individuality, we
would be still roaming the primeval forests.

Peter Kropotkin has shown what wonderful results this unique force of
mans individuality has achieved when strengthened by =co-operation= with
other individualities. The one-sided and entirely inadequate Darwinian
theory of the struggle for existence received its biological and
sociological completion from the great Anarchist scientist and thinker.
In his profound work, _Mutual Aid_, Kropotkin shows that in the animal
kingdom, as well as in human society, co-operation--as opposed to
internecine strife and struggle--has worked for the survival and
evolution of the species. He demonstrated that only mutual aid and
voluntary co-operation--=not= the omnipotent, all-devastating State--can
create the basis for a free individual and associational life.

At present the individual is the pawn of the zealots of dictatorship and
the equally obsessed zealots of rugged individualism. The excuse of
the former is its claim of a new objective. The latter does not even
make a pretense of anything new. As a matter of fact rugged
individualism has learned nothing and forgotten nothing. Under its
guidance the brute struggle for physical existence is still kept up.
Strange as it may seem, and utterly absurd as it is, the struggle for
physical survival goes merrily on though the necessity for it has
entirely disappeared. Indeed, the struggle is being continued apparently
=because= there is no necessity for it. Does not so-called overproduction
prove it? Is not the world-wide economic crisis an eloquent
demonstration that the struggle for existence is being maintained by the
blindness of rugged individualism at the risk of its own destruction?

One of the insane characteristics of this struggle is the complete
negation of the relation of the producer to the things he produces. The
average worker has no inner point of contact with the industry he is
employed in, and he is a stranger to the process of production of which
he is a mechanical part. Like any other cog of the machine, he is
replaceable at any time by other similar depersonalized human beings.

The intellectual proletarian, though he foolishly thinks himself a free
agent, is not much better off. He, too, has a little choice or
self-direction, in his particular metier as his brother who works with
his hands. Material considerations and desire for greater social
prestige are usually the deciding factors in the vocation of the
intellectual. Added to it is the tendency to follow in the footsteps of
family tradition, and become doctors, lawyers, teachers, engineers, etc.
The groove requires less effort and personality. In consequence nearly
everybody is out of place in our present scheme of things. The masses
plod on, partly because their senses have been dulled by the deadly
routine of work and because they must eke out an existence. This applies
with even greater force to the political fabric of today. There is no
place in its texture for free choice of independent thought and
activity. There is a place only for voting and tax-paying puppets.

The interests of the State and those of the individual differ
fundamentally and are antagonistic. The State and the political and
economic institutions it supports can exist only by fashioning the
individual to their particular purpose; training him to respect law and
order; teaching him obedience, submission and unquestioning faith in
the wisdom and justice of government; above all, loyal service and
complete self-sacrifice when the State commands it, as in war. The State
puts itself and its interests even above the claims of religion and of
God. It punishes religious or conscientious scruples against
individuality because there is no individuality without liberty, and
liberty is the greatest menace to authority.

The struggle of the individual against these tremendous odds is the more
difficult--too often dangerous to life and limb--because it is not truth
or falsehood which serves as the criterion of the opposition he meets.
It is not the validity or usefulness of his thought or activity which
rouses against him the forces of the State and of public opinion. The
persecution of the innovator and protestant has always been inspired by
fear on the part of constituted authority of having its infallibility
questioned and its power undermined.

Mans true liberation, individual and collective, lies in his
emancipation from authority and from the belief in it. All human
evolution has been a struggle in that direction and for that object. It
is not invention and mechanics which constitute development. The
ability to travel at the rate of 100 miles an hour is no evidence of
being civilized. True civilization is to be measured by the individual,
the unit of all social life; by his individuality and the extent to
which it is free to have its being, to grow and expand unhindered by
invasive and coercive, authority.

Socially speaking, the criterion of civilization and culture is the
degree of liberty and economic opportunity which the individual enjoys;
of social and international unity and co-operation unrestricted by
man-made laws and other artificial obstacles; by the absence of
privileged castes and by the reality of liberty and human dignity; in
short, by the true emancipation of the individual.

Political absolutism has been abolished because men have realized in the
course of time that absolute power is evil and destructive. But the same
thing is true of all power, whether it be the power of privilege, of
money, of the priest, of the politician or of so-called democracy. In
its effect on individuality it matters little what the particular
character of coercion is--whether it be as black as Fascism, as yellow
as Nazism or as pretentiously red as Bolshevism. It is power that
corrupts and degrades both master and slave and it makes no difference
whether the power is wielded by an autocrat, by parliament or Soviets.
More pernicious than the power of a dictator is that of a class; the
most terrible--the tyranny of a majority.

The long process of history has taught man that division and strife mean
death, and that unity and co-operation advance his cause, multiply his
strength and further his welfare. The spirit of government has always
worked against the social application of this vital lesson, except where
it served the State and aided its own particular interests. It is this
anti-progressive and anti-social spirit of the State and of the
privileged castes back of it which has been responsible for the bitter
struggle between man and man. The individual and ever larger groups of
individuals are beginning to see beneath the surface of the established
order of things. No longer are they so blinded as in the past by the
glare and tinsel of the State idea, and of the blessings of rugged
individualism. Man is reaching out for the wider scope of human
relations which liberty alone can give. For true liberty is not a mere
scrap of paper called constitution, legal right or law. It is not
an abstraction derived from the non-reality known as the State. It is
not the =negative= thing of being free =from= something, because with
=such= freedom you may starve to death. Real freedom, true liberty =is
positive=: it is freedom to something; it is the liberty to be, to do;
in short, the liberty of actual and active opportunity.

That sort of liberty is not a gift: it is the natural right of man, of
every human being. It cannot be given; it cannot be conferred by any law
or government. The need of it, the longing for it, is inherent in the
individual. Disobedience to every form of coercion is the instinctive
expression of it. Rebellion and revolution are the more or less
conscious attempt to achieve it. Those manifestations, individual and
social, are fundamentally expressions of the values of man. That those
values may be nurtured, the community must realize that its greatest and
most lasting asset is the unit--the individual.

In religion, as in politics, people speak of abstractions and believe
they are dealing with realities. But when it does come to the real and
the concrete, most people seem to lose vital touch with it. It may well
be because reality alone is too matter-of-fact, too cold to enthuse the
human soul. It can be aroused to enthusiasm only by things out of the
commonplace, out of the ordinary. In other words, the Ideal is the spark
that fires the imagination and hearts of men. Some ideal is needed to
rouse man out of the inertia and humdrum of his existence and turn the
abject slave into an heroic figure.

Right here, of course, comes the Marxist objector who has outmarxed Marx
himself. To such a one, man is a mere puppet in the hands of that
metaphysical Almighty called economic determinism or, more vulgarly, the
class struggle. Mans will, individual and collective, his psychic life
and mental orientation count for almost nothing with our Marxist and do
not affect his conception of human history.

No intelligent student will deny the importance of the economic factor
in the social growth and development of mankind. But only narrow and
wilful dogmatism can persist in remaining blind to the important role
played by an idea as conceived by the imagination and aspirations of the
individual.

It were vain and unprofitable to attempt to balance one factor as
against another in human experience. No one single factor in the complex
of individual or social behavior can be designated as the factor of
decisive quality. We know too little, and may never know enough, of
human psychology to weigh and measure the relative values of this or
that factor in determining mans conduct. To form such dogmas in their
social connotation is nothing short of bigotry; yet, perhaps, it has its
uses, for the very attempt to do so proved the persistence of the human
will and confutes the Marxists.

Fortunately even some Marxists are beginning to see that all is not well
with the Marxian creed. After all, Marx was but human--all too
human--hence by no means infallible. The practical application of
economic determinism in Russia is helping to clear the minds of the more
intelligent Marxists. This can be seen in the trans-valuation of Marxian
values going on in Socialist and even Communist ranks in some European
countries. They are slowly realising that their theory has overlooked
the human element, _den Menschen_, is a Socialist paper put it.
Important as the economic factor is, it is not enough. The rejuvenation
of mankind needs the inspiration and energising force of an ideal.

Such an ideal I see in Anarchism. To be sure, not in the popular
misrepresentations of Anarchism spread by the worshippers of the State
and authority. I mean the philosophy of a new social order based on the
released energies of the individual and the free association of
liberated individuals.

Of all social theories Anarchism alone steadfastly proclaims that
society exists for man, not man for society. The sole legitimate purpose
of society is to serve the needs and advance the aspiration of the
individual. Only by doing so can it justify its existence and be an aid
to progress and culture.

The political parties and men savagely scrambling for power will scorn
me as hopelessly out of tune with our time. I cheerfully admit the
charge. I find comfort in the assurance that their hysteria lacks
enduring quality. Their hosanna is but of the hour.

Mans yearning for liberation from all authority and power will never be
soothed by their cracked song. Mans quest for freedom from every
shackle is eternal. It must and will go on.


    This pamphlet is sponsored by the Free Society Forum
    1241 N. California Avenue
    Chicago, Illinois




     The Vanguard

     An anarchist--Communist Publication

     45 West 17th St.

     New York

     Subscription $1.00 per year.




     Bolshevism Promises and Reality

     by

     G. Maximov

     One of the most effective and best documented pamphlets on the
     Russian Revolution, by a man who lived through its various
     stages.

     Sponsored by the Free Society Forum.


     Single Copy 5c

     in Lots of 100

     3c a copy, plus postage

     B. Yelensky, Secretary

     3332 Potomac Avenue

     Chicago, Illinois




     LIVING MY LIFE

     by

     _Emma Goldman_

     Recognized as one of the greatest autobiographies ever written.

     Formerly $5.00

     Now available for $1.49

     through
     THE GARDEN CITY PUBLISHING COMPANY
     GARDEN CITY, NEW YORK

     A human document of the most absorbing thought.

     The N. Y. Times

     A life unmatched by any woman of our time.

     The N. Y. Herald-Tribune




     jaybass [Illustration: printers logo] printing




Transcribers Note


Obvious typographical errors corrected as follows:

  On Page 3: Is political goverment, is the State...--corrected to
      government.
  On Page 10: But for the genuis of man, that...--corrected to
      genius.
  On Back Cover: ...most absorbing though.--corrected to
      thought.

Punctuation errors corrected without note.

Questionable spellings of millenium, wilful and wilfully retained.

_Text_ denotes italic and =text= denotes bold in this e-text version.

The title given on the cover of this Pamphlet and the title given on
the first page are indeed different.




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PLACE OF THE INDIVIDUAL IN SOCIETY ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given awayyou may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (the
Foundation or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase Project Gutenberg appears, or with which the
phrase Project Gutenberg is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase Project
Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original Plain
Vanilla ASCII or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

     You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.
    
     You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg
        works.
    
     You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
     You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain Defects, such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you AS-IS, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenbergs
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your states laws.

The Foundations business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundations website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

