                    Analytic Summary of Leibniz’s Monadology


                                      J.-M. Kuczynski

    Gottfried Leibniz wrote a supremely brilliant but notoriously obscure

treatise titled The Monadology. What follows is an analytic summary of that

work.

  The following material is entirely my own, but it is structured in the same

as the Monadology, and each part of the present work clearly states the

meaning of the same-numbered part of Monadology itself. 

    There are contradictions in the following work, for example, in section it

is said that monads cannot change, and in section 11 it is said that they can

change. But these contradictions are present in the Monadology itself, and

they are present in this work only because the present work is an elucidation

of the Monadology.

  1. The monad is simple. it has no parts.

  2. There must simple substances, since composite ones consist of them.


  3. What is simple has no extension and therefore no shape. Monads are

the true atoms of nature.

  4. Monads cannot be destroyed, since to destroy is to take apart and

monads have no parts.

  5. For the same reason mutatis mutandis, monads cannot be created.

  6. Therefore, monads come into, and depart from, existence

instantaneously; they can be destroyed only be being annihilated, not

decomposed, and they come into existence ex nihilo, and not in the gradual

manner of composites.


  7. It follows that monads cannot undergo internal change. Internal change

requires internal parts, and monads have no such parts. It also follows that

nothing can change a monad. To be changed is for one’s internal parts to be

rearranged, and monads have no such parts.

  8. Even though monads don’t have parts, they do have qualities. Monads

do not differ in respect of size from one another, as there are no quantitativedifferences between any two monads. So if there are any such differences,

they must be qualitative. But monads cannot possibly be qualitatively

identical. Given that there is no empty space, it follows that each point in

space is occupied by a monad and that change involves monads switching

places. But if monads are all the same, then the state of the universe before

two monads switch places is just like the state of the universe after they do

so. Wherefore, unless monads differ in quality, there is no such thing as

change.

  9. It follows that some monads are different from some monads. But a

stronger claim is warranted, namely, no two monads are the same. This is

because no two objects are the same. And the differences between any two

objects are rooted in the natures of those objects. It is not simply that those

objects differ in respect of their relations to other objects. It is that those two

objects have different natures.            


  10. Every created being can change. Therefore, monads can change. In

fact, monads are always changing.

  11. These changes come from within. This is because nothing can affect a

monad, as we saw in proposition 7.

  12. And each monad must change in its own way. This is a consequence

of the fact that each monad is unique.

  13. It follows that even though monads do not consist of parts, there is a

respect in which they are internally differentiated. They are qualitatively

internally differentiated. And when a given monad changes, it must do so in

some respects, and not others, since total change would be tantamount to

annihilated, and it must do so continuously, since all changes are continuous.


  14. Thus, when a monad changes, the change is internal to a being that

remains fundamentally unified. Such changes-within-unity are nothing other

than we call perception. Perception is not the same thing as thought. Nor is it

the same thing as consciousness. The reasons for this will soon be made

clear. Cartesians hold that consciousness and mind are the same thing, and

they deny that there is anything in one’s mind of which one is not conscious.

For this reason, they wrongly hold that mind and body are distinct and that

the soul can perish.  15. The force that drives a monad’s internal changes may be referred to

as appetition. Any given change in a monad begins with one perception and

strives towards a different perception. The target-perception is never reached,

but a perception approximating to it is reached, and new perceptions are

generated in the course of this transition.

  16. The soul is simple. Therefore, we are simple substances. And we find

that the object of even the simplest of our perceptions is internally

differentiated. It follows that we are internally differentiated, since we could

not be aware complexity without ourselves being complex.  


  17. Perception cannot be explained mechanically. Suppose that some

machine could create perceptions. That machine could be expanded, so that

we could walk around inside it.  If we did so, we would see cogs and levers

and pulleys; we would see various interacting objects, as in a factory. But we

certainly we would not see perceptions or thoughts or feelings. Interacting

objects do not create perceptions. Therefore, multiplicities of objects do not

have perceptions. Therefore, perceptions are had by simple beings.

  18. An entelechy is a self-powering being. Souls are entelechies, and so

therefore are monads.

  19. We must distinguish between minds and souls. Where there is

perception, there is a mind. But it is only where perception is accompanied by

memory that there is a soul.

    Henceforth, I refer to mere monads, I am referring to beings that have

perception but not memory.

  20. When we are in a dreamless sleep, our condition is more like that of a

mere monad than it is otherwise. But we wake up from even the deepest

sleep, showing that our condition is different from that of a mere monad even

when we are in the depths of the deepest sleep.


  21. But it does not follow that monads have no perceptions. They

obviously do. What follows is that their perceptions are weak and confused,

as we are during a dizzy spell or period of delirium.

  22.  A monad’s condition at any given moment is a consequence of its

earlier condition. It follows that a monad’s future condition is implicit in its

present condition.  23. When you recover from a dizzy spell, you remember what it was like.

You therefore must have been taking a mental note of your condition, even

though you were not aware of doing so while you were in your delirium. It

follows that you were having these perceptions unconsciously. Also,

perceptions must arise from other perceptions, just as motions must be caused

by other motions, and it follows that conscious perceptions are unconscious

perceptions that have become conscious.

  24. When we are lucid, it is because our mental state is appropriately

articulated, some of our perceptions being more intense, or otherwise more

accented, than others. And when we are in a stupor, it is because our

perceptions are not thus distinguished from one another. Mental haziness is

identical with this absence of internal psychological structure.


  25. Animals often have enormous powerful sensory modalities. The

reason an eagle sees so well is that its eyes do such a good job of organize the

light rays that strike, and the reason a bat hears so well is that its ears do such

a good job of organizing the undulations that affect it. Whenever a creature is

possessed of a given sensory modality, it is because his body is structured in

a very particular way. I will later explain how a creature’s perception depend

on its bodily configuration.

  26. If a creature has neither memory nor reason, experiences do not

change it. If it has either memory or reason, experiences do change it. And in

some cases, memory-based changes mimic reason-based changes. A dog that

has been beaten enough times will cringe at the mere sight of the stick used to

beat it. The dog’s behavior is similar to that of a person who deduces that he

is in danger. But the dog’s behavior is reflexive, being purely memory-based,

and does not embody any actual thought.

  27. A dog that has suffered a few severe beatings may cringe when it sees

its master’s stick, and so may a dog that has suffered many mild beatings.

Sometimes a long series of mild perceptions has the same effect as a few

intense ones. 

  28. Most of our beliefs are based solely on past experience, there being

no element of rational inference. We believe that the sun will rise because

experience has conditioned us to believe it. Only the astronomer believes it

on the basis of reason.  29. What distinguishes us from animals is that we are aware of necessary

truths. Unlike animals, we grasp the concept of logical dependence, and this

is what makes us rational. Because we are rational, we think about the world

in a scientific manner. Because we are rational, we are able to think about

ourselves and about God.

  30. It is because we grasp necessary truths that we can think about

ourselves. And because we can think about ourselves, we can think about

simples, composites, mind, and matter. We thereby learn that what limits one

being may not limit another. On this basis, we learn that what limits us need

not limit some other being. On this basis, we learn that what limits any finite

being need not limit some other being. And on this basis, we grasp the

concept of God, that is, of an unlimited being.


  31. All reasoning is based on two principles. First, the Principle of Non-

contradition. Self-contradictory statements are always false, and the negation

of such a statement is always true.

  32. Second, the Principle of Sufficient Reason. No statement can be true,

no fact can exist, unless there is an adequate reason. In most cases, we do not

know the reason.

  33. Also, there are two kinds of truths: Truths of Reason and Truths of

Fact.

  Truths of reason are necessary, and their negations cannot possibly be

true.

  Truths of fact are contingent, and their negations can be true.

  34. When a truth is necessary, we can learn why it is true by analyzing it.

Analyzing a statement involves decomposing it into its simple constitutents.


  35. This is what a mathematician is doing when he derives a truth of

mathematics from a body of axioms.

  36. Analysis reaches an end with these basic principles---these axioms, as

it were---and the mark of a basic principle is that its negation is explicitly

self-contradictory. These basic principles are always identities, that is, truths

of the form x=x.

  37.  Mathematicians give reasons for necessary truths. But there aresufficient reasons for contingent truths, as well. Consider the movements I

am now making with my pen. These movements are the end-result of an

infinitely long chain of events, and any given link in that chain is of infinite

internal complexity. Moreover, innumerably many past mental states of mine

are responsible for my having the motivation to make these markings.

  38. But each of these various antecedents of my behavior leads simply to

more antecedents, and each of the internal nuances of any such antecedent

refers us simply to more internal structure. No matter how far back in time

we follow this chain of events, and no matter how intensively we scrutinize

any given one of its links, we fail to encounter a sufficient reason for my

behavior. To find such a reason, we must look outside this sequence of

contingencies.


  39. This necessary being is sufficient for all of these contingencies, which

are all interconnected. So there is one God and this God is sufficient.

  40. There is nothing distinct from this being that does not depend for its

existence on it. Therefore, this being is, quite literally, universally, in that its

existence is implicated in that of every aspect of everything in the universe.

    Moreover, this being cannot be possible without being actual. Therefore,

its existence is necessary.

  41. If this being were limited in any way, it would not be sufficient. But it

is sufficient, so it is not limited, and it is therefore unlimited in respect of how

much reality is in it. 

  42.  It follows that God is responsible for each creature’s perfections. It

also follows that each creature is itself responsible for its own imperfections.

A creature’s imperfections are what limit it, and what limits it is what

distinguishes it from God.


  43. It also follows that God is the source not only of what is actual, but of

what is possible, and that he is therefore responsible for the existence of

essences. For it is in God’s mind, and nowhere else, that possibilities exist,

and without God there would be no possibilities, and therefore no actualities

either.

  44. This is because possibilities do not exist unless grounded in

actualities and must therefore grounded in necessary and eternal truths and,therefore, in a being whose essence involves existence. It follows that God’s

being possible is sufficient for His being actual.  

  45. Of God and God alone can it be said that He must exist if He can

exist.

  God is unlimited and his existence is in no way negated. Nothing

contradicts his existence and it therefore does not self-contradict. Since what

is not self-contradictory is possible, God is possible and, since possible,

existent.

  Here, then, is a second proof of God’s existence.


  46. According to Descartes, necessary truths depend on God’s will and

are therefore arbitrary. This is a mistake. God’s will is responsible for

contingent truths. God’s intellect is responsible for necessary truths. Such

truths constitute His intellect.

  47. Thus, God is the ultimate simple substance. All other monads are His

creations. They are continuously created by the silent flashes of lightning that

God gives off. Finite beings are affected by these flashes of lightning and to

that extent, and only to that are they limited.

  48. In God, there is

    *Power, which is the source of everything,

    *Knowledge, which contains every truth, and

  *Will, which produces changes, as God sees fit.

    These correspond, respectively, to


  *The monad’s basic nature,

  *The monad’s perceptual faculty, and

  *The monad’s appetitive faculty.

    Some derived monads have these attributes to a higher degree than

others, but all such monads have them a finite degree. Only God has them to

an unlimited degree. The greater the extent to which a given monad has these

attributes, the more God-like that monad is.

  49. A being is perfect so far as it acts and imperfect so far as it is acted

on. For reasons that I will now explain, it follows that a monad acts in so far

as it has clear perceptions and is acted on in so far as it has confused ones.  50.  To the extent that one monad has clear perceptions and another

confused ones, the states of the former can be responsible for those of the

latter and the states of the latter cannot be responsible for those of the former.

And one created being is more perfect than another to the extent that what

happens in it can be said a priori to be responsible for what happens in the

second, this being what it means to say that the first ‘acts on’ the second and

the second is ‘acted on’ by the first.

  51. No monad directly acts on any other. But God so arranges things that

the conditions of lesser monads can be inferred from those of higher monads

but not vice versa, wherefore God so pre-arranges things that this inferential

asymmetry between higher and lesser monads is made to appear as a causal

asymmetry between them.


  52. For x to act on y, as it were, is for y’s condition to be explained in

terms of x’s, and it is therefore for y’s perceptions to lower resolution than,

but otherwise comparable to, x’s perceptions. If x and y affect each other, that

is because x is superior to y in some respects and inferior to y in others, and

God so pre-arranged their interactions as to reflect that fact.

  53. Since there are infinitely many possible universes and only one actual

one, God must have had a reason for choosing this universe to create.

  54. It is only if one universe is better than another that it is more worthy

of being created.

  55. Since ours is the only universe that God created, it follows that it is

better than every other possible universe. This is the best of all worlds.


  56. Given that the relations of monads are pre-arranged in such as a way

as to reflect the differences between them, it follows that a monad’s relational

properties can be read off of its intrinsic properties. Equivalently, each

monad’s intrinsic properties can be read off of its relational properties, and

each monad is therefore a mirror of the universe.

  57. And just as a town appears differently to differently situated

observers, so there are as many reflections of the universe as there are

monads.

  58. In this way, there is a maximum of variety in the universe, as well asa maximum of order. The fewer the differences between the monads in a

given universe, the more those monads must interact with one another if that

universe is to be internally differentiated. But the more they interact, the less

orderly that universe is. By making monads as varied as possible, and by so

pre-arranging their mutual relations as to reflect those differences, while

prohibiting actual interactions from taking place, God endowed our universe

with a maximum of variety and a maximum of order.

  59. This theory, which I have rigorously proved, is the only one that does

God justice. Even Bayle, who criticized it, saying that I had attributed too

much to God, could not find any reason to reject it.


  60. The condition of any given monad reflects that of the entire universe.

  The more internally differentiated a given monad is, the more accurate a

mirror it is of the universe.

  Each monad reflects what is close more accurately than it reflects what is

far, and it more accurately reflects what is large than it does what is small.

  This is because each monad is a picture, and it is inherent in the nature of

pictorial representation that it be perspectival.

  61. Because there is no such thing as empty space, there is nothing in the

universe whose changes are not without an effect on everything else. If there

were empty space, this would not be so, but there isn’t, so it is. Thus each

monad contains within itself a complete record of everything that happens in

the universe. Thus, monads vary not in respect of the information that they

bear, but in respect of how clearly they bear it.  

  62.  And although each monad represents the whole universe, it

represents the body assigned to it---the one of which it is the entelechy---

more clearly than it represents others. And just as that body reflects the whole

universe through its interconnections with other monads, so that soul

represents the whole universe by representing that body. 

  63. A body that has a monad as its soul, taken in conjunction with that

monad, is what we call a living thing. And we call a body a living thing if the

monad that animates it is itself a soul, meaning that it is a mind that has

memory.

  Any given animal’s body is highly organized, the reason being:

  1. The universe is regulated in a perfectly orderly manner.  2. Each monad mirrors the universe in its own way.

  3. The representing monad must be orderly to the extent that it is a good

picture of the universe.

  4. The body that it represents must to that extent itself be orderly.

  64. Thus, every living thing is a kind of divine automaton. And whereas

the constituents of an artificial automaton are not themselves artifices, and are

therefore not reflective of that automaton’s mode of organization, there is no

part of an animal that does not itself partake of that animal’s mode of

organization. 


  65. And this is possible because each unit of matter not only can be, but

is subdivided without end. And for this reason, each is autonomous, being its

own source of motion and vitality, and not having, like a cog in a man-

machine, to await an impulse from some other body. It is only because there

is no end to these subdivisions that any given part of the universe is able to be

a reflection of the rest.

  66.  It follows that there is a world of animals---of living things and souls,

of entelechies and minds---within the smallest fragment of matter.

  67. Every particle is a pond of full of living creatures, and every particle

within each such creature, yet another such pond. 

  68. And although the earth and air separating animals are not themselves

animals, they do yet contain animals, albeit ones too small for us to see in

most cases.


  69. There is therefore nothing dead or barren in the universe; nothing

chaotic or confused, except in appearance. For example, if you look at a pond

teeming with fish from a certain distance, you will see various motions on the

part of fish but will not able to pick out any individual fish. You will

therefore see these motions as confused, but it is not the motions themselves

that are confused, but rather your perception of them.  

  70. It follows that every living body has a dominant entelechy or soul,

which in the case of animals is itself an entelechy or soul. And each part of an

animal is teeming with animals, each which itself has a soul.

  71. If a body has a soul, it does not have that soul forever. Bodies are inconstant flux, and souls therefore enter and leave them.

  72. Thus, the soul changes its body only gradually, and no soul is ever

instantly stripped of its bodily organs. So animals change form, but souls do

not travel between them, as between distinct empty vessells.


  73. Another consequence is that life never comes into existence ex nihilo

nor completely goes out of existence. What we call conception is simply

unusually rapid development, and what we call death is unusually negative

development.

  74. It used to be thought that animals came from nothing. We now know

this to be false. Wherever there seems to be a case of spontaneous generation,

there was in a fact a seed or spore, too small for us to detect, from which the

animal in question developed. It follows that conception and death are not

creation and annihilation, respectively, but are rather unusually rapid and

involved forms of development and enfeeblement.

  75. These days we are discovering that tiny animals that could become

larger animals do so through a process of ‘spermatic conception.’ Most

animals that can do so do not, it being a select few that make that transition.


  76.  But this is only half the story. An animal that has no way of starting

also has no way of ending. These zoological discoveries of ours are therefore

consistent with what we know a priori, that there is neither creation nor

annihilation.

  77. So not only is the soul indestructible, so too is the animal itself,

though its particular mechanism may come to an end, and either throw off or

take on organic coating.

  78. The conformity of mind and body to one another is a consequence of

the pre-established harmony discussed earlier. Mind and body do not interact,

but mind reflects body and body reflects the universe. Hence the appearance

of interaction.

  79. For this very reason, the behavior of animate bodies harmonizes with

that of inanimate bodies, even though the former is driven by final causes and

the latter by efficient causes.    80. Descartes was aware that the total amount of energy in the universe

remains the same. From this he inferred that minds could not cause bodies to

move, but he did believe that minds could redirect existing motions. We now

know this this too would violate the conservation-principle in question, and

had Descartes known this, he would have opted for my system.

  81. Our system is consistent with the supposition that the movements of

an animal’s body have strictly physical causes, and it is also consistent with

the supposition that they have psychological causes. Our system therefore

explains how it is that strictly physics-governed behavior can also be reason-

governed.


  82. No living soul is created and no living soul is destroyed. But whereas

all living souls can feel, only some can reason.

  83. A given soul resembles God to the extent that it is rational.

  84. On this basis, God enters into community with his subjects, relating

to them not just as an inventor relates to his machines, but also a prince

relates to his subjects and as a father relates to his children.

  85. It follows that the totality of monads is the City of God, this being the

most perfect kingdom imaginable.


  86. This City of God is a moral world within the natural world.

  87. Just as efficient causes align with final causes, so too, in this City of

God, does the natural realm align with the Realm of Grace, and so therewith

are the deeds of God as Designer brought into coincidence with those of God

as Divine Monarch.

  88. Divine Moral Law requires that there be events of a purely physical

or natural variety, and this is indeed possible, owing to coincidence of the

Realm of Nature with the City of God.

  89. Owing to this same coincidence, evil actions bring their own

punishment and good deeds lead to their own reward.


  90. We therefore live in a maximally good world, in which virtue is duly

rewarded and vice duly punished, and it is only because we are ignorant, and

do not see reality clearly, that things seem to us to be otherwise.