seems  plausible  to  formulate  the  following  proposition.  When  an

instinctual  trend  undergoes  repression,  its  libidinal  elements  are

turned into symptoms, and its aggressive components into a sense of

guilt. Even if this proposition is only an average approximation to the

truth, it is worthy of our interest.

 

   Some readers of this work may further have an impression that they

have heard the formula of the struggle between Eros and the death

instinct  too  often.  It  was  alleged  to  characterize  the  process  of

civilization  which  mankind  undergoes  but  it  was  also  brought  into

connection with the development of the individual, and, in addition, it

was said to have revealed the secret of organic life in general. We

cannot, I think, avoid going into the relations of these three processes

to one another. The repetition of the same formula is justified by the

consideration that both the process of human civilization and of the

development of the individual are also vital processes - which is to say

that they must share in the most general characteristic of life. On the

other  hand,  evidence  of  the  presence  of  this  general  characteristic

fails, for the very reason of its general nature, to help us to arrive at

any  differentiation,  so  long  as  it  is  not  narrowed  down  by  special

qualifications. We can only be satisfied, therefore, if we assert that the

process  of  civilization  is  a  modification  which  the  vital  process

experiences under the influence of a task that is set it by Eros and

instigated by Ananke - by the exigencies of reality; and that this task is

one of uniting separate individuals into a community bound together

by libidinal ties. When, however, we look at the relation between the

process  of  human  civilization  and  the  developmental  or  educative

process of individual human beings, we shall conclude without much

hesitation that the two are very similar in nature, if not the very same

process  applied  to  different  kinds  of  object.  The  process  of  the

civilization  of  the  human  species  is,  of  course,  an  abstraction  of  a

higher  order  than  is  the  development  of  the  individual  and  it  is

therefore  harder  to  apprehend  in  concrete  terms,  nor  should  we

pursue  analogies  to  an  obsessional  extreme;  but  in  view  of  the

similarity between the aims of the two processes - in the one case the

integration of a separate individual into a human group, and in the

other case the creation of a unified group out of many individuals - wecannot  be  surprised  at  the  similarity  between  the  means  employed

and the resultant phenomena.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4528

 

   In view of its exceptional importance, we must not long postpone the

mention  of  one  feature  which  distinguishes  between  the  two

processes.  In  the  developmental  process  of  the  individual,  the

programme  of  the  pleasure  principle,  which  consists  in  finding  the

satisfaction of happiness, is retained as the main aim. Integration in,

or adaptation to, a human community appears as a scarcely avoidable

condition which must be fulfilled before this aim of happiness can be

achieved. If it could be done without that condition, it would perhaps

be  preferable.  To  put  it  in  other  words,  the  development  of  the

individual seems to us to be a product of the interaction between two

urges, the urge towards happiness, which we usually call ‘egoistic’,

and the urge towards union with others in the community, which we

call  ‘altruistic’.  Neither  of  these  descriptions  goes  much  below  the

surface. In the process of individual development, as we have said,

the main accent falls mostly on the egoistic urge (or the urge towards

happiness);  while  the  other  urge,  which  may  be  described  as  a

‘cultural’ one, is usually content with the role of imposing restrictions.

But in the process of civilization things are different. Here by far the

most important thing is the aim of creating a unity out of the individual

human beings. It is true that the aim of happiness is still there, but it is

pushed into the background. It almost seems as if the creation of a

great human community would be most successful if no attention had

to  be  paid  to  the  happiness  of  the  individual.  The  developmental

process  of  the  individual  can  thus  be  expected  to  have  special

features of its own which are not reproduced in the process of human

civilization. It is only in so far as the first of these processes has union

with the community as its aim that it need coincide with the second

process.

                           Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4529

 

   Just as a planet revolves around a central body as well as rotating

on its own axis, so the human individual takes part in the course of

development of mankind at the same time as he pursues his own path

in life. But to our dull eyes the play of forces in the heavens seems

fixed in a never-changing order; in the field of organic life we can still

see how the forces contend with one another, and how the effects of

the conflict are continually changing. So, also, the two urges, the one

towards personal happiness and the other towards union with other

human beings, must struggle with each other in every individual; and

so, also, the two processes of individual and of cultural development

must stand in hostile opposition to each other and mutually dispute the

ground. But this struggle between the individual and society is not a

derivative  of  the  contradiction  -  probably  an  irreconcilable  one  -

between the primal instincts of Eros and death. It is a dispute within

the economics of the libido, comparable to the contest concerning the

distribution of libido between ego and objects; and it does admit of an

eventual accommodation in the individual, as, it may be hoped, it will

also do in the future of civilization, however much that civilization may

oppress the life of the individual to-day.

   The analogy between the process of civilization and the path of

individual development may be extended in an important respect. It

can be asserted that the community, too, evolves a super-ego under

whose  influence  cultural  development  proceeds.  It  would  be  a

tempting task for anyone who has a knowledge of human civilizations

to follow out this analogy in detail. I will confine myself to bringing

forward a few striking points. The super-ego of an epoch of civilization

has  an  origin  similar  to  that  of  an  individual.  It  is  based  on  the

impression left behind by the personalities of great leaders - men of

overwhelming  force  of  mind  or  men  in  whom  one  of  the  human

impulsions has found its strongest and purest, and therefore often its

most one-sided, expression. In many instances the analogy goes still

further, in that during their lifetime these figures were - often enough,

even  if  not  always  -  mocked  and  maltreated  by  others  and  even

despatched in a cruel fashion. In the same way, indeed, the primalfather did not attain divinity until long after he had met his death by

violence. The most arresting example of this fateful conjunction is to

be seen in the figure of Jesus Christ - if, indeed, that figure is not a

part of mythology, which called it into being from an obscure memory

of that primal event. Another point of agreement between the cultural

and the individual super-ego is that the former, just like the latter, sets

up strict ideal demands, disobedience to which is visited with ‘fear of

conscience’.  Here,  indeed,  we  come  across  the  remarkable

circumstance that the mental processes concerned are actually more

familiar to us and more accessible to consciousness as they are seen

in  the  group  than  they  can  be  in  the  individual  man.  In  him,  when

tension arises, it is only the aggressiveness of the super-ego which, in

the form of reproaches, makes itself noisily heard; its actual demands

often  remain  unconscious  in  the  background.  If  we  bring  them  to

conscious knowledge, we find that they coincide with the precepts of

the prevailing cultural super-ego. At this point the two processes, that

of  the  cultural  development  of  the  group  and  that  of  the  cultural

development of the individual, are, as it were, always interlocked. For

that reason some of the manifestations and properties of the super-

ego  can  be  more  easily  detected  in  its  behaviour  in  the  cultural

community than in the separate individual.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4530

 

      The  cultural  super-ego  has  developed  its  ideals  and  set  up  its

demands.  Among  the  latter,  those  which  deal  with  the  relations  of

human  beings  to  one  another  are  comprised  under  the  heading  of

ethics. People have at all times set the greatest value on ethics, as

though  they  expected  that  it  in  particular  would  produce  especially

important results. And it does in fact deal with a subject which can

easily be recognized as the sorest spot in every civilization. Ethics is

thus to be regarded as a therapeutic attempt - as an endeavour to

achieve, by means of a command of the super-ego, something which

has so far not been achieved by means of any other cultural activities.

As we already know, the problem before us is how to get rid of thegreatest hindrance to civilization - namely, the constitutional inclination

of human beings to be aggressive towards one another; and for that

very reason we are especially interested in what is probably the most

recent of the cultural commands of the super-ego, the commandment

to love one’s neighbour as oneself. In our research into, and therapy

of, a neurosis, we are led to make two reproaches against the super-

ego of the individual. In the severity of its commands and prohibitions

it troubles itself too little about the happiness of the ego, in that it takes

insufficient account of the resistances against obeying them - of the

instinctual strength of the id, and of the difficulties presented by the

real external environment. Consequently we are very often obliged, for

therapeutic purposes, to oppose the super-ego, and we endeavour to

lower its demands. Exactly the same objections can be made against

the ethical demands of the cultural super-ego. It, too, does not trouble

itself  enough  about  the  facts  of  the  mental  constitution  of  human

beings. It issues a command and does not ask whether it is possible

for people to obey it. On the contrary, it assumes that a man’s ego is

psychologically capable of anything that is required of it, that his ego

has unlimited mastery over his id. This is a mistake; and even in what

are  known  as  normal  people  the  id  cannot  be  controlled  beyond

certain limits. If more is demanded of a man, a revolt will be produced

in him or a neurosis, or he will be made unhappy. The commandment,

‘Love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself’,  is  the  strongest  defence  against

human  aggressiveness  and  an  excellent  example  of  the

unpsychological  proceedings  of  the  cultural  super-ego.  The

commandment is impossible to fulfil; such an enormous inflation of

love can only lower its value, not get rid of the difficulty. Civilization

pays no attention to all this; it merely admonishes us that the harder it

is to obey the precept the more meritorious it is to do so. But anyone

who follows such a precept in present-day civilization only puts himself

at  a  disadvantage vis-à-vis  the  person  who  disregards  it.  What  a

potent obstacle to civilization aggressiveness must be, if the defence

against it can cause as much unhappiness as aggressiveness itself!

‘Natural’ ethics, as it is called, has nothing to offer here except the

narcissistic  satisfaction  of  being  able  to  think  oneself  better  than

others.  At  this  point  the  ethics  based  on  religion  introduces  its

promises of a better after-life. But so long as virtue is not rewardedhere on earth, ethics will, I fancy, preach in vain. I too think it quite

certain  that  a  real  change  in  the  relations  of  human  beings  to

possessions would be of more help in this direction than any ethical

commands; but the recognition of this fact among socialists has been

obscured and made useless for practical purposes by a fresh idealistic

misconception of human nature.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4531

 

   I believe the line of thought which seeks to trace in the phenomena

of cultural development the part played by a super-ego promises still

further  discoveries.  I  hasten  to  come  to  a  close.  But  there  is  one

question which I can hardly evade. If the development of civilization

has such a far-reaching similarity to the development of the individual

and  if  it  employs  the  same  methods,  may  we  not  be  justified  in

reaching  the  diagnosis  that,  under  the  influence  of  cultural  urges,

some civilizations, or some epochs of civilization - possibly the whole

of mankind - have become ‘neurotic’? An analytic dissection of such

neuroses might lead to therapeutic recommendations which could lay

claim to great practical interest. I would not say that an attempt of this

kind  to  carry  psycho-analysis  over  to  the  cultural  community  was

absurd  or  doomed  to  be  fruitless.  But  we  should  have  to  be  very

cautious  and  not  forget  that,  after  all,  we  are  only  dealing  with

analogies and that it is dangerous, not only with men but also with

concepts, to tear them from the sphere in which they have originated

and been evolved. Moreover, the diagnosis of communal neuroses is

faced with a special difficulty. In an individual neurosis we take as our

starting-point  the  contrast  that  distinguishes  the  patient  from  his

environment,  which  is  assumed  to  be  ‘normal’.  For  a  group  all  of

whose members are affected by one and the same disorder no such

background could exist; it would have to be found elsewhere. And as

regards the therapeutic application of our knowledge, what would be

the use of the most correct analysis of social neuroses, since no one

possesses authority to impose such a therapy upon the group? But in

spite of all these difficulties, we may expect that one day someone willventure to embark upon a pathology of cultural communities.

 


                          Civilization And Its Discontents

                                                                                      4532

 

 

   For a wide variety of reasons, it is very far from my intention to

express  an  opinion  upon  the  value  of  human  civilization.  I  have

endeavoured to guard myself against the enthusiastic prejudice which

holds that our civilization is the most precious thing that we possess or

could  acquire  and  that  its  path  will  necessarily  lead  to  heights  of

unimagined perfection. I can at least listen without indignation to the

critic who is of the opinion that when one surveys the aims of cultural

endeavour and the means it employs, one is bound to come to the

conclusion that the whole effort is not worth the trouble, and that the

outcome of it can only be a state of affairs which the individual will be

unable to tolerate. My impartiality is made all the easier to me by my

knowing very little about all these things. One thing only do I know for

certain and that is that man’s judgements of value follow directly his

wishes  for  happiness  -  that,  accordingly,  they  are  an  attempt  to

support  his  illusions  with  arguments.  I  should  find  it  very

understandable if someone were to point out the obligatory nature of

the course of human civilization and were to say, for instance, that the

tendencies  to  a  restriction  of  sexual  life  or  to  the  institution  of  a

humanitarian  ideal  at  the  expense  of  natural  selection  were

developmental trends which cannot be averted or turned aside and to

which  it  is  best  for  us  to  yield  as  though  they  were  necessities  of

nature. I know, too, the objection that can be made against this, to the

effect that in the history of mankind, trends such as these, which were

considered  unsurmountable,  have  often  been  thrown  aside  and

replaced  by  other  trends.  Thus  I  have  not  the  courage  to  rise  up

before my fellow-men as a prophet, and I bow to their reproach that I

can offer them no consolation: for at bottom that is what they are all

demanding - the wildest revolutionaries no less passionately than the

most virtuous believers.

      The  fateful  question  for  the  human  species  seems  to  me  to  bewhether and to what extent their cultural development will succeed in

mastering the disturbance of their communal life by the human instinct

of  aggression  and  self-destruction.  It  may  be  that  in  this  respect

precisely  the  present  time  deserves  a  special  interest.  Men  have

gained control over the forces of nature to such an extent that with

their help they would have no difficulty in exterminating one another to

the last man. They know this, and hence comes a large part of their

current unrest, their unhappiness and their mood of anxiety. And now

it  is  to  be  expected  that  the  other  of  the  two  ‘Heavenly  Powers’,

eternal Eros, will make an effort to assert himself in the struggle with

his  equally  immortal  adversary.  But  who  can  foresee  with  what

success and with what result?

                                                                                       4533

 

                                        FETISHISM

                                        (1927)

 


                                                                                      4534

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4535

 

                                        FETISHISM

 

In the last few years I have had an opportunity of studying analytically

a  number  of  men  whose  object-choice  was  dominated  by  a  fetish.

There is no need to expect that these people came to analysis on

account of their fetish. For though no doubt a fetish is recognized by

its  adherents  as  an  abnormality,  it  is  seldom  felt  by  them  as  the

symptom of an ailment accompanied by suffering. Usually they are

quite satisfied with it, or even praise the way in which it eases their

erotic  life.  As  a  rule,  therefore,  the  fetish  made  its  appearance  in

analysis as a subsidiary finding.

   For obvious reasons the details of these cases must be withheld

from  publication;  I  cannot,  therefore,  show  in  what  way  accidental

circumstances have contributed to the choice of a fetish. The most

extraordinary case seemed to me to be one in which a young man had

exalted  a  certain  sort  of  ‘shine  on  the  nose’  into  a  fetishistic

precondition. The surprising explanation of this was that the patient

had  been  brought  up  in  an  English  nursery  but  had  later  come  to

Germany, where he forgot his mother-tongue almost completely. The

fetish,  which  originated  from  his  earliest  childhood,  had  to  be

understood in English, not German. The ‘shine on the nose’ - was in

reality a ‘glance at the nose’. The nose was thus the fetish, which,

incidentally, he endowed at will with the luminous shine which was not

perceptible to others.   In every instance, the meaning and the purpose of the fetish turned

out,  in  analysis,  to  be  the  same.  It  revealed  itself  so  naturally  and

seemed to me so compelling that I am prepared to expect the same

solution in all cases of fetishism. When now I announce that the fetish

is a substitute for the penis, I shall certainly create disappointment; so

I hasten to add that it is not a substitute for any chance penis, but for a

particular and quite special penis that had been extremely important in

early  childhood  but  had  later  been  lost.  That  is  to  say,  it  should

normally have been given up, but the fetish is precisely designed to

preserve  it  from  extinction.  To  put  it  more  plainly:  the  fetish  is  a

substitute for the woman’s (the mother’s) penis that the little boy once

believed in and - for reasons familiar to us - does not want to give up.¹

 

   ¹ This interpretation was made as early as 1910, in my study on Leonardo da Vinci, without

any reasons being given for it.
 


                                          Fetishism

                                                                                      4536

 

      What  happened,  therefore,  was  that  the  boy  refused  to  take

cognizance of the fact of his having perceived that a woman does not

possess a penis. No, that could not be true: for if a woman had been

castrated,  then  his  own  possession  of  a  penis  was  in  danger;  and

against that there rose in rebellion the portion of his narcissism which

Nature has, as a precaution, attached to that particular organ. In later

life a grown man may perhaps experience a similar panic when the cry

goes  up  that  Throne  and  Altar  are  in  danger,  and  similar  illogical

consequences will ensue. If I am not mistaken, Laforgue would say in

this case that the boy ‘scotomizes’ his perception of the woman’s lack

of a penis.¹ A new technical term is justified when it describes a new

fact  or  emphasizes  it.  This  is  not  so  here.  The  oldest  word  in  our

psycho-analytic  terminology,  ‘repression’,  already  relates  to  this

pathological  process.  If  we  wanted  to  differentiate  more  sharply

between the vicissitude of the idea as distinct from that of the affect,

and reserve the word ‘Verdrängung’ [‘repression’] for the affect, then

the  correct  German  word  for  the  vicissitude  of  the  idea  would  be

‘Verleugnung’ [’disavowal’]. ‘Scotomization’ seems to me particularlyunsuitable, for it suggests that the perception is entirely wiped out, so

that the result is the same as when a visual impression falls on the

blind spot in the retina. In the situation we are considering, on the

contrary, we see that the perception has persisted, and that a very

energetic action has been undertaken to maintain the disavowal. It is

not true that, after the child has made his observation of the woman,

he has preserved unaltered his belief that women have a phallus. He

has retained that belief, but he has also given it up. In the conflict

between the weight of the unwelcome perception and the force of his

counter-wish, a compromise has been reached, as is only possible

under the dominance of the unconscious laws of thought - the primary

processes. Yes, in his mind the woman has got a penis, in spite of

everything;  but  this  penis  is  no  longer  the  same  as  it  was  before.

Something else has taken its place, has been appointed its substitute,

as it were, and now inherits the interest which was formerly directed to

its predecessor. But this interest suffers an extraordinary increase as

well, because the horror of castration has set up a memorial to itself in

the  creation  of  this  substitute.  Furthermore,  an  aversion,  which  is

never absent in any fetishist, to the real female genitals remains a

stigma indelebile of the repression that has taken place. We can now

see what the fetish achieves and what it is that maintains it. It remains

a  token  of  triumph  over  the  threat  of  castration  and  a  protection

against it. It also saves the fetishist from becoming a homosexual, by

endowing women with the characteristic which makes them tolerable

as sexual objects. In later life, the fetishist feels that he enjoys yet

another advantage from his substitute for a genital. The meaning of

the fetish is not known to other people, so the fetish is not withheld

from him: it is easily accessible and he can readily obtain the sexual

satisfaction attached to it. What other men have to woo and make

exertions for can be had by the fetishist with no trouble at all.

 

   ¹ I correct myself, however, by adding that I have the best reasons for supposing that

Laforgue  would  not  say  anything  of  the  sort.  It  is  clear  from  his  own  remarks  that
‘scotomization’ is a term which derives from descriptions of dementia praecox, which does not
arise from a carrying-over of psycho-analytic concepts to the psychoses and which has no
application to developmental processes or to the formation of neuroses. In his exposition in
the text of his paper, the author has been at pains to make this incompatibility clear.
                                           Fetishism

                                                                                      4537

 

   Probably no male human being is spared the fright of castration at

the sight of a female genital. Why some people become homosexual

as  a  consequence  of  that  impression,  while  others  fend  it  off  by

creating a fetish, and the great majority surmount it, we are frankly not

able to explain. It is possible that, among all the factors at work, we do

not yet know those which are decisive for the rare pathological results.

We must be content if we can explain what has happened, and may

for the present leave on one side the task of explaining why something

has not happened.

   One would expect that the organs or objects chosen as substitutes

for the absent female phallus would be such as appear as symbols of

the  penis  in  other  connections  as  well.  This  may  happen  often

enough,  but  is  certainly  not  a  deciding  factor.  It  seems  rather  that

when the fetish is instituted some process occurs which reminds one

of the stopping of memory in traumatic amnesia. As in this latter case,

the  subject’s  interest  comes  to  a  halt  half-way,  as  it  were;  it  is  as

though the last impression before the uncanny and traumatic one is

retained as a fetish. Thus the foot or shoe owes its preference as a

fetish - or a part of it - to the circumstance that the inquisitive boy

peered at the woman’s genitals from below, from her legs up; fur and

velvet - as has long been suspected - are a fixation of the sight of the

pubic hair, which should have been followed by the longed-for sight of

the  female  member;  pieces  of  underclothing,  which  are  so  often

chosen  as  a  fetish,  crystallize  the  moment  of  undressing,  the  last

moment in which the woman could still be regarded as phallic. But I do

not maintain that it is invariably possible to discover with certainty how

the fetish was determined.

   An investigation of fetishism is strongly recommended to any one

who still doubts the existence of the castration complex or who can

still believe that fright at the sight of the female genital has some other

ground - for instance, that it is derived from a supposed recollection of

the trauma of birth.

   For me, the explanation of fetishism had another point of theoretical

interest as well. Recently, along quite speculative lines, I arrived at theproposition  that  the  essential  difference  between  neurosis  and

psychosis  was  that  in  the  former  the  ego,  in  the  service  of  reality,

suppresses a piece of the id, whereas in a psychosis it lets itself be

induced by the id to detach itself from a piece of reality. I returned to

this theme once again later on.¹ But soon after this I had reason to

regret that I had ventured so far. In the analysis of two young men I

learned that each - one when he was two years old and the other

when he was ten - had failed to take cognizance of the death of his

beloved  father  -  had  ‘scotomized’  it  -  and  yet  neither  of  them  had

developed a psychosis. Thus a piece of reality which was undoubtedly

important had been disavowed by the ego, just as the unwelcome fact

of  women’s  castration  is  disavowed  in  fetishists.  I  also  began  to

suspect that similar occurrences in childhood are by no means rare,

and I believed that I had been guilty of an error in my characterization

of neurosis and psychosis. It is true that there was one way out of the

difficulty. My formula needed only to hold good where there was a

higher  degree  of  differentiation  in  the  psychical  apparatus;  things

might be permissible to a child which would entail severe injury to an

adult.

 

   ¹ ‘Neurosis and Psychosis’ (1924b) and ‘The Loss of Reality in Neurosis and Psychosis’

(1924e).
 


                                          Fetishism

                                                                                      4538

 

   But further research led to another solution of the contradiction. It

turned out that the two young men had no more ‘scotomized’ their

father’s death than a fetishist does the castration of women. It was

only  one  current  in  their  mental  life  that  had  not  recognized  their

father’s death; there was another current which took full account of

that fact. The attitude which fitted in with the wish and the attitude

which fitted in with reality existed side by side. In one of my two cases

this split had formed the basis of a moderately severe obsessional

neurosis. The patient oscillated in every situation in life between two

assumptions: the one, that his father was still alive and was hindering

his activities; the other, opposite one, that he was entitled to regardhimself as his father’s successor. I may thus keep to the expectation

that in a psychosis the one current - that which fitted in with reality -

would have in fact been absent.

   Returning to my description of fetishism, I may say that there are

many and weighty additional proofs of the divided attitude of fetishists

to the question of the castration of women. In very subtle instances

both the disavowal and the affirmation of the castration have found

their way into the construction of the fetish itself. This was so in the

case of a man whose fetish was an athletic support-belt which could

also be worn as bathing drawers. This piece of clothing covered up

the  genitals  entirely  and  concealed  the  distinction  between  them.

Analysis showed that it signified that women were castrated and that

they were not castrated; and it also allowed of the hypothesis that men

were  castrated,  for  all  these  possibilities  could  equally  well  be

concealed  under  the  belt  -  the  earliest  rudiment  of  which  in  his

childhood had been the fig-leaf on a statue. A fetish of this sort, doubly

derived from contrary ideas, is of course especially durable. In other

instances the divided attitude shows itself in what the fetishist does

with his fetish, whether in reality or in his imagination. To point out that

he reveres his fetish is not the whole story; in many cases he treats it

in  a  way  which  is  obviously  equivalent  to  a  representation  of

castration.  This  happens  particularly  if  he  has  developed  a  strong

identification with his father and plays the part of the latter; for it is to

him that as a child he ascribed the woman’s castration. Affection and

hostility  in  the  treatment  of  the  fetish  -  which  run  parallel  with  the

disavowal  and  the  acknowledgement  of  castration  -  are  mixed  in

unequal proportions in different cases, so that the one or the other is

more  clearly  recognizable.  We  seem  here  to  approach  an

understanding, even if a distant one, of the behaviour of the ‘coupeur

de  nattes’.  In  him  the  need  to  carry  out  the  castration  which  he

disavows has come to the front. His action contains in itself the two

mutually incompatible assertions: ‘the woman has still got a penis’ and

‘my father has castrated the woman’. Another variant, which is also a

parallel  to  fetishism  in  social  psychology,  might  be  seen  in  the

Chinese custom of mutilating the female foot and then revering it like a

fetish  after  it  has  been  mutilated.  It  seems  as  though  the  Chinese

male  wants  to  thank  the  woman  for  having  submitted  to  beingcastrated.

   In conclusion we may say that the normal prototype of fetishes is a

man’s  penis,  just  as  the  normal  prototype  of  inferior  organs  is  a

woman’s real small penis, the clitoris.

                                                                                       4539

 

                                          HUMOUR

                                        (1927)

 


                                                                                      4540

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4541

 

                                          HUMOUR

 

In my volume on Jokes and their Relation to the Unconscious (1905c),

I in fact considered humour only from the economic point of view. My

object  was  to  discover  the  source  of  the  pleasure  obtained  from

humour, and I think I was able to show that the yield of humorous

pleasure arises from an economy in expenditure upon feeling.

   There are two ways in which the humorous process can take place.

It may take place in regard to a single person, who himself adopts the

humorous  attitude,  while  a  second  person  plays  the  part  of  the

spectator who derives enjoyment from it; or it may take place between

two  persons,  of  whom  one  takes  no  part  at  all  in  the  humorous

process, but is made the object of humorous contemplation by the

other. When, to take the crudest example, a criminal who was being

led  out  to  the  gallows  on  a  Monday  remarked:  ‘Well,  the  week’s

beginning  nicely’,  he  was  producing  the  humour  himself;  the

humorous  process  is  completed  in  his  own  person  and  obviously

affords  him  a  certain  sense  of  satisfaction.  I,  the  non-participating

listener,  am  affected  as  it  were  at  long-range  by  this  humorous

production  of  the  criminal’s;  I  feel,  like  him,  perhaps,  the  yield  of

humorous pleasure.

   We have an instance of the second way in which humour arises

when  a  writer  or  a  narrator  describes  the  behaviour  of  real  or

imaginary people in a humorous manner. There is no need for thosepeople to display any humour themselves; the humorous attitude is

solely the business of the person who is taking them as his object;

and,  as  in  the  former  instance,  the  reader  or  hearer  shares  in  the

enjoyment  of  the  humour.  To  sum  up,  then,  we  can  say  that  the

humorous attitude - whatever it may consist in - can be directed either

towards  the  subject’s  own  self  or  towards  other  people;  it  is  to  be

assumed that it brings a yield of pleasure to the person who adopts it,

and  a  similar  yield  of  pleasure  falls  to  the  share  of  the  non-

participating onlooker.

      We  shall  best  understand  the  genesis  of  the  yield  of  humorous

pleasure  if  we  consider  the  process  in  the  listener  before  whom

someone  else  produces  humour.  He  sees  this  other  person  in  a

situation which leads the listener to expect that the other will produce

the signs of an affect - that he will get angry, complain, express pain,

be frightened or horrified or perhaps even in despair; and the onlooker

or  listener  is  prepared  to  follow  his  lead  and  to  call  up  the  same

emotional  impulses  in  himself.  But  this  emotional  expectancy  is

disappointed; the other person expresses no affect, but makes a jest.

The expenditure on feeling that is economized turns into humorous

pleasure in the listener.

 


                                          Humour

                                                                                      4542

 

   It is easy to get so far. But we soon tell ourselves that it is the

process which takes place in the other person - the ‘humorist’ - that

merits the greater attention. There is no doubt that the essence of

humour is that one spares oneself the affects to which the situation

would  naturally  give  rise  and  dismisses  the  possibility  of  such

expressions of emotion with a jest. As far as this goes, the process in

the humorist must tally with the process in the hearer - or, to put it

more correctly, the process in the hearer must have copied the one in

the humorist. But how does the latter bring about the mental attitude

which makes a release of affect superfluous? What are the dynamics

of his adoption of the ‘humorous attitude’? Clearly, the solution of the

problem is to be sought in the humorist; in the hearer we must assumethat there is only an echo, a copy, of this unknown process.

   It is now time to acquaint ourselves with a few of the characteristics

of humour. Like jokes and the comic, humour has something liberating

about it; but it also has something of grandeur and elevation, which is

lacking in the other two ways of obtaining pleasure from intellectual

activity. The grandeur in it clearly lies in the triumph of narcissism, the

victorious assertion of the ego’s invulnerability. The ego refuses to be

distressed by the provocations of reality, to let itself be compelled to

suffer.  It  insists  that  it  cannot  be  affected  by  the  traumas  of  the

external world; it shows, in fact, that such traumas are no more than

occasions for it to gain pleasure. This last feature is a quite essential

element of humour. Let us suppose that the criminal who was being

led to execution on Monday had said: ‘It doesn’t worry me. What does

it matter, after all, if a fellow like me is hanged? The world won’t come

to an end because of it.’ We should have to admit that such a speech

does  in  fact  display  the  same  magnificent  superiority  over  the  real

situation. It is wise and true; but it does not betray a trace of humour.

Indeed,  it  is  based  on  an  appraisal  of  reality  which  runs  directly

counter to the appraisal made by humour. Humour is not resigned; it is

rebellious. It signifies not only the triumph of the ego but also of the

pleasure  principle,  which  is  able  here  to  assert  itself  against  the

unkindness of the real circumstances.

 


                                          Humour

                                                                                      4543

 

   These last two features - the rejection of the claims of reality and the

putting though of the pleasure principle - bring humour near to the

regressive  or  reactionary  processes  which  engage  our  attention  so

extensively  in  psychopathology.  Its  fending  off  of  the  possibility  of

suffering  places  it  among  the  great  series  of  methods  which  the

human  mind  has  constructed  in  order  to  evade  the  compulsion  to

suffer  -  a  series  which  begins  with  neurosis  and  culminates  in

madness and which includes intoxication, self-absorption and ecstasy.

Thanks to this connection, humour possesses a dignity which is wholly

lacking, for instance, in jokes, for jokes either serve simply to obtain ayield of pleasure or place the yield of pleasure that has been obtained

in the service of aggression. In what, then, does the humorous attitude

consist,  an  attitude  by  means  of  which  a  person  refuses  to  suffer,

emphasizes the invincibility of his ego by the real world, victoriously

maintains  the  pleasure  principle  -  and  all  this,  in  contrast  to  other

methods having the same purposes, without overstepping the bounds

of mental health? The two achievements seem incompatible.

   If we turn to the situation in which one person adopts a humorous

attitude  towards  others,  a  view  which  I  have  already  put  forward

tentatively in my book on jokes will at once suggest itself. This is that

the subject is behaving towards them as an adult does towards a child

when  he  recognizes  and  smiles  at  the  triviality  of  interests  and

sufferings which seem so great to it. Thus the humorist would acquire

his superiority by assuming the role of the grown-up and identifying

himself to some extent with his father, and reducing the other people

to being children. This view probably covers the facts, but it hardly

seems a conclusive one. One asks oneself what it is that makes the

humorist arrogate this role to himself.

 


                                          Humour

                                                                                      4544

 

   But we must recall the other, probably more primary and important,

situation of humour, in which a person adopts a humorous attitude

towards himself in order to ward off possible suffering. Is there any

sense in saying that someone is treating himself like a child and is at

the same time playing the part of a superior adult towards that child?

   This not very plausible idea receives strong support, I think, if we

consider what we have learned from pathological observations on the

structure of the ego. This ego is not a simple entity. It harbours within

it,  as  its  nucleus,  a  special  agency  the  super-ego.  Sometimes  it  is

merged  with  the  super-ego  so  that  we  cannot  distinguish  between

them, whereas in other circumstances it is sharply differentiated from

it. Genetically the super-ego is the heir to the parental agency. It often

keeps  the  ego  in  strict  dependence  and  still  really  treats  it  as  the

parents, or the father, once treated the child, in its early years. Weobtain a dynamic explanation of the humorous attitude, therefore, if we

assume  that  it  consists  in  the  humorist’s  having  withdrawn  the

psychical  accent  from  his  ego  and  having  transposed  it  on  to  his

super-ego. To the super-ego, thus inflated, the ego can appear tiny

and all its interests trivial; and, with this new distribution of energy, it

may become an easy matter for the super-ego to suppress the ego’s

possibilities of reacting.

   In order to remain faithful to our customary phraseology, we shall

have  to  speak,  not  of  transposing  the  psychical  accent,  but  of

displacing large amounts of cathexis. The question then is whether we

are  entitled  to  picture  extensive  displacements  like  this  from  one

agency  of  the  mental  apparatus  to  another.  It  looks  like  a  new

hypothesis constructed ad hoc. Yet we may remind ourselves that we

have repeatedly (even though not sufficiently often) taken a factor of

this kind into account in our attempts at a metapsychological picture of

mental events. Thus, for instance, we supposed that the difference

between an ordinary erotic object-cathexis and the state of being in

love is that in the latter incomparably more cathexis passes over to the

object and that the ego empties itself as it were in favour of the object.

In studying some cases of paranoia I was able to establish the fact

that ideas of persecution are formed early and exist for a long time

without any perceptible effect, until, as the result of some particular

precipitating  event,  they  receive  sufficient  amounts  of  cathexis  to

cause  them  to  become  dominant.  The  cure,  too,  of  such  paranoic

attacks would lie not so much in a resolution and correction of the

delusional ideas as in a withdrawal from them of the cathexis which

has  been  lent  to  them.  The  alternations  between  melancholia  and

mania, between a cruel suppression of the ego by the super-ego and

a liberation of the ego after that pressure, suggests a shift of cathexis

of this kind; such a shift, moreover, would have to be brought in to

explain a whole number of phenomena belonging to normal mental

life. If this has been done hitherto only to a very limited extent, that is

on  account  of  our  usual  caution  -  something  which  deserves  only

praise. The region in which we feel secure is that of the pathology of

mental life; it is here that we make our observations and acquire our

convictions. For the present we venture to form a judgement on the

normal mind only in so far as we can discern what is normal in theisolations and distortions of the pathological material. When once we

have  overcome  this  hesitancy  we  shall  recognize  what  a  large

contribution is made to the understanding of mental processes by the

static conditions as well as by the dynamic changes in the quantity of

energic cathexis.

 


                                          Humour

                                                                                      4545

 

   I think, therefore, that the possibility I have suggested here, that in a

particular situation the subject suddenly hypercathects his super-ego

and then, proceeding from it, alters the reactions of the ego, is one

which  deserves  to  be  retained.  Moreover,  what  I  have  suggested

about humour finds a remarkable analogy in the kindred field of jokes.

As regards the origin of jokes I was led to assume that a preconscious

thought is given over for a moment to unconscious revision. A joke is

thus the contribution made to the comic by the unconscious. In just the

same  way, humour  would  be  the  contribution  made  to  the  comic

through the agency of the super-ego.

   In other connections we knew the super-ego as a severe master. It

will be said that it accords ill with such a character that the super-ego

should  condescend  to  enabling  the  ego  to  obtain  a  small  yield  of

pleasure. It is true that humorous pleasure never reaches the intensity

of the pleasure in the comic or in jokes, that it never finds vent in

hearty laughter. It is also true that, in bringing about the humorous

attitude, the super-ego is actually repudiating reality and serving an

illusion. But (without rightly knowing why) we regard this less intense

pleasure as having a character of very high value; we feel it to be

especially  liberating  and  elevating.  Moreover,  the  jest  made  by

humour  is  not  the  essential  thing.  It  has  only  the  value  of  a

preliminary. The main thing is the intention which humour carries out,

whether it is acting in relation to the self or other people. It means:

‘Look! here is the world, which seems so dangerous! It is nothing but a

game for children - just worth making a jest about!’

   If it is really the super-ego which, in humour, speaks such kindly

words of comfort to the intimidated ego, this will teach us that we havestill  a  great  deal  to  learn  about  the  nature  of  the  super-ego.

Furthermore, not everyone is capable of the humorous attitude. It is a

rare and precious gift, and many people are even without the capacity

to enjoy humorous pleasure that is presented to them. And finally, if

the  super-ego  tries,  by  means  of  humour,  to  console  the  ego  and

protect  it  from  suffering,  this  does  not  contradict  its  origin  in  the

parental agency.

                                                                                       4546

 

                            A RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE

                                        (1928)

 


                                                                                      4547

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4548

 

                            A RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCE

 

In the autumn of 1927, G. S. Viereck, a German-American journalist

who  had  paid  me  a  welcome  visit,  published  an  account  of  a

conversation with me, in the course of which he mentioned my lack of

religious  faith  and  my  indifference  on  the  subject  of  survival  after

death. This ‘interview, as it was called, was widely read and brought

me, among others, the following letter from an American physician:

 

   ‘. . . What struck me most was your answer to the question whether

you believe in a survival of personality after death. You are reported

as having said: "I give no thought to the matter."

   ‘I am writing now to tell you of an experience that I had in the year I

graduated at the University of X. One afternoon while I was passing

through the dissecting-room my attention was attracted to a sweet-

faced dear old woman who was being carried to a dissecting-table.

This  sweet-faced  woman  made  such  an  impression  on  me  that  a

thought flashed up in my mind: "There is no God: if there were a God

he would not have allowed this dear old woman to be brought into the

dissecting room."

   ‘When I got home that afternoon the feeling I had had at the sight in

the  dissecting-room  had  determined  me  to  discontinue  going  to

church. The doctrines of Christianity had before this been the subject

of doubts in my mind.   ‘While I was meditating on this matter a voice spoke to my soul that

"I should consider the step I was about to take". My spirit replied to

this inner voice by saying, "If I knew of a certainty that Christianity was

truth and the Bible was the Word of God, then I would accept it."

   ‘In the course of the next few days God made it clear to my soul that

the Bible was His Word, that the teachings about Jesus Christ were

true, and that Jesus was our only hope. After such a clear revelation I

accepted the Bible as God’s Word and Jesus Christ as my personal

Saviour. Since then God has revealed Himself to me by many infallible

proofs.

      ‘I  beg  you  as  a  brother  physician  to  give  thought  to  this  most

important matter, and I can assure you, if you look into this subject

with an open mind, God will reveal the truth to your soul, the same as

he did to me and to multitudes of others. . . .’

 


                                A Religious Experience

                                                                                      4549

 

 

      I  sent  a  polite  answer,  saying  that  I  was  glad  to  hear  that  this

experience had enabled him to retain his faith. As for myself, God had

not done so much for me. He had never allowed me to hear an inner

voice; and if, in view of my age, he did not make haste, it would not be

my fault if I remained to the end of my life what I now was - ‘an infidel

Jew’.

      In  the  course  of  a  friendly  reply,  my  colleague  gave  me  an

assurance that being a Jew was not an obstacle in the pathway to true

faith and proved this by several instances. His letter culminated in the

information that prayers were being earnestly addressed to God that

he might grant me ‘faith to believe’.

   I am still awaiting the outcome of this intercession. In the meantime,

my  colleague’s  religious  experience  provides  food  for  thought.  It

seems to me to demand some attempt at an interpretation based upon

emotional motives; for his experience is puzzling in itself and is based

on  particularly  bad  logic.  God,  as  we  know,  allows  horrors  to  take

place of a kind very different from the removal to a dissecting-room ofthe dead body of a pleasant-looking old woman. This has been true at

all times, and it must have been so while my American colleague was

pursuing his studies. Nor, as a medical student, can he have been so

sheltered from the world as to have known nothing of such evils. Why

was it, then, that his indignation against God broke out precisely when

he received this particular impression in the dissecting-room?

   For anyone who is accustomed to regard men’s internal experiences

and actions analytically the explanation is very obvious - so obvious

that  it  actually  crept  into  my  recollections  of  the  facts  themselves.

Once, when I was referring to my pious colleague’s letter in the course

of a discussion, I spoke of his having written that the dead woman’s

face had reminded him of his own mother. In fact these words were

not in his letter, and a moment’s reflection will show that they could

not possibly have been. But that is the explanation irresistibly forced

on  us  by  his  affectionately  phrased  description  of  the  ‘sweet-faced

dear old woman’. Thus the weakness of judgement displayed by the

young doctor is to be accounted for by the emotion roused in him by

the memory of his mother. It is difficult to escape from the bad psycho-

analytic habit of bringing forward as evidence details which also allow

of more superficial explanations - and I am tempted to recall the fact

that my colleague addressed me later as a ‘brother physician’.

 


                                A Religious Experience

                                                                                      4550

 

   We may suppose, therefore, that this was the way in which things

happened. The sight of a woman’s dead body, naked or on the point

of being stripped, reminded the young man of his mother. It roused in

him a longing for his mother which sprang from his Oedipus complex,

and this was immediately completed by a feeling of indignation against

his father. His ideas of ‘father’ and ‘God’ had not yet become widely

separated;  so  that  his  desire  to  destroy  his  father  could  become

conscious as doubt in the existence of God and could seek to justify

itself in the eyes of reason as indignation about the ill-treatment of a

mother  object.  It  is  of  course  typical  for  a  child  to  regard  what  his

father does to his mother in sexual intercourse as ill-treatment. Thenew impulse, which was displaced into the sphere of religion, was only

a repetition of the Oedipus situation and consequently soon met with a

similar fate. It succumbed to a powerful opposing current. During the

actual conflict the level of displacement was not maintained: there is

no mention of arguments in justification of God, nor are we told what

the  infallible  signs  were  by  which  God  proved  his  existence  to  the

doubter. The conflict seems to have been unfolded in the form of a

hallucinatory  psychosis:  inner  voices  were  heard  which  uttered

warnings against resistance to God. But the outcome of the struggle

was displayed once again in the sphere of religion and it was of a kind

predetermined  by  the  fate  of  the  Oedipus  complex:  complete

submission to the will of God the Father. The young man became a

believer  and  accepted  everything  he  had  been  taught  since  his

childhood  about  God  and  Jesus  Christ.  He  had  had  a  religious

experience and had undergone a conversion.

   All of this is so simple and straightforward that we cannot but ask

ourselves whether by understanding this case we have thrown any

light at all on the psychology of conversion in general. I may refer the

reader to an admirable volume on the subject by Sante de Sanctis

(1924), which incidentally takes all the findings of psycho-analysis into

account. Study of this work confirms our expectation that by no means

every case of conversion can be understood so easily as this one. In

no respect, however, does our case contradict the views arrived at on

the  subject  by  modern  research.  The  point  which  our  present

observation throws into relief is the manner in which the conversion

was  attached  to  a  particular  determining  event,  which  caused  the

subject’s  scepticism  to  flare  up  for  a  last  time  before  being  finally

extinguished.

                                                                                       4551

 

                          DOSTOEVSKY AND PARRICIDE

                                        (1928)

 


                                                                                      4552

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4553

 

                          DOSTOEVSKY AND PARRICIDE

 

Four  facets  may  be  distinguished  in  the  rich  personality  of

Dostoevsky:  the  creative  artist,  the  neurotic,  the  moralist  and  the

sinner. How is one to find one’s way in this bewildering complexity?

   The creative artist is the least doubtful: Dostoevsky’s place is not far

behind  Shakespeare. The  Brothers  Kamarazov  is  the  most

magnificent novel ever written; the episode of the Grand Inquisitor,

one of the peaks in the literature of the world, can hardly be valued too

highly. Before the problem of the creative artist analysis must, alas,

lay down its arms.

   The moralist in Dostoevsky is the most readily assailable. If we seek

to rank him high as a moralist on the plea that only a man who has

gone  through  the  depths  of  sin  can  reach  the  highest  summit  of

morality, we are neglecting a doubt that arises. A moral man is one

who reacts to temptation as soon as he feels it in his heart, without

yielding  to  it.  A  man  who  alternately  sins  and  then  in  his  remorse

erects high moral standards lays himself open to the reproach that he

has  made  things  too  easy  for  himself.  He  has  not  achieved  the

essence of morality, renunciation, for the moral conduct of life is a

practical  human  interest.  He  reminds  one  of  the  barbarians  of  the

great migrations, who murdered and did penance for it, till penance

became an actual technique for enabling murder to be done. Ivan the

Terrible  behaved  in  exactly  this  way;  indeed  this  compromise  withmorality is a characteristic Russian trait. Nor was the final outcome of

Dostoevsky’s  moral  strivings  anything  very  glorious.  After  the  most

violent struggles to reconcile the instinctual demands of the individual

with the claims of the community, he landed in the retrograde position

of submission both to temporal and spiritual authority, of veneration

both for the Tsar and for the God of the Christians, and of a narrow

Russian  nationalism  -  a  position  which  lesser  minds  have  reached

with  smaller  effort.  This  is  the  weak  point  in  that  great  personality.

Dostoevsky  threw  away  the  chance  of  becoming  a  teacher  and

liberator of humanity and made himself one with their gaolers. The

future of human civilization will have little to thank him for. It seems

probable that he was condemned to this failure by his neurosis. The

greatness of his intelligence and the strength of his love for humanity

might have opened to him another, an apostolic, way of life.

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4554

 

   To consider Dostoevsky as a sinner or a criminal rouses violent

opposition, which need not be based upon a philistine assessment of

criminals. The real motive for this opposition soon becomes apparent.

Two traits are essential in a criminal: boundless egoism and a strong

destructive urge. Common to both of these, and a necessary condition

for  their  expression,  is  absence  of  love,  lack  of  an  emotional

appreciation of (human) objects. One at once recalls the contrast to

this  presented  by  Dostoevsky  -  his  great  need  of  love  and  his

enormous capacity for love, which is to be seen in manifestations of

exaggerated kindness and caused him to love and to help where he

had  a  right  to  hate  and  to  be  revengeful,  as,  for  example,  in  his

relations with his first wife and her lover. That being so, it must be

asked why there is any temptation to reckon Dostoevsky among the

criminals.  The  answer  is  that  it  comes  from  his  choice  of  material,

which  singles  out  from  all  others  violent,  murderous  and  egoistic

characters, thus pointing to the existence of similar tendencies within

himself,  and  also  from  certain  facts  in  his  life,  like  his  passion  for

gambling  and  his  possible  confession  to  a  sexual  assault  upon  ayoung  girl.¹  The  contradiction  is  resolved  by  the  realization  that

Dostoevsky’s very strong destructive instinct, which might easily have

made him a criminal, was in his actual life directed mainly against his

own person (inward instead of outward) and thus found expression as

masochism  and  a  sense  of  guilt.  Nevertheless,  his  personality

retained  sadistic  traits  in  plenty,  which  show  themselves  in  his

irritability,  his  love  of  tormenting  and  his  intolerance  even  towards

people he loved, and which appear also in the way in which, as an

author,  he  treats  his  readers.  Thus  in  little  things  he  was  a  sadist

towards others, and in bigger things a sadist towards himself, in fact a

masochist - that is to say the mildest, kindliest, most helpful person

possible.

 

   ¹ See the discussion of this in Fülöp-Miller and Eckstein (1926). Stefan Zweig (1920) writes:

‘He was not halted by the barriers of bourgeois morality; and no one can say exactly how far
he transgressed the bounds of law in his own life or how much of the criminal instincts of his
heroes was realized in himself.’ For the intimate connection between Dostoevsky’s characters
and  his  own  experiences,  see  René  Fülöp  Miller’s  remarks  in  the  introductory  section  of
Fülöp-Miller and Eckstein (1925), which are based upon N. Strakhov.
 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4555

 

      We  have  selected  three  factors  from  Dostoevsky’s  complex

personality,  one  quantitative  and  two  qualitative:  the  extraordinary

intensity  of  his  emotional  life,  his  perverse  innate  instinctual

disposition, which inevitably marked him out to be a sado-masochist

or a criminal, and his unanalysable artistic gift. This combination might

very well exist without neurosis; there are people who are complete

masochists  without  being  neurotic.  Nevertheless,  the  balance  of

forces between his instinctual demands and the inhibitions opposing

them (plus the available methods of sublimation) would even so make

it necessary to classify Dostoevsky as what is known as an ‘instinctual

character’. But the position is obscured by the simultaneous presence

of neurosis, which, as we have said, was not in the circumstances

inevitable, but which comes into being the more readily, the richer the

complication which has to be mastered by the ego. For neurosis is

after  all  only  a  sign  that  the  ego  has  not  succeeded  in  making  asynthesis, that in attempting to do so it has forfeited its unity.

      How  then,  strictly  speaking,  does  his  neurosis  show  itself?

Dostoevsky called himself an epileptic, and was regarded as such by

other  people,  on  account  of  his  severe  attacks,  which  were

accompanied  by  loss  of  consciousness,  muscular  convulsions  and

subsequent depression. Now it is highly probable that this so-called

epilepsy was only a symptom of his neurosis and must accordingly be

classified as hystero-epilepsy - that is, as severe hysteria. We cannot

be completely certain on this point for two reasons - firstly, because

the anamnestic data on Dostoevsky’s alleged epilepsy are defective

and  untrustworthy,  and  secondly,  because  our  understanding  of

pathological states combined with epileptiform attacks is imperfect.

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4556

 

   To take the second point first. It is unnecessary here to reproduce

the whole pathology of epilepsy, for it would throw no decisive light on

the problem. But this may be said. The old morbus sacer is still in

evidence as an ostensible clinical entity, the uncanny disease with its

incalculable, apparently unprovoked convulsive attacks, its changing

of the character into irritability and aggressiveness, and its progressive

lowering of all the mental faculties. But the outlines of this picture are

quite  lacking  in  precision.  The  attacks,  so  savage  in  their  onset,

accompanied by biting of the tongue and incontinence of urine and

working up to the dangerous status epilepticus with its risk of severe

self-injuries,  may,  nevertheless,  be  reduced  to  brief  periods  of

absence, or rapidly passing fits of vertigo or may be replaced by short

spaces  of  time  during  which  the  patient  does  something  out  of

character, as though he were under the control of his unconscious.

These  attacks,  though  as  a  rule  determined,  in  a  way  we  do  not

understand, by purely physical causes, may nevertheless owe their

first appearance to some purely mental cause (a fright, for instance) or

may  react  in  other  respects  to  mental  excitations.  However

characteristic  intellectual  impairment  may  be  in  the  overwhelming

majority of cases, at least one case is known to us (that of Helmholtz)in  which  the  affliction  did  not  interfere  with  the  highest  intellectual

achievement.  (Other  cases  of  which  the  same  assertion  has  been

made are either disputable or open to the same doubts as the case of

Dostoevsky himself.) People who are victims of epilepsy may give an

impression of dullness and arrested development just as the disease

often accompanies the most palpable idiocy and the grossest cerebral

defects, even though not as a necessary component of the clinical

picture. But these attacks, with all their variations, also occur in other

people who display complete mental development and, if anything, an

excessive and as a rule insufficiently controlled emotional life. It is no

wonder in these circumstances that it has been found impossible to

maintain that ‘epilepsy’ is a single clinical entity. The similarity that we

find in the manifest symptoms seems to call for a functional view of

them. It is as though a mechanism for abnormal instinctual discharge

had been laid down organically, which could be made use of in quite

different circumstances - both in the case of disturbances of cerebral

activity due to severe histolytic or toxic affections, and also in the case

of inadequate control over the mental economy and at times when the

activity  of  the  energy  operating  in  the  mind  reaches  crisis-pitch.

Behind  this  dichotomy  we  have  a  glimpse  of  the  identity  of  the

underlying  mechanism  of  instinctual  discharge.  Nor  can  that

mechanism  stand  remote  from  the  sexual  processes,  which  are

fundamentally of toxic origin: the earliest physicians described coition

as a minor epilepsy, and thus recognized in the sexual act a mitigation

and adaptation of the epileptic method of discharging stimuli.

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4557

 

   The ‘epileptic reaction’, as this common element may be called, is

also undoubtedly at the disposal of the neurosis whose essence it is to

get rid by somatic means of amounts of excitation which it cannot deal

with  psychically.  Thus  the  epileptic  attack  becomes  a  symptom  of

hysteria and is adapted and modified by it just as it is by the normal

sexual process of discharge. It is therefore quite right to distinguish

between  an  organic  and  an  ‘affective’  epilepsy.  The  practicalsignificance of this is that a person who suffers from the first kind has

a disease of the brain, while a person who suffers from the second

kind is a neurotic. In the first case his mental life is subjected to an

alien disturbance from without, in the second case the disturbance is

an expression of his mental life itself.

      It  is  extremely  probable  that  Dostoevsky’s  epilepsy  was  of  the

second kind. This cannot, strictly speaking, be proved. To do so we

should have to be in a position to insert the first appearance of the

attacks and their subsequent fluctuations into the thread of his mental

life; and for that we know too little. The descriptions of the attacks

themselves teach us nothing and our information about the relations

between them and Dostoevsky’s experiences is defective and often

contradictory. The most probable assumption is that the attacks went

back far into his childhood, that their place was taken to begin with by

milder symptoms and that they did not assume an epileptic form until

after the shattering experience of his eighteenth year - the murder of

his father.¹ It would be very much to the point if it could be established

that  they  ceased  completely  during  his  exile  in  Siberia,  but  other

accounts contradict this.²

 

   ¹ See René Fülöp-Miller (1924). Of especial interest is the information that in the novelist’s

childhood ‘something terrible, unforgettable and agonizing’ happened, to which the first signs
of his illness were to be traced (from an article by Suvorin in the newspaper Novoe Vremya,
1881, quoted in the introduction to Fülöp-Miller and Eckstein, 1925, xlv). See also Orest Miller
(1921,  140):  ‘There  is,  however,  another  special  piece  of  evidence  about  Fyodor
Mikhailovich’s illness, which relates to his earliest youth and brings the illness into connection
with a tragic event in the family life of his parents. But, although this piece of evidence was
given to me orally by one who was a close friend of Fyodor Mlkhailovich, I cannot bring myself
to reproduce it fully and precisely since I have had no confirmation of this rumour from any
other  quarter.’  Biographers  and  scientific  research  workers  cannot  feel  grateful  for  this
discretion.

   ² Most of the accounts, including Dostoevsky’s own, assert on the contrary that the illness

only assumed its final, epileptic character during the Siberian exile. Unfortunately there is
reason to distrust the autobiographical statements of neurotics. Experience shows that their
memories  introduce  falsifications  which  are  designed  to  interrupt  disagreeable  causal
connections.  Nevertheless,  it  appears  certain  that  Dostoevsky’s  detention  in  the  Siberian
prison markedly altered his pathological condition. Cf. Fülöp-Miller (1924, 1186).
 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4558 

   The unmistakable connection between the murder of the father in

The Brothers Kamarazov and the fate of Dostoevsky’s own father has

struck more than one of his biographers, and has led them to refer to

‘a  certain  modern  school  of  psychology’.  From  the  standpoint  of

psycho-analysis (for that is what is meant), we are tempted to see in

that event the severest trauma and to regard Dostoevsky’s reaction to

it as the turning-point of his neurosis. But if I undertake to substantiate

this view psycho-analytically, I shall have to risk the danger of being

unintelligible to all those readers who are unfamiliar with the language

and theories of psycho-analysis.

   We have one certain starting-point. We know the meaning of the first

attacks from which Dostoevsky suffered in his early years, long before

the incidence of the ‘epilepsy’. These attacks had the significance of

death:  they  were  heralded  by  a  fear  of  death  and  consisted  of

lethargic, somnolent states. The illness first came over him while he

was still a boy, in the form of a sudden, groundless melancholy, a

feeling, as he later told his friend Soloviev, as though he were going to

die on the spot. And there in fact followed a state exactly similar to

real death. His brother Andrey tells us that even when he was quite

young Fyodor used to leave little notes about before he went to sleep,

saying that he was afraid he might fall into this death-like sleep during

the night and therefore begged that his burial should be postponed for

five days. (Fülöp-Miller and Eckstein, 1925, lx.)

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4559

 

   We know the meaning and intention of such deathlike attacks. They

signify an identification with a dead person, either with someone who

is really dead or with someone who is still alive and whom the subject

wishes dead. The latter case is the more significant. The attack then

has the value of a punishment. One has wished another person dead,

and now one is this other person and is dead oneself. At this point

psycho-analytical  theory  brings  in  the  assertion  that  for  a  boy  this

other person is usually his father and that the attack (which is termedhysterical) is thus a self-punishment for a death-wish against a hated

father.

   Parricide, according to a well-known view, is the principal and primal

crime of humanity as well as of the individual. (See my Totem and

Taboo 1912-13.) It is in any case the main source of the sense of guilt,

though we do not know if it is the only one: researches have not yet

been able to establish with certainty the mental origin of guilt and the

need for expiation. But it is not necessary for it to be the only one. The

psychological situation is complicated and requires elucidation. The

relation of a boy to his father is, as we say, an ‘ambivalent’ one. In

addition to the hate which seeks to get rid of the father as a rival, a

measure  of  tenderness  for  him  is  also  habitually  present.  The  two

attitudes of mind combine to produce identification with the father; the

boy wants to be in his father’s place because he admires him and

wants to be like him, and also because he wants to put him out of the

way.  This  whole  development  now  comes  up  against  a  powerful

obstacle. At a certain moment the child comes to understand that an

attempt to remove his father as a rival would be punished by him with

castration.  So  from  fear  of  castration  -  that  is,  in  the  interests  of

preserving  his  masculinity  -  he  gives  up  his  wish  to  possess  his

mother and get rid of his father. In so far as this wish remains in the

unconscious it forms the basis of the sense of guilt. We believe that

what we have here been describing are normal processes, the normal

fate of the so-called ‘Oedipus complex’; nevertheless it requires an

important amplification.

   A further complication arises when the constitutional factor we call

bisexuality is comparatively strongly developed in a child. For then,

under the threat to the boy’s masculinity by castration, his inclination

becomes strengthened to diverge in the direction of femininity, to put

himself instead in his mother’s place and take over her role as object

of  his  father’s  love.  But  the  fear  of  castration  makes this  solution

impossible as well. The boy understands that he must also submit to

castration if he wants to be loved by his father as a woman. Thus both

impulses,  hatred  of  the  father  and  being  in  love  with  the  father,

undergo repression. There is a certain psychological distinction in the

fact that the hatred of the father is given up on account of fear of an

external danger (castration), while the being in love with the father istreated as an internal instinctual danger, though fundamentally it goes

back to the same external danger.

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4560

 

   What makes hatred of the father unacceptable is fear of the father;

castration is terrible, whether as a punishment or as the price of love.

Of the two factors which repress hatred of the father, the first, the

direct fear of punishment and castration, may be called the normal

one;  its  pathogenic  intensification  seems  to  come  only  with  the

addition of the second factor, the fear of the feminine attitude. Thus a

strong innate bisexual disposition becomes one of the preconditions or

reinforcements  of  neurosis.  Such  a  disposition  must  certainly  be

assumed in Dostoevsky, and it shows itself in a viable form (as latent

homosexuality) in the important part played by male friendships in his

life, in his strangely tender attitude towards rivals in love and in his

remarkable understanding of situations which are explicable only by

repressed homosexuality, as many examples from his novels show.

   I am sorry, though I cannot alter the facts, if this exposition of the

attitudes  of  hatred  and  love  towards  the  father  and  their

transformations under the influence of the threat of castration seems

to readers unfamiliar with psycho-analysis unsavoury and incredible. I

should myself expect that it is precisely the castration complex that

would be bound to arouse the most general repudiation. But I can only

insist  that  psycho-analytic  experience  has  put  these  matters  in

particular beyond the reach of doubt and has taught us to recognize in

them the key to every neurosis. This key, then, we must apply to our

author’s  so-called  epilepsy.  So  alien  to  our  consciousness  are  the

things by which our unconscious mental life is governed!

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4561

 

   But what has been said so far does not exhaust the consequences

of the repression of the hatred of the father in the Oedipus complex.There  is  something  fresh  to  be  added:  namely  that  in  spite  of

everything the identification with the father finally makes a permanent

place for itself in the ego. It is received into the ego, but establishes

itself there as a separate agency in contrast to the rest of the content

of the ego. We then give it the name of super-ego and ascribe to it,

the inheritor of the parental influence, the most important functions. If

the father was hard, violent and cruel, the super-ego takes over those

attributes from him and, in the relations between the ego and it, the

passivity  which  was  supposed  to  have  been  repressed  is  re-

established.  The  super-ego  has  become  sadistic,  and  the  ego

becomes masochistic - that is to say, at bottom passive in a feminine

way. A great need for punishment develops in the ego, which in part

offers  itself  as  a  victim  to  Fate,  and  in  part  finds  satisfaction  in  ill-

treatment by the super-ego (that is, in the sense of guilt). For every

punishment is ultimately castration and, as such, a fulfilment of the old

passive attitude towards the father. Even Fate is, in the last resort,

only a later projection of the father.

      The  normal  processes  in  the  formation  of  conscience  must  be

similar  to  the  abnormal  ones  described  here.  We  have  not  yet

succeeded  in  fixing  the  boundary  line  between  them.  It  will  be

observed that here the largest share in the outcome is ascribed to the

passive component of repressed femininity. In addition, it must be of

importance as an accidental factor whether the father, who is feared in

any  case,  is  also  especially  violent  in  reality.  This  was  true  in

Dostoevsky’s case, and we can trace back the fact of his extraordinary

sense  of  guilt  and  of  his  masochistic  conduct  of  life  to  a  specially

strong  feminine  component.  Thus  the  formula  for  Dostoevsky  is  as

follows: a person with a specially strong innate bisexual disposition,

who can defend himself with special intensity against dependence on

a specially severe father. This characteristic of bisexuality comes as

an  addition  to  the  components  of  his  nature  that  we  have  already

recognized.  His  early  symptoms  of  death-like  attacks  can  thus  be

understood as a father-identification on the part of his ego, which is

permitted by his super-ego as a punishment. ‘You wanted to kill your

father in order to be your father yourself. Now you are your father, but

a dead father’ - the regular mechanism of hysterical symptoms. And

further: ‘Now your father is killing you.’ For the ego the death symptomis a satisfaction in phantasy of the masculine wish and at the same

time  a  masochistic  satisfaction;  for  the  super-ego  it  is  a  punitive

satisfaction - that is, a sadistic satisfaction. Both of them, the ego and

the super-ego, carry on the role of father.

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4562

 

   To sum up, the relation between the subject and his father-object,

while  retaining  its  content,  has  been  transformed  into  a  relation

between the ego and the super-ego - a new setting on a fresh stage.

Infantile  reactions  from  the  Oedipus  complex  such  as  these  may

disappear if reality gives them no further nourishment. But the father’s

character remained the same, or rather, it deteriorated with the years,

and thus Dostoevsky’s hatred for his rather and his death-wish against

that  wicked  father  were  maintained.  Now  it  is  a  dangerous  thing  if

reality fulfils such repressed wishes. The phantasy has become reality

and all defensive measures are thereupon reinforced. Dostoevsky’s

attacks  now  assumed  an  epileptic  character;  they  still  undoubtedly

signified an identification with his father as a punishment, but they had

become  terrible,  like  his  father’s  frightful  death  itself.  What  further

content they had absorbed, particularly what sexual content, escapes

conjecture.

   One thing is remarkable: in the aura of the epileptic attack, one

moment  of  supreme  bliss  is  experienced.  This  may  very  well  be  a

record of the triumph and sense of liberation felt on hearing the news

of  the  death,  to  be  followed  immediately  by  an  all  the  more  cruel

punishment. We have divined just such a sequence of triumph and

mourning, of festive joy and mourning, in the brothers of the primal

horde  who  murdered  their  father,  and  we  find  it  repeated  in  the

ceremony  of  the  totem  meal.¹  If  it  proved  to  be  the  case  that

Dostoevsky was free from his attacks in Siberia, that would merely

substantiate the view that they were his punishment. He did not need

them any longer when he was being punished in another way. But that

cannot be proved. Rather does this necessity for punishment on the

part of Dostoevsky’s mental economy explain the fact that he passedunbroken through these years of misery and humiliation. Dostoevsky’s

condemnation as a political prisoner was unjust and he must have

known it, but he accepted the undeserved punishment at the hands of

the  Little  Father,  the  Tsar,  as  a  substitute  for  the  punishment  he

deserved  for  his  sin  against  his  real  father.  Instead  of  punishing

himself, he got himself punished by his father’s deputy. Here we have

a glimpse of the psychological justification of the punishments inflicted

by  society.  It  is  a  fact  that  large  groups  of  criminals  want  to  be

punished.  Their  super-ego  demands  it  and  so  saves  itself  the

necessity for inflicting the punishment itself.

 

   ¹ See Totem and Taboo.

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4563

 

      Everyone  who  is  familiar  with  the  complicated  transformation  of

meaning undergone by hysterical symptoms will understand that no

attempt can be made here to follow out the meaning of Dostoevsky’s

attacks beyond this beginning.¹ It is enough that we may assume that

their original meaning remained unchanged behind all later accretions.

We can safely say that Dostoevsky never got free from the feelings of

guilt  arising  from  his  intention  of  murdering  his  father.  They  also

determined his attitude in the two other spheres in which the father-

relation is the decisive factor, his attitude towards the authority of the

State and towards belief in God. In the first of these he ended up with

complete  submission  to  his  Little  Father,  the  Tsar,  who  had  once

performed with him in reality the comedy of killing which his attacks

had so often represented in play. Here penitence gained the upper

hand. In the religious sphere he retained more freedom: according to

apparently trustworthy reports he wavered, up to the last moment of

his  life,  between  faith  and  atheism.  His  great  intellect  made  it

impossible  for  him  to  overlook  any  of  the  intellectual  difficulties  to

which faith leads. By an individual recapitulation of a development in

world-history he hoped to find a way out and a liberation from guilt in

the Christ ideal, and even to make use of his sufferings as a claim to

be  playing  a  Christ-like  role.  If  on  the  whole  he  did  not  achievefreedom and became a reactionary, that was because the filial guilt,

which is present in human beings generally and on which religious

feeling  is  built,  had  in  him  attained  a  super-individual  intensity  and

remained insurmountable even to his great intelligence. In writing this

we are laying ourselves open to the charge of having abandoned the

impartiality of analysis and of subjecting Dostoevsky to judgements

that can only be justified from the partisan standpoint of a particular

Weltanschauung.  A  conservative  would  take  the  side  of  the  Grand

Inquisitor  and  would  judge  Dostoevsky  differently.  The  objection  is

just; and one can only say in extenuation that Dostoevsky’s decision

has every appearance of having been determined by an intellectual

inhibition due to his neurosis.

 

   ¹ The best account of the meaning and content given by Dostoevsky himself, when he told

his friend Strakhov that his irritability and depression after an epileptic attack were due to the
fact that he seemed to himself a criminal and could not get rid of the feeling that he had a
burden  of  unknown  guilt  upon  him,  that  he  had  committed  some  great  misdeed,  which
oppressed  him.  (Fülöp-Miller,  1924,  1188.)  In  self-accusations  like  these  psycho-analysis
sees signs of a recognition of ‘psychical reality’, and it endeavours to make the unknown guilt
known to consciousness.
 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4564

 

   It can scarcely be owing to chance that three of the masterpieces of

the  literature  of  all  time  -  the Oedipus  Rex  of  Sophocles,

Shakespeare’s Hamlet and Dostoevsky’s The Brothers Kamarazov -

should all deal with the same subject, parricide. In all three, moreover,

the motive for the deed, sexual rivalry for a woman, is laid bare.

   The most straightforward is certainly the representation in the drama

derived from the Greek legend. In this it is still the hero himself who

commits  the  crime.  But  poetic  treatment  is  impossible  without

softening and disguise. The naked admission of an intention to commit

parricide,  as  we  arrive  at  it  in  analysis,  seems  intolerable  without

analytic  preparation.  The  Greek  drama,  while  retaining  the  crime,

introduces  the  indispensable  toning-down  in  a  masterly  fashion  by

projecting the hero’s unconscious motive into reality in the form of a

compulsion by a destiny which is alien to him. The hero commits thedeed unintentionally and apparently uninfluenced by the woman; this

latter element is however taken into account in the circumstance that

the hero can only obtain possession of the queen mother after he has

repeated his deed upon the monster who symbolizes the father. After

his guilt has been revealed and made conscious, the hero makes no

attempt to exculpate himself by appealing to the artificial expedient of

the compulsion of destiny. His crime is acknowledged and punished

as though it were a full and conscious one - which is bound to appear

unjust to our reason, but which psychologically is perfectly correct.

   In the English play the presentation is more indirect; the hero does

not commit the crime himself; it is carried out by someone else, for

whom it is not parricide. The forbidden motive of sexual rivalry for the

woman does not need, therefore, to be disguised. Moreover, we see

the hero’s Oedipus complex, as it were, in a reflected light, by learning

the  effect  upon  him  of  the  other’s  crime.  He  ought  to  avenge  the

crime, but finds himself, strangely enough, incapable of doing so. We

know  that  it  is  his  sense  of  guilt  that  is  paralysing  him;  but,  in  a

manner entirely in keeping with neurotic processes, the sense of guilt

is displaced on to the perception of his inadequacy for fulfilling his

task. There are signs that the hero feels this guilt as a super-individual

one. He despises others no less than himself: ‘Use every man after

his desert, and who should ‘scape whipping?’

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4565

 

   The Russian novel goes a step further in the same direction. There

also the murder is committed by someone else. This other person,

however, stands to the murdered man in the same filial relation as the

hero, Dmitri; in this other person’s case the motive of sexual rivalry is

openly admitted; he is a brother of the hero’s, and it is a remarkable

fact that Dostoevsky has attributed to him his own illness, the alleged

epilepsy, as though he were seeking to confess that the epileptic, the

neurotic, in himself was a parricide. Then, again, in the speech for the

defence at the trial, there is the famous mockery of psychology - it is a

‘knife that cuts both ways’: a splendid piece of disguise, for we haveonly  to  reverse  it  in  order  to  discover  the  deepest  meaning  of

Dostoevsky’s view of things. It is not psychology that deserves the

mockery,  but  the  procedure  of  judicial  enquiry.  It  is  a  matter  of

indifference  who  actually  committed  the  crime;  psychology  is  only

concerned to know who desired it emotionally and who welcomed it

when it was done. And for that reason all of the brothers, except the

contrasted  figure  of  Alyosha,  are  equally  guilty  -  the  impulsive

sensualist,  the  sceptical  cynic  and  the  epileptic  criminal.  In The

Brothers Karamazov there is one particularly revealing scene. In the

course of his talk with Dmitri, Father Zossima recognizes that Dmitri is

prepared  to  commit  parricide,  and  he  bows  down  at  his  feet.  It  is

impossible that this can be meant as an expression of admiration; it

must mean that the holy man is rejecting the temptation to despise or

detest the murderer and for that reason humbles himself before him.

Dostoevsky’s sympathy for the criminal is, in fact, boundless; it goes

far  beyond  the  pity  which  the  unhappy  wretch  has  a  right  to,  and

reminds us of the ‘holy awe’ with which epileptics and lunatics were

regarded in the past. A criminal is to him almost a Redeemer, who has

taken on himself the guilt which must else have been borne by others.

There is no longer any need for one to murder, since he has already

murdered; and one must be grateful to him, for, except for him, one

would have been obliged oneself to murder. That is not kindly pity

alone, it is identification on the basis of similar murderous impulses -

in  fact,  a  slightly  displaced  narcissism.  (In  saying  this,  we  are  not

disputing the ethical value of this kindliness.) This may perhaps be

quite generally the mechanism of kindly sympathy with other people, a

mechanism which one can discern with especial ease in this extreme

case of a guilt-ridden novelist. There is no doubt that this sympathy by

identification was a decisive factor in determining Dostoevsky’s choice

of material. He dealt first with the common criminal (whose motives

are egotistical) and the political and religious criminal; and not until the

end of his life did he come back to the primal criminal, the parricide,

and use him, in a work of art, for making his confession.

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4566 

 

      The  publication  of  Dostoevsky’s  posthumous  papers  and  of  his

wife’s  diaries  has  thrown  a  glaring  light  on  one  episode  in  his  life,

namely the period in Germany when he was obsessed with a mania

for gambling (cf. Fülöp-Miller and Eckstein, 1925), which no one could

regard  as  anything  but  an  unmistakable  fit  of  pathological  passion.

There was no lack of rationalizations for this remarkable and unworthy

behaviour. As often happens with neurotics, Dostoevsky’s sense of

guilt had taken a tangible shape as a burden of debt, and he was able

to take refuge behind the pretext that he was trying by his winnings at

the tables to make it possible for him to return to Russia without being

arrested by his creditors. But this was no more than a pretext and

Dostoevsky  was  acute  enough  to  recognize  the  fact  and  honest

enough to admit it. He knew that the chief thing was gambling for its

own  sake  - le  jeu  pour  le  jeu.¹  All  the  details  of  his  impulsively

irrational conduct show this and something more besides. He never

rested until he had lost everything. For him gambling was a method of

self-punishment as well. Time after time he gave his young wife his

promise or his word of honour not to play any more or not to play any

more on that particular day; and, as she says, he almost always broke

it. When his losses had reduced himself and her to the direst need, he

derived a second pathological satisfaction from that. He could then

scold and humiliate himself before her, invite her to despise him and

to feel sorry that she had married such an old sinner; and when he

had thus unburdened his conscience, the whole business would begin

again next day. His young wife accustomed herself to this cycle, for

she  had  noticed  that  the  one  thing  which  offered  any  real  hope  of

salvation - his literary production - never went better than when they

had lost everything and pawned their last possessions. Naturally she

did  not  understand  the  connection.  When  his  sense  of  guilt  was

satisfied by the punishments he had inflicted on himself, the inhibition

upon his work became less severe and he allowed himself to take a

few steps along the road to success.²

 

   ¹ ‘The main thing is the play itself,’ he writes in one of his letters. ‘I swear that greed for

money has nothing to do with it, although Heaven knows I am sorely in need of money.’   ² ‘He always remained at the gaming tables till he had lost everything and was totally

ruined. It was only when the damage was quite complete that the demon at last retired from
his soul and made way for the creative genius.’ (Fülöp-Miller and Eckstein, 1925, lxxxvi.)
 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4567

 

   What part of a gambler’s long-buried childhood is it that forces its

way  to  repetition  in  his  obsession  for  play?  The  answer  may  be

divined without difficulty from a story by one of our younger writers.

Stefan  Zweig,  who  has  incidentally  devoted  a  study  to  Dostoevsky

himself  (1920),  has  included  in  his  collection  of  three  stories Die

Verwirrung der Gefühle  (1927)  one  which  he  calls  ‘Vierundzwanzig

Stunden aus dem Leben einer Frau’. This little masterpiece ostensibly

sets out only to show what an irresponsible creature woman is, and to

what excesses, surprising even to herself, an unexpected experience

may drive her. But the story tells far more than this. If it is subjected to

an analytical interpretation, it will be found to represent (without any

apologetic  intent)  something  quite  different,  something  universally

human, or rather something masculine. And such an interpretation is

so extremely obvious that it cannot be resisted. It is characteristic of

the nature of artistic creation that the author, who is a personal friend

of  mine,  was  able  to  assure  me,  when  I  asked  him,  that  the

interpretation which I put to him had been completely strange to his

knowledge and intention, although some of the details woven into the

narrative  seemed  expressly  designed  to  give  a  clue  to  the  hidden

secret.

   In this story, an elderly lady of distinction tells the author about an

experience she has had more than twenty years earlier. She has been

left a widow when still young and is the mother of two sons, who no

longer need her. In her forty-second year, expecting nothing further of

life,  she  happens,  on  one  of  her  aimless  journeyings,  to  visit  the

Rooms at Monte Carlo. There, among all the remarkable impressions

which the place produces, she is soon fascinated by the sight of a pair

of hands which seem to betray all the feelings of the unlucky gambler

with  terrifying  sincerity  and  intensity.  These  hands  belong  to  a

handsome young man - the author, as though unintentionally, makeshim of the same age as the narrator’s elder son - who, after losing

everything, leaves the Rooms in the depth of despair, with the evident

intention  of  ending  his  hopeless  life  in  the  Casino  gardens.  An

inexplicable feeling of sympathy compels her to follow him and make

every  effort  to  save  him.  He  takes  her  for  one  of  the  importunate

women so common there and tries to shake her off; but she stays with

him and finds herself obliged, in the most natural way possible, to join

him in his apartment at the hotel, and finally to share his bed. After this

improvised  light  of  love,  she  exacts  a  most  solemn  vow  from  the

young man, who has now apparently calmed down, that he will never

play  again,  provides  him  with  money  for  his  journey  home  and

promises to meet him at the station before the departure of his train.

Now, however, she begins to feel a great tenderness for him, is ready

to sacrifice all she has in order to keep him and makes up her mind to

go with him instead of saying goodbye. Various mischances delay her,

so that she misses the train. In her longing for the lost one she returns

once more to the Rooms and there, to her horror, sees once more the

hands which had first excited her sympathy: the faithless youth had

gone back to his play. She reminds him of his promise, but, obsessed

by his passion, he calls her a spoil-sport, tells her to go, and flings

back the money with which she has tried to rescue him. She hurries

away  in  deep  mortification  and  learns  later  that  she  has  not

succeeded in saving him from suicide.

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4568

 

   The brilliantly told, faultlessly motivated story is of course complete

in itself and is certain to make a deep effect upon the reader. But

analysis shows us that its invention is based fundamentally upon a

wishful phantasy belonging to the period of puberty, which a number

of people actually remember consciously. The phantasy embodies a

boy’s wish that his mother should herself initiate him into sexual life in

order to save him from the dreaded injuries caused by masturbation.

(The numerous creative works that deal with the theme of redemption

have the same origin.) The ‘vice’ of masturbation is replaced by theaddiction  to  gambling;  and  the  emphasis  laid  upon  the  passionate

activity of the hands betrays this derivation. Indeed, the passion for

play is an equivalent of the old compulsion to masturbate; ‘playing’ is

the  actual  word  used  in  the  nursery  to  describe  the  activity  of  the

hands upon the genitals. The irresistible nature of the temptation, the

solemn resolutions, which are nevertheless invariably broken, never to

do it again, the stupefying pleasure and the bad conscience which

tells the subject that he is ruining himself (committing suicide) - all

these elements remain unaltered in the process of substitution. It is

true that Zweig’s story is told by the mother, not by the son. It must

flatter  the  son  to  think:  ‘if  my  mother  only  knew  what  dangers

masturbation involves me in, she would certainly save me from them

by allowing me to lavish all my tenderness on her own body’. The

equation of the mother with a prostitute, which is made by the young

man in the story, is linked up with the same phantasy. It brings the

unattainable  woman  within  easy  reach.  The  bad  conscience  which

accompanies the phantasy brings about the unhappy ending of the

story. It is also interesting to notice how the façade given to the story

by its author seeks to disguise its analytic meaning. For it is extremely

questionable whether the erotic life of women is dominated by sudden

and  mysterious  impulses.  On  the  contrary,  analysis  reveals  an

adequate motivation for the surprising behaviour of this woman who

had  hitherto  turned  away  from  love.  Faithful  to  the  memory  of  her

dead husband, she had armed herself against all similar attractions;

but - and here the son’s phantasy is right - she did not, as a mother,

escape her quite unconscious transference of love on to her son, and

Fate was able to catch her at this undefended spot.

   If the addiction to gambling, with the unsuccessful struggles to break

the  habit  and  the  opportunities  it  affords  for  self-punishment,  is  a

repetition of the compulsion to masturbate, we shall not be surprised

to find that it occupied such a large space in Dostoevsky’s life. After

all,  we  find  no  cases  of  severe  neurosis  in  which  the  auto-erotic

satisfaction of early childhood and of puberty has not played a part;

and the relation between efforts to suppress it and fear of the father

are too well known to need more than a mention.¹

 

   ¹ Most of the views which are here expressed are also contained in an excellent book byJolan Neufeld (1923)
 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4569

 

                                      APPENDIX

 

            A LETTER FROM FREUD TO THEODOR REIK

 

                                                                                                                       

April 14, 1929

   . . . I have read your critical review of my Dostoevsky study with

great pleasure. All your objections deserve consideration and must be

recognized  as  in  a  sense  apt.  I  can  bring  forward  a  little  in  my

defence. But of course it will not be a question of who is right or who is

wrong.

   I think you are applying too high a standard to this triviality. It was

written as a favour to someone and written reluctantly. I always write

reluctantly nowadays. No doubt you noticed this about it. This is not

meant, of course, to excuse hasty or false judgements, but merely the

careless architecture of the essay as a whole. I cannot dispute the

unharmonious effect produced by the addition of the Zweig analysis;

but deeper examination will perhaps show some justification for it. If I

had  not  been  hampered  by  considerations  of  the  place  where  my

essay was to appear, I should certainly have written: ‘We may expect

that in the history of a neurosis accompanied by such a severe sense

of  guilt  a  special  part  will  be  played  by  the  struggle  against

masturbation. This expectation is completely fulfilled by Dostoevsky’s

pathological addiction to gambling. For, as we can see from a short

story of Zweig’s . . . etc.’ That is to say, the amount of space given to

the short story corresponds not to the relation: Zweig-Dostoevsky, but

to the other one: masturbation-neurosis. All the same, the outcome

was clumsy.

 


                              Dostoevsky And Parricide

                                                                                      4570 

   I hold firmly to a scientifically objective social assessment of ethics,

and for that reason I should not wish to deny the excellent Philistine a

certificate of good ethical conduct, even though it has cost him little

self-discipline. But alongside of this I grant the validity of the subjective

psychological view of ethics which you support. Though I agree with

your judgement of the world and mankind as they are to-day, I cannot,

as you know, regard your pessimistic dismissal of a better future as

justified.

   As you suggest, I included Dostoevsky the psychologist under the

creative artist. Another objection I might have raised against him was

that  his  insight  was  so  much  restricted  to  abnormal  mental  life.

Consider his astonishing helplessness in face of the phenomena of

love.  All  he  really  knew  were  crude,  instinctual  desire,  masochistic

subjection and loving out of pity. You are right, too, in suspecting that,

in  spite  of  all  my  admiration  for  Dostoevsky’s  intensity  and  pre-

eminence, I do not really like him. That is because my patience with

pathological  natures  is  exhausted  in  analysis.  In  art  and  life  I  am

intolerant of them. Those are character traits personal to me and not

binding on others.

   Where are you going to publish your essay? I rate it very highly. It is

only scientific research that must be without presumptions. In every

other kind of thinking the choice of a point of view cannot be avoided;

and there are, of course, several of these . . .

                                                                                       4571

 

                        SOME DREAMS OF DESCARTES’

                          A LETTER TO MAXIME LEROY

                                        (1929)

 


                                                                                      4572

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4573

 

                        SOME DREAMS OF DESCARTES’

                          A LETTER TO MAXIME LEROY

 

On  considering  your  letter  asking  me  to  examine  some  dreams  of

Descartes’,  my  first  feeling  was  an  impression  of  dismay,  since

working  on  dreams  without  being  able  to  obtain  from  the  dreamer

himself any indications on the relations which might link them to one

another or attach them to the external world - and this is clearly the

case when it is a question of the dreams of a historical figure - gives,

as a general rule, only a meagre result. In the event my task turned

out to be easier than I had anticipated; nevertheless, the fruit of my

investigations will no doubt seem to you much less important than you

had a right to expect.

      Our  philosopher’s  dreams  are  what  are  known  as  ‘dreams  from

above’ (‘Träume von oben’). That is to say, they are formulations of

ideas which could have been created just as well in a waking state as

during the state of sleep, and which have derived their content only in

certain parts from mental states at a comparatively deep level. That is

why  these  dreams  offer  for  the  most  part  a  content  which  has  an

abstract, poetic or symbolic form.

   The analysis of dreams of this kind usually leads us to the following

position: we cannot understand the dream, but the dreamer - or the

patient - can translate it immediately and without difficulty, given thatthe  content  of  the  dream  is  very  close  to  his  conscious  thoughts.

There then remain certain parts of the dream about which the dreamer

does not know what to say: and these are precisely the parts which

belong to the unconscious and which are in many respects the most

interesting.

   In the most favourable cases we explain this unconscious with the

help of the ideas which the dreamer has added to it.

   This way of judging ‘dreams from above’ - and this term must be

understood in a psychological, not in a mystical, sense - is the one to

be followed in the case of Descartes’ dreams.

 


                            Some Dreams Of Descartes'

                                                                                      4574

 

   The philosopher interprets them himself and, in accordance with all

the  rules  for  the  interpretation  of  dreams,  we  must  accept  his

explanation, but it should be added that we have no path open to us

which will take us any further.

   In confirmation of his explanation we can say that the hindrances

which prevented him from moving freely are perfectly well known to

us: they are a representation by the dream of an internal conflict. The

left  side  represents  evil  and  sin,  and  the  wind  the  ‘evil  genius’

(animus).

   The different figures who appear in the dream cannot of course be

identified by us, although Descartes, if he were questioned, would not

have  failed  to  identify  them.  The  bizarre  elements,  of  which,

incidentally, there are few, and which are almost absurd - such as ‘the

melon  from  a  foreign  land’,  and  the  little  portraits  -  remain

unexplained.

   As regards the melon, the dreamer has had the - original - idea of

seeing in it ‘the charms of solitude, but presented by purely human

inducements’.  This  is  certainly  not  correct,  but  it  might  provide  an

association of ideas which would lead to a correct explanation. If it is

correlated  with  his  state  of  sin,  this  association  might  stand  for  a

sexual picture which occupied the lonely young man’s imagination.

   On the question of the portraits Descartes throws no light.                                                                                       4575

 

                                THE GOETHE PRIZE

                                        (1930)

 


                                                                                      4576

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                    The Goethe Prize

                                                                                      4577

 

                        LETTER TO DR. ALFONS PAQUET

                                                                  Grundlsee, 3.8.1930

 

My dear Dr. Paquet,

   I have not been spoilt by public marks of honour and I have so

adapted  myself  to  this  state  of  things  that  I  have  been  able  to  do

without them. I should not like to deny, however, that the award of the

Goethe Prize of the City of Frankfurt has given me great pleasure.

There is something about it that especially fires the imagination and

one of its stipulations dispels the feeling of humiliation which in other

cases is a concomitant of such distinctions.

   I must particularly thank you for your letter; it moved and astonished

me.  Apart  from  your  sympathetic  penetration  into  the  nature  of  my

work, I have never before found the secret, personal intentions behind

it recognized with such clarity as by you, and I should very much like

to ask you how you come by such knowledge.

   I am sorry to learn from your letter to my daughter that I am not to

see  you  in  the  near  future,  and  postponement  is  always  a  chancy

affair at my time of life. Of course I shall be most ready to receive the

gentleman (Dr. Michel) whose visit you announce.

   Unfortunately I shall not be able to attend the ceremony in Frankfurt;

I am too frail for such an undertaking. The company there will lose

nothing by that: my daughter Anna is certainly pleasanter to look atand to listen to than I am. We propose that she shall read out a few

sentences of mine which deal with Goethe’s connections with psycho-

analysis and defend the analysts themselves against the reproach of

having  offended  against  the  respect  due  to  the  great  man  by  the

analytic attempts they have made on him. I hope it will be acceptable

if I thus adapt the theme that has been proposed to me - my ‘inner

relations as a man and a scientist to Goethe’ - or else that you will be

kind enough to let me know.

                                                                Yours very sincerely,

                                                                                    Freud

 


                                    The Goethe Prize

                                                                                      4578

 

ADDRESS DELIVERED IN THE GOETHE HOUSE AT FRANKFURT

 

My life’s work has been directed to a single aim. I have observed the

more subtle disturbances of mental function in healthy and sick people

and have sought to infer - or, if you prefer it, to guess - from signs of

this  kind  how  the  apparatus  which  serves  these  functions  is

constructed and what concurrent and mutually opposing forces are at

work in it. What we - I, my friends and collaborators - have managed

to learn in following this path has seemed to us of importance for the

construction  of  a  mental  science  which  makes  it  possible  to

understand both normal and pathological processes as parts of the

same natural course of events.

   I was recalled from such narrow considerations by the astonishing

honour which you do me. By evoking the figure of the great universal

personality who was born in this house and who spent his childhood in

these rooms, your distinction prompts one as it were to justify oneself

before him and raises the question of how he would have reacted if

his  glance,  attentive  to  every  innovation  in  science,  had  fallen  on

psycho-analysis. Goethe can be compared in versatility to Leonardo

da Vinci, the Renaissance master, who like him was both artist and

scientific investigator. But human images can never be repeated, and

profound differences between the two great men are not lacking. InLeonardo’s nature the scientist did not harmonize with the artist, he

interfered with him and perhaps in the end stifled him. In Goethe’s life

both  personalities  found  room  side  by  side:  at  different  times  each

allowed  the  other  to  predominate.  In  Leonardo  it  is  plausible  to

associate his disturbance with that inhibition in his development which

withdrew everything erotic, and hence psychology too, from his sphere

of  interest.  In  this  respect  Goethe’s  character  was  able  to  develop

more freely.

 


                                    The Goethe Prize

                                                                                      4579

 

   I think that Goethe would not have rejected psycho-analysis in an

unfriendly spirit, as so many of our contemporaries have done. He

himself approached it at a number of points, recognized much through

his own insight that we have since been able to confirm, and some

views, which have brought criticism and mockery down upon us, were

expounded  by  him  as  self-evident.  Thus  he  was  familiar  with  the

incomparable strength of the first affective ties of human creatures. He

celebrated them in the Dedication to his Faust poem, in words which

we could repeat for each of our analyses:

 

                                                Ihr naht euch wieder, schwankende Gestalten,
                                                Die früh sich einst dem trüben Blick gezeigt,
                                                Versuch’ ich wohl, euch diesmal festzuhalten?

                                    .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .

                                                Gleich einer alten, halbverklungenen Sage
                                                Kommt erste Lieb’ und Freundschaft mit herauf

 

He  explained  to  himself  the  strongest  impulse  of  love  that  he

experienced as a mature man by apostrophizing his beloved: ‘Ach, du

warst in abgelebten Zeiten meine Schwester oder meine Frau.’

   Thus he does not deny that these perennial first inclinations take

figures from one’s own family circle as their object.

      Goethe  paraphrases  the  content  of  dream-life  in  the  evocative

words:

 

                                                Was von Menschen nicht gewusst                                                Oder nicht bedacht,
                                                Durch das Labyrinth der Brust
                                                Wandelt in der Nacht.

 

Behind  this  magic  we  recognize  the  ancient,  venerable  and

incontestably correct pronouncement of Aristotle - that dreaming is the

continuation of our mental activity into the state of sleep - combined

with  the  recognition  of  the  unconscious  which  psycho-analysis  first

added to it. Only the riddle of dream-distortion finds no solution here.

 


                                    The Goethe Prize

                                                                                      4580

 

   In what is perhaps his most sublime poetical creation, Iphigenie,

Goethe shows us a striking instance of expiation, of the freeing of a

suffering mind from the burden of guilt, and he makes this catharsis

come  about  through  a  passionate  outburst  of  feeling  under  the

beneficent influence of loving sympathy. Indeed, he himself repeatedly

made attempts at giving psychological help - as for example to the

unfortunate  man  who  is  named  as  Kraft  in  the  Letters,  and  to

Professor Plessing, of whom he tells in the Campagne in Frankreich;

and the procedure which he applied goes beyond the method of the

Catholic Confessional and approximates in some remarkable details

to  the  technique  of  our  psycho-analysis.  There  is  an  example  of

psychotherapeutic influence which is described by Goethe as a jest,

but which I should like to quote in full since it may not be well known

and yet is very characteristic. It is from a letter to Frau von Stein (No.

1444, of September 5, 1785):

 

   ‘Yesterday evening I performed a psychological feat. Frau Herder

was still in a state of tension of the most hypochondriacal kind over all

the  unpleasant  things  that  had  happened  to  her  at  Carlsbad.

Particularly through the woman who was her companion in the house.

I made her tell and confess everything to me, other people’s misdeeds

and  her  own  faults  with  their  most  minute  circumstances  and

consequences, and at the end I absolved her and made it clear to her,

jestingly, in this formula, that these things were now done with andcast into the depths of the sea. She herself made fun of it all and is

really cured.’

 

   Goethe always rated Eros high, never tried to belittle its power,

followed  its  primitive  and  even  wanton  expressions  with  no  less

attentiveness than its highly sublimated ones and has, as it seems to

me, expounded its essential unity throughout all its manifestations no

less decisively than Plato did in the remote past. Indeed, it is perhaps

more than a chance coincidence when in Die Wahlverwandtschaften

he  applies  to  love  an  idea  taken  from  the  sphere  of  chemistry  -  a

connection to which the name of psycho-analysis itself bears witness.

   I am prepared for the reproach that we analysts have forfeited the

right to place ourselves under the patronage of Goethe because we

have  offended  against  the  respect  due  to  him  by  trying  to  apply

analysis  to  him  himself:  we  have  degraded  the  great  man  to  the

position of an object of analytic investigation. But I would dispute at

once that any degradation is intended or implied by this.

 


                                    The Goethe Prize

                                                                                      4581

 

   We all, who revere Goethe, put up, without too much protest, with

the efforts of his biographers, who try to recreate his life from existing

accounts and indications. But what can these biographies achieve for

us?  Even  the  best  and  fullest  of  them  could  not  answer  the  two

questions which alone seem worth knowing about. It would not throw

any light on the riddle of the miraculous gift that makes an artist, and it

could not help us to comprehend any better the value and the effect of

his  works.  And  yet  there  is  no  doubt  that  such  a  biography  does

satisfy a powerful need in us. We feel this very distinctly if the legacy

of history unkindly refuses the satisfaction of this need - for example in

the case of Shakespeare. It is undeniably painful to all of us that even

now we do not know who was the author of the Comedies, Tragedies

and Sonnets of Shakespeare; whether it was in fact the untutored son

of the provincial citizen of Stratford, who attained a modest position as

an  actor  in  London,  or  whether  it  was,  rather,  the  nobly-born  andhighly  cultivated,  passionately  wayward,  to  some  extent déclassé

aristocrat,  Edward  de  Vere,  Seventeenth  Earl  of  Oxford,  hereditary

Lord Great Chamberlain of England. But how can we justify a need of

this  kind  to  obtain  knowledge  of  the  circumstances  of  a  man’s  life

when  his  works  have  become  so  full  of  importance  to  us?  People

generally say that it is our desire to bring ourselves nearer to such a

man in a human way as well. Let us grant this; it is, then, the need to

acquire affective relations with such men, to add them to the fathers,

teachers,  exemplars  whom  we  have  known  or  whose  influence  we

have already experienced, in the expectation that their personalities

will be just as fine and admirable as those works of art of theirs which

we possess.

 


                                    The Goethe Prize

                                                                                      4582

 

   All the same, we may admit that there is still another motive force at

work. The biographer’s justification also contains a confession. It is

true that the biographer does not want to depose his hero, but he does

want to bring him nearer to us. That means, however, reducing the

distance  that  separates  him  from  us:  it  still  tends  in  effect  towards

degradation. And it is unavoidable that if we learn more about a great

man’s life we shall also hear of occasions on which he has in fact

done  no  better  than  we,  has  in  fact  come  near  to  us  as  a  human

being. Nevertheless, I think we may declare the efforts of biography to

be  legitimate.  Our  attitude  to  fathers  and  teachers  is,  after  all,  an

ambivalent  one  since  our  reverence  for  them  regularly  conceals  a

component  of  hostile  rebellion.  That  is  a  psychological  fatality;  it

cannot  be  altered  without  forcible  suppression  of  the  truth  and  is

bound  to  extend  to  our  relations  with  the  great  men  whose  life

histories we wish to investigate.

      When  psycho-analysis  puts  itself  at  the  service  of  biography,  it

naturally has the right to be treated no more harshly than the latter

itself. Psycho-analysis can supply some information which cannot be

arrived at by other means, and can thus demonstrate new connecting

threads in the ‘weaver’s masterpiece’ spread between the instinctualendowments, the experiences and the works of an artist. Since it is

one of the principal functions of our thinking to master the material of

the external world psychically, it seems to me that thanks are due to

psycho-analysis if, when it is applied to a great man, it contributes to

the understanding of his great achievement. But, I admit, in the case

of  Goethe  we  have  not  yet  succeeded  very  far.  This  is  because

Goethe was not only, as a poet, a great self-revealer, but also, in spite

of the abundance of autobiographical records, a careful concealer. We

cannot help thinking here of the words of Mephistopheles:

 

                                                                Das Beste, was du wissen kannst,
                                                                Darfst du den Buben doch nicht sagen.

                                                                                       4583

 

                                    LIBIDINAL TYPES

                                        (1931)

 


                                                                                      4584

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4585

 

                                    LIBIDINAL TYPES

 

Observation  teaches  us  that  individual  human  beings  realize  the

general picture of humanity in an almost infinite variety of ways. If we

yield  to  the  legitimate  need  to  distinguish  particular  types  in  this

multiplicity,  we  shall  at  the  start  have  the  choice  as  to  what

characteristics and what points of view we shall take as the basis of

our differentiation. For that purpose physical qualities will doubtless

serve no less well than mental ones; the most valuable distinctions will

be those which promise to present a regular combination of physical

and mental characteristics.

   It is doubtful whether we are as yet in a position to discover types to

fulfil this requirement - as we shall no doubt be able to do later, on

some basis of which we are still ignorant. If we confine our effort to

setting up purely psychological types, the libidinal situation will have a

first claim to serve as a basis for our classification. It may fairly be

demanded that this classification should not merely be deduced from

our knowledge or our hypotheses about the libido, but that it should be

easily confirmed in actual experience and that it should contribute to

the clarification of the mass of our observations and help us to grasp

them. It may at once be admitted that these libidinal types need not be

the  only  possible  ones  even  in  the  psychical  field,  and  that,  if  we

proceeded from other qualities, we might perhaps establish a whole

set of other psychological types. But it must be required of all suchtypes  that  they  shall  not  coincide  with  clinical  pictures.  On  the

contrary, they must comprehend all the variations which according to

our  practical  judgement  fall  within  the  limits  of  the  normal.  In  their

extreme  developments,  however,  they  may  well  approximate  to

clinical  pictures  and  in  that  way  help  to  bridge  the  gulf  that  is

supposed to lie between the normal and the pathological.

      According,  then,  as  the  libido  is  predominantly  allocated  to  the

provinces  of  the  mental  apparatus,  we  can  distinguish  three  main

libidinal types. To give names to these types is not particularly easy;

following the lines of our depth-psychology, I should like to call them

the erotic, the narcissistic and the obsessional types.

 


                                      Libidinal Types

                                                                                      4586

 

   The erotic type is easily characterized. Erotics are those whose

main interest - the relatively largest part of whose libido - is turned

towards love. Loving, but above all being loved, is the most important

thing for them. They are dominated by the fear of loss of love and are

therefore especially dependent on others who may withhold their love

from  them.  Even  in  its  pure  form  this  type  is  a  very  common  one.

Variants of it occur according as it is blended with another type and in

proportion to the amount of aggressiveness present in it. From the

social  and  cultural  standpoint  this  type  represents  the  elementary

instinctual demands of the id, to which the other psychical agencies

have become compliant.

   The second type is what I have termed the obsessional type - a

name  which  may  at  first  seem  strange.  It  is  distinguished  by  the

predominance  of  the  super-ego,  which  is  separated  from  the  ego

under great tension. People of this type are dominated by fear of their

conscience instead of fear of losing love. They exhibit, as it were, an

internal  instead  of  an  external  dependence.  They  develop  a  high

degree of self-reliance; and, from the social standpoint, they are the

true, pre-eminently conservative vehicles of civilization.

   The third type, justly called the narcissistic type, is mainly to be

described in negative terms. There is no tension between ego andsuper-ego (indeed, on the strength of this type one would scarcely

have  arrived  at  the  hypothesis  of  a  super-ego),  and  there  is  no

preponderance of erotic needs. The subject’s main interest is directed

to self-preservation; he is independent and not open to intimidation.

His ego has a large amount of aggressiveness at its disposal, which

also manifests itself in readiness for activity. In his erotic life loving is

preferred above being loved. People belonging to this type impress

others as being ‘personalities’; they are especially suited to act as a

support for others, to take on the role of leaders and to give a fresh

stimulus to cultural development or to damage the established state of

affairs.

 


                                      Libidinal Types

                                                                                      4587

 

   These pure types will hardly escape the suspicion of having been

deduced from the theory of the libido. But we feel ourselves on the

firm ground of experience when we turn to the mixed types, which are

to  be  observed  so  much  more  frequently  than  the  unmixed  ones.

These new types - the erotic-obsessional, the erotic-narcissistic and

the narcissistic-obsessional  -  seem  in  fact  to  afford  a  good

classification  of  the  individual  psychical  structures  which  we  have

come to know though analysis. If we study these mixed types we find

in them pictures of characters with which we have long been familiar.

In the erotic-obsessional type it appears that the preponderance of

instinctual life is restricted by the influence of the super-ego. In this

type, dependence at once on contemporary human objects and on the

residues of parents, educators and exemplars, is carried to its highest

pitch. The erotic-narcissistic type is perhaps the one we must regard

as  the  commonest  of  all.  It  unites  opposites,  which  are  able  to

moderate  one  another  in  it.  One  may  learn  from  this  type,  as

compared  with  the  two  other  erotic  ones,  that  aggressiveness  and

activity  go  along  with  a  predominance  of  narcissism.  Finally,  the

narcissistic-obsessional  type  produces  the  variation  which  is  most

valuable from a cultural standpoint; for it adds to independence of the

external world and a regard for the demands of conscience a capacityfor vigorous action, and it strengthens the ego against the super-ego.

   One might think one was making a jest if one asked why no mention

has  been  made  here  of  another  mixed  type  which  is  theoretically

possible  -  namely,  the erotic-obsessional-narcissistic  type.  But  the

answer to this jest is serious. Such a type would no longer be a type at

all: it would be the absolute norm, the ideal harmony. We thus realize

that the phenomenon of types arises precisely from the fact that, of

the three main ways of employing the libido in the economy of the

mind, one or two have been favoured at the expense of the others.

   The question may also be raised of what the relation is of these

libidinal types to pathology - whether some of them have a special

disposition to pass over into neurosis, and if so, which types lead to

which forms of neurosis. The answer is that the setting-up of these

libidinal types throws no new light on the genesis of the neuroses.

Experience shows that all these types can exist without any neurosis.

The pure types, marked by the undisputed preponderance of a single

mental  agency,  seem  to  have  a  better  chance  of  manifesting

themselves as pure characterological pictures, while we might expect

that mixed types would provide a more favourable soil for conditions

leading to a neurosis. But I think we should not make up our minds on

these matters till they have been submitted to a careful and specially

directed examination.

   It seems easy to infer that when people of the erotic type fall ill they

will develop hysteria, just as those of the obsessional the will develop

obsessional neurosis; but these inferences, too, share the uncertainty

which I have just stressed. People of the narcissistic type who are

exposed  to  a  frustration  from  the  external  world,  though  otherwise

independent,  are  peculiarly  disposed  to  psychosis;  and  they  also

present essential preconditions for criminality.

   It is a familiar fact that the aetiological preconditions of neurosis are

not  yet  known  with  certainty.  The  precipitating  causes  of  it  are

frustrations  and  internal  conflicts:  conflicts  between  the  three  major

psychical  agencies,  conflicts  arising  within  the  libidinal  economy  in

consequence  of  our  bisexual  disposition  and  conflicts  between  the

erotic and the aggressive instinctual components. It is the endeavour

of  the  psychology  of  the  neuroses  to  discover  what  makes  these

processes, which belong to the normal course of mental life, becomepathogenic.

                                                                                       4588

 

                                FEMALE SEXUALITY

                                        (1931)

 


                                                                                      4589

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4590

 

                                FEMALE SEXUALITY

 

                                            I

 

During the phase of the normal Oedipus complex we find the child

tenderly attached to the parent of the opposite sex, while its relation to

the parent of its own sex is predominantly hostile. In the case of a boy

there  is  no  difficulty  in  explaining  this.  His  first  love-object  was  his

mother.  She  remains  so;  and,  with  the  strengthening  of  his  erotic

desires and his deeper insight into the relations between his father

and mother, the former is bound to become his rival. With the small

girl it is different. Her first object, too, was her mother. How does she

find  her  way  to  her  father?  How,  when  and  why  does  she  detach

herself  from  her  mother?  We  have  long  understood  that  the

development of female sexuality is complicated by the fact that the girl

has the task of giving up what was originally her leading genital zone

the clitoris - in favour of a new zone - the vagina. But it now seems to

us that there is a second change of the same sort which is no less

characteristic and important for the development of the female: the

exchange of her original object - her mother - for her father. The way

in which the two tasks are connected with each other is not yet clear

to us.

   It is well known that there are many women who have a strong

attachment to their father; nor need they be in any way neurotic. It isupon such women that I have made the observations which I propose

to report here and which have led me to adopt a particular view of

female sexuality. I was struck, above all, by two facts. The first was

that  where  the  woman’s  attachment  to  her  father  was  particularly

intense, analysis showed that it had been preceded by a phase of

exclusive attachment to her mother which had been equally intense

and passionate. Except for the change of her love-object, the second

phase  had  scarcely  added  any  new  feature  to  her  erotic  life.  Her

primary relation to her mother had been built up in a very rich and

many-sided manner. The second fact taught me that the duration of

this  attachment  had  also  been  greatly  under-estimated.  In  several

cases it lasted until well into the fourth year - in one case into the fifth

year - so that it covered by far the longer part of the period of early

sexual efflorescence. Indeed, we had to reckon with the possibility that

a number of women remain arrested in their original attachment to

their mother and never achieve a true change-over towards men. This

being so, the pre-Oedipus phase in women gains an importance which

we have not attributed to it hitherto.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4591

 

   Since this phase allows room for all the fixations and repressions

from  which  we  trace  the  origin  of  the  neuroses,  it  would  seem  as

though we must retract the universality of the thesis that the Oedipus

complex is the nucleus of the neuroses. But if anyone feels reluctant

about making this correction, there is no need for him to do so. On the

one  hand,  we  can  extend  the  content  of  the  Oedipus  complex  to

include all the child’s relations to both parents; or, on the other, we

can take due account of our new findings by saying that the female

only  reaches  the  normal  positive  Oedipus  situation  after  she  has

surmounted  a  period  before  it  that  is  governed  by  the  negative

complex. And indeed during that phase a little girl’s father is not much

else for her than a troublesome rival, although her hostility towards

him never reaches the pitch which is characteristic of boys. We have,

after all, long given up any expectation of a neat parallelism betweenmale and female sexual development.

   Our insight into this early, pre-Oedipus, phase in girls comes to us

as  a  surprise,  like  the  discovery,  in  another  field,  of  the  Minoan-

Mycenean civilization behind the civilization of Greece.

      Everything  in  the  sphere  of  this  first  attachment  to  the  mother

seemed to me so difficult to grasp in analysis - so grey with age and

shadowy and almost impossible to revivify - that it was as if it had

succumbed  to  an  especially  inexorable  repression.  But  perhaps  I

gained this impression because the women who were in analysis with

me were able to cling to the very attachment to the father in which

they had taken refuge from the early phase that was in question. It

does indeed appear that women analysts - as, for instance, Jeanne

Lampl-de Groot and Helene Deutsch - have been able to perceive

these  facts  more  easily  and  clearly  because  they  were  helped  in

dealing  with  those  under  their  treatment  by  the  transference  to  a

suitable mother-substitute. Nor have I succeeded in seeing my way

though any case completely, and I shall therefore confine myself to

reporting the most general findings and shall give only a few examples

of the new ideas which I have arrived at. Among these is a suspicion

that  this  phase  of  attachment  to  the  mother  is  especially  intimately

related to the aetiology of hysteria, which is not surprising when we

reflect  that  both  the  phase  and  the  neurosis  are  characteristically

feminine, and further, that in this dependence on the mother we have

the germ of later paranoia in women.¹ For this germ appears to be the

surprising, yet regular, fear of being killed (? devoured) by the mother.

It is plausible to assume that this fear corresponds to a hostility which

develops  in  the  child  towards  her  mother  in  consequence  of  the

manifold restrictions imposed by the latter in the course of training and

bodily care and that the mechanism of projection is favoured by the

early age of the child’s psychical organization.

 

   ¹ In the well-known case of delusional jealousy reported by Ruth Mack Brunswick (1928),

the direct source of the disorder was the patient’s pre-Oedipus fixation (to her sister).
 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4592

                                             II

 

I began by stating the two facts which have struck me as new: that a

woman’s  strong  dependence  on  her  father  merely  takes  over  the

heritage of an equally strong attachment to her mother, and that this

earlier  phase  has  lasted  for  an  unexpectedly  long  period  of  time.  I

shall now go back a little in order to insert these new findings into the

picture of female sexual development with which we are familiar. In

doing this, a certain amount of repetition will be inevitable. It will help

our exposition if, as we go along, we compare the state of things in

women with that in men.

      First  of  all,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  bisexuality,  which  is

present,  as  we  believe,  in  the  innate  disposition  of  human  beings,

comes to the fore much more clearly in women than in men. A man,

after all, has only one leading sexual zone, one sexual organ, whereas

a woman has two: the vagina - the female organ proper - and the

clitoris,  which  is  analogous  to  the  male  organ.  We  believe  we  are

justified in assuming that for many years the vagina is virtually non-

existent and possibly does not produce sensations until puberty. It is

true  that  recently  an  increasing  number  of  observers  report  that

vaginal impulses are present even in these early years. In women,

therefore, the main genital occurrences of childhood must take place

in relation to the clitoris. Their sexual life is regularly divided into two

phases, of which the first has a masculine character, while only the

second is specifically feminine. Thus in female development there is a

process of transition from the one phase to the other, to which there is

nothing analogous in the male. A further complication arises from the

fact that the clitoris, with its virile character, continues to function in

later female sexual life in a manner which is very variable and which is

certainly not yet satisfactorily understood. We do not, of course, know

the biological basis of these peculiarities in women; and still less are

we able to assign them any teleological purpose.

   Parallel with this first great difference there is the other, concerned

with  the  finding  of  the  object.  In  the  case  of  a  male,  his  mother

becomes his first love-object as a result of her feeding him and looking

after him, and she remains so until she is replaced by someone who

resembles her or is derived from her. A female’s first object, too, mustbe her mother: the primary conditions for a choice of object are, of

course, the same for all children. But at the end of her development,

her father - a man - should have become her new love-object. In other

words, to the change in her own sex there must correspond a change

in  the  sex  of  her  object.  The  new  problems  that  now  require

investigating are in what way this change takes place, how radically or

how incompletely it is carried out, and what the different possibilities

are which present themselves in the course of this development.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4593

 

   We have already learned, too, that there is yet another difference

between the sexes, which relates to the Oedipus complex. We have

an  impression  here  that  what  we  have  said  about  the  Oedipus

complex applies with complete strictness to the male child only and

that we are right in rejecting the term ‘Electra complex’ which seeks to

emphasize the analogy between the attitude of the two sexes. It is

only in the male child that we find the fateful combination of love for

the one parent and simultaneous hatred for the other as a rival. In his

case it is the discovery of the possibility of castration, as proved by the

sight of the female genitals, which forces on him the transformation of

his Oedipus complex, and which leads to the creation of his super-ego

and  thus  initiates  all  the  processes  that  are  designed  to  make  the

individual  find  a  place  in  the  cultural  community.  After  the  paternal

agency has been internalized and become a super-ego, the next task

is to detach the latter from the figures of whom it was originally the

psychical representative. In this remarkable course of development it

is precisely the boy’s narcissistic interest in his genitals - his interest in

preserving his penis - which is turned round into a curtailing of his

infantile sexuality.

   One thing that is left over in men from the influence of the Oedipus

complex is a certain amount of disparagement in their attitude towards

women, whom they regard as being castrated. In extreme cases this

gives  rise  to  an  inhibition  in  their  choice  of  object,  and,  if  it  is

supported by organic factors, to exclusive homosexuality. 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4594

 

      Quite  different  are  the  effects  of  the  castration  complex  in  the

female. She acknowledges the fact of her castration, and with it, too,

the  superiority  of  the  male  and  her  own  inferiority;  but  she  rebels

against  this  unwelcome  state  of  affairs.  From  this  divided  attitude

three  lines  of  development  open  up.  The  first  leads  to  a  general

revulsion from sexuality. The little girl, frightened by the comparison

with boys, grows dissatisfied with her clitoris, and gives up her phallic

activity and with it her sexuality in general as well as a good part of

her masculinity in other fields. The second line leads her to cling with

defiant  self-assertiveness  to  her  threatened  masculinity.  To  an

incredibly late age she clings to the hope of getting a penis some time.

That hope becomes her life’s aim; and the phantasy of being a man in

spite  of  everything  often  persists  as  a  formative  factor  over  long

periods.  This  ‘masculinity  complex’  in  women  can  also  result  in  a

manifest homosexual choice of object. Only if her development follows

the third, very circuitous, path does she reach the final normal female

attitude, in which she takes her father as her object and so finds her

way to the feminine form of the Oedipus complex. Thus in women the

Oedipus complex is the end-result of a fairly lengthy development. It is

not destroyed, but created, by the influence of castration; it escapes

the strongly hostile influences which, in the male, have a destructive

effect on it, and indeed it is all too often not surmounted by the female

at all. For this reason, too, the cultural consequences of its break-up

are smaller and of less importance in her. We should probably not be

wrong  in  saying  that  it  is  this  difference  in  the  reciprocal  relation

between  the  Oedipus  and  the  castration  complex  which  gives  its

special stamp to the character of females as social beings.¹

 

   ¹ It  is  to  be  anticipated  that  men  analysts  with  feminist  views,  as  well  as  our  women

analysts, will disagree with what I have said here. They will hardly fail to object that such
notions  spring  from  the  ‘masculinity  complex’  of  the  male  and  are  designed  to  justify  on
theoretical grounds his innate inclination to disparage and suppress women. But this sort of
psycho-analytic argumentation reminds us here, as it so often does, of Dostoevsky’s famous
‘knife that cuts both ways’. The opponents of those who argue in this way will on their sidethink it quite natural that the female sex should refuse to accept a view which appears to
contradict  their  eagerly  coveted  equality  with  men.  The  use  of  analysis  as  a  weapon  of
controversy can clearly lead to no decision.
 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4595

 

   We see, then, that the phase of exclusive attachment to the mother,

which may be called the pre-Oedipus phase, possesses a far greater

importance in women than it can have in men. Many phenomena of

female sexual life which were not properly understood before can be

fully explained by reference to this phase. Long ago, for instance, we

noticed  that  many  women  who  have  chosen  their  husband  on  the

model  of  their  father,  or  have  put  him  in  their  father’s  place,

nevertheless  repeat  towards  him,  in  their  married  life,  their  bad

relations with their mother. The husband of such a woman was meant

to be the inheritor of her relation to her father, but in reality he became

the inheritor of her relation to her mother. This is easily explained as

an  obvious  case  of  regression.  Her  relation  to  her  mother  was  the

original one, and her attachment to her father was built up on it, and

now, in marriage, the original relation emerges from repression. For

the main content of her development to womanhood lay in the carrying

over of her affective object attachments from her mother to her father.

      With  many  women  we  have  the  impression  that  their  years  of

maturity are occupied by a struggle with their husband, just as their

youth  was  spent  in  a  struggle  with  their  mother.  In  the  light  of  the

previous discussions we shall conclude that their hostile attitude to

their mother is not a consequence of the rivalry implicit in the Oedipus

complex,  but  originates  from  the  preceding  phase  and  has  merely

been  reinforced  and  exploited  in  the  Oedipus  situation.  And  actual

analytic examination confirms this view. Our interest must be directed

to  the  mechanisms  that  are  at  work  in  her  turning  away  from  the

mother who was an object so intensely and exclusively loved. We are

prepared  to  find,  not  a  single  factor,  but  a  whole  number  of  them

operating together towards the same end,

      Among  these  factors  are  some  which  are  determined  by  the

circumstances  of  infantile  sexuality  in  general,  and  so  hold  goodequally for the erotic life of boys. First and foremost we may mention

jealousy of other people - of brothers and sisters, rivals, among whom

the father too has a place. Childhood love is boundless; it demands

exclusive possession, it is not content with less than all. But it has a

second characteristic: it has, in point of fact, no aim and is incapable

of obtaining complete satisfaction; and principally for that reason it is

doomed  to  end  in  disappointment  and  to  give  place  to  a  hostile

attitude. Later on in life the lack of an ultimate satisfaction may favour

a  different  result.  This  very  factor  may  ensure  the  uninterrupted

continuance of the libidinal cathexis, as happens with love-relations

that are inhibited in their aim. But in the stress of the processes of

development  it  regularly  happens  that  the  libido  abandons  its

unsatisfying position in order to find a new one.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4596

 

      Another,  much  more  specific  motive  for  turning  away  from  the

mother arises from the effect of the castration complex on the creature

who is without a penis. At some time or other the little girl makes the

discovery of her organic inferiority - earlier and more easily, of course,

if there are brothers or other boys about. We have already taken note

of the three paths which diverge from this point: (a) the one which

leads to a cessation of her whole sexual life, (b) the one which leads

to a defiant over-emphasis of her masculinity, and (c) the first steps

towards  definitive  femininity.  It  is  not  easy  to  determine  the  exact

timing  here  or  the  typical  course  of  events.  Even  the  point  of  time

when  the  discovery  of  castration  is  made  varies,  and  a  number  of

other factors seem to be inconstant and to depend on chance. The

state of the girl’s own phallic activity plays a part; and so too does the

question whether this activity was found out or not, and how much

interference with it she experienced afterwards.

   Little girls usually discover for themselves their characteristic phallic

activity - masturbation of the clitoris; and to begin with this is no doubt

unaccompanied by phantasy. The part played in starting it by nursery

hygiene is reflected in the very common phantasy which makes themother or nurse into a seducer. Whether little girls masturbate less

frequently and from the first less energetically than little boys is not

certain;  quite  possibly  it  is  so.  Actual  seduction,  too,  is  common

enough; it is initiated either by other children or by someone in charge

of  the  child  who  wants  to  soothe  it,  or  send  it  to  sleep  or  make  it

dependent on them. Where seduction intervenes it invariably disturbs

the natural course of the developmental processes, and it often leaves

behind extensive and lasting consequences.

      A  prohibition  of  masturbation,  as  we  have  seen,  becomes  an

incentive for giving it up; but it also becomes a motive for rebelling

against the person who prohibits it - that is to say, the mother, or the

mother-substitute  who  later  regularly  merges  with  her.  A  defiant

persistence in masturbation appears to open the way to masculinity.

Even  where  the  girl  has  not  succeeded  in  suppressing  her

masturbation, the effect of the apparently vain prohibition is seen in

her later efforts to free herself at all costs from a satisfaction which

has been spoilt for her. When she reaches maturity her object-choice

may still be influenced by this persisting purpose. Her resentment at

being  prevented  from  free  sexual  activity  plays  a  big  part  in  her

detachment from her mother. The same motive comes into operation

again after puberty, when her mother takes up her duty of guarding

her daughter’s chastity. We shall, of course, not forget that the mother

is similarly opposed to a boy’s masturbating and thus provides him,

too, with a strong motive for rebellion.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4597

 

   When the little girl discovers her own deficiency, from seeing a male

genital, it is only with hesitation and reluctance that she accepts the

unwelcome knowledge. As we have seen, she clings obstinately to the

expectation of one day having a genital of the same kind too, and her

wish  for  it  survives  long  after  her  hope  has  expired.  The  child

invariably  regards  castration  in  the  first  instance  as  a  misfortune

peculiar to herself; only later does she realize that it extends to certain

other children and lastly to certain grown-ups. When she comes tounderstand  the  general  nature  of  this  characteristic,  it  follows  that

femaleness  -  and  with  it,  of  course,  her  mother  -  suffers  a  great

depreciation in her eyes.

   This account of how girls respond to the impression of castration

and the prohibition against masturbation will very probably strike the

reader as confused and contradictory. This is not entirely the author’s

fault.  In  truth,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  give  a  description  which  has

general  validity.  We  find  the  most  different  reactions  in  different

individuals, and in the same individual the contrary attitudes exist side

by  side.  With  the  first  intervention  of  the  prohibition,  the  conflict  is

there,  and  from  now  on  it  will  accompany  the  development  of  the

sexual  function.  Insight  into  what  takes  place  is  made  particularly

difficult  by  the  fact  of  its  being  so  hard  to  distinguish  the  mental

processes of this first phase from later ones by which they are overlaid

and  are  distorted  in  memory.  Thus,  for  instance,  a  girl  may  later

construe the fact of castration as a punishment for her masturbatory

activity, and she will attribute the carrying out of this punishment to her

father,  but  neither  of  these  ideas  can  have  been  a  primary  one.

Similarly, boys regularly fear castration from their father, although in

their case, too, the threat most usually comes from their mother.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4598

 

   However this may be, at the end of this first phase of attachment to

the mother, there emerges, as the girl’s strongest motive for turning

away from her, the reproach that her mother did not give her a proper

penis - that is to say, brought her into the world as a female. A second

reproach, which does not reach quite so far back, is rather a surprising

one. It is that her mother did not give her enough milk, did not suckle

her long enough. Under the conditions of modern civilization this may

be  true  often  enough,  but  certainly  not  so  often  as  is  asserted  in

analyses. It would seem rather that this accusation gives expression

to  the  general  dissatisfaction  of  children,  who,  in  our  monogamous

civilization,  are  weaned  from  the  breast  after  six  or  nine  months,

whereas the primitive mother devotes herself exclusively to her childfor two or three years. It is as though our children had remained for

ever unsated, as though they had never sucked long enough at their

mother’s breast. But I am not sure whether, if one analysed children

who had been suckled as long as the children of primitive peoples,

one would not come upon the same complaint. Such is the greed of a

child’s libido!

   When we survey the whole range of motives for turning away from

the mother which analysis brings to light - that she failed to provide the

little  girl  with  the  only  proper  genital,  that  she  did  not  feed  her

sufficiently, that she compelled her to share her mother’s love with

others, that she never fulfilled all the girl’s expectations of love, and,

finally, that she first aroused her sexual activity and then forbade it - all

these motives seem nevertheless insufficient to justify the girl’s final

hostility. Some of them follow inevitably from the nature of infantile

sexuality; others appear like rationalizations devised later to account

for the uncomprehended change in feeling. Perhaps the real fact is

that  the  attachment  to  the  mother  is  bound  to  perish,  precisely

because it was the first and was so intense; just as one can often see

happen  in  the  first  marriages  of  young  women  which  they  have

entered  into  when  they  were  most  passionately  in  love.  In  both

situations  the  attitude  of  love  probably  comes  to  grief  from  the

disappointments that are unavoidable and from the accumulation of

occasions for aggression. As a rule, second marriages turn out much

better.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4599

 

   We cannot go so far as to assert that the ambivalence of emotional

cathexes is a universally valid law, and that it is absolutely impossible

to feel great love for a person without its being accompanied by a

hatred that is perhaps equally great, or vice versa. Normal adults do

undoubtedly  succeed  in  separating  those  two  attitudes  from  each

other, and do not find themselves obliged to hate their love-objects

and to love their enemy as well as hate him. But this seems to be the

result  of  later  developments.  In  the  first  phases  of  erotic  life,ambivalence is evidently the rule. Many people retain this archaic trait

all through their lives. It is characteristic of obsessional neurotics that

in their object-relationships love and hate counterbalance each other.

In primitive races, too, we may say that ambivalence predominates.

We shall conclude, then, that the little girl’s intense attachment to her

mother is strongly ambivalent, and that it is in consequence precisely

of this ambivalence that (with the assistance of the other factors we

have adduced) her attachment is forced away from her mother - once

again, that is to say, in consequence of a general characteristic of

infantile sexuality.

      The  explanation  I  have  attempted  to  give  is  at  once  met  by  a

question:  ‘How  is  it,  then,  that  boys  are  able  to  keep  intact  their

attachment to their mother, which is certainly no less strong than that

of girls?’ The answer comes equally promptly: ‘Because boys are able

to deal with their ambivalent feelings towards their mother by directing

all their hostility on to their father.’ But, in the first place, we ought not

to  make  this  reply  until  we  have  made  a  close  study  of  the  pre-

Oedipus phase in boys, and, in the second place, it is probably more

prudent  in  general  to  admit  that  we  have  as  yet  no  clear

understanding  of  these  processes,  with  which  we  have  only  just

become acquainted.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4600

 

                                            III

 

   A further question arises: ‘What does the little girl require of her

mother?  What  is  the  nature  of  her  sexual  aims  during  the  time  of

exclusive attachment to her mother?’ The answer we obtain from the

analytic material is just what we should expect. The girl’s sexual aims

in  regard  to  her  mother  are  active  as  well  as  passive  and  are

determined  by  the  libidinal  phases  though  which  the  child  passes.

Here the relation of activity to passivity is especially interesting. It can

easily be observed that in every field of mental experience, not merely

that of sexuality, when a child receives a passive impression it has atendency to produce an active reaction. It tries to do itself what has

just been done to it. This is part of the work imposed on it of mastering

the external world and can even lead to its endeavouring to repeat an

impression  which  it  would  have  reason  to  avoid  on  account  of  its

distressing content. Children’s play, too, is made to serve this purpose

of  supplementing  a  passive  experience  with  an  active  piece  of

behaviour  and  of  thus,  as  it  were,  annulling  it.  When  a  doctor  has

opened a child’s mouth, in spite of his resistance, to look down his

throat, the same child, after the doctor has gone, will play at being the

doctor himself, and will repeat the assault upon some small brother or

sister who is as helpless in his hands as he was in the doctor’s. Here

we have an unmistakable revolt against passivity and a preference for

the active role. This swing-over from passivity to activity does not take

place with the same regularity or vigour in all children; in some it may

not occur at all. A child’s behaviour in this respect may enable us to

draw  conclusions  as  to  the  relative  strength  of  the  masculinity  and

femininity that it will exhibit in its sexuality.

   The first sexual and sexually coloured experiences which a child has

in  relation  to  its  mother  are  naturally  of  a  passive  character.  It  is

suckled, fed, cleaned, and dressed by her, and taught to perform all its

functions. A part of its libido goes on clinging to those experiences and

enjoys the satisfactions bound up with them; but another part strives

to turn them into activity. In the first place, being suckled at the breast

gives place to active sucking. As regards the other experiences the

child contents itself either with becoming self-sufficient - that is, with

itself successfully carrying out what had hitherto been done for it - or

with repeating its passive experiences in an active form in play; or else

it actually makes its mother into the object and behaves as the active

subject towards her. For a long time I was unable to credit this last

behaviour,  which  takes  place  in  the  field  of  real  action,  until  my

observations removed all doubts on the matter.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4601

 

   We seldom hear of a little girl’s wanting to wash or dress her mother,or tell her to perform her excretory functions. Sometimes, it is true, she

says:  ‘Now  let’s  play  that  I’m  the  mother  and  you’re  the  child’;  but

generally she fulfils these active wishes in an indirect way, in her play

with her doll, in which she represents the mother and the doll the child.

The fondness girls have for playing with dolls, in contrast to boys, is

commonly  regarded  as  a  sign  of  early  awakened  femininity.  Not

unjustly  so;  but  we  must  not  overlook  the  fact  that  what  finds

expression here is the active side of femininity, and that the little girl’s

preference for dolls is probably evidence of the exclusiveness of her

attachment to her mother, with complete neglect of her father-object.

   The very surprising sexual activity of little girls in relation to their

mother is manifested chronologically in oral, sadistic, and finally even

in phallic trends directed towards her. It is difficult to give a detailed

account of these because they are often obscure instinctual impulses

which it was impossible for the child to grasp psychically at the time of

their occurrence, which were therefore only interpreted by her later,

and which then appear in the analysis in forms of expression that were

certainly not the original ones. Sometimes we come across them as

transferences on to the later, father-object, where they do not belong

and  where  they  seriously  interfere  with  our  understanding  of  the

situation. We find the little girl’s aggressive oral and sadistic wishes in

a form forced on them by early repression, as a fear of being killed by

her mother - a fear which, in turn, justifies her death-wish against her

mother, if that becomes conscious. It is impossible to say how often

this fear of the mother is supported by an unconscious hostility on the

mother’s part which is sensed by the girl. (Hitherto, it is only in men

that I have found the fear of being eaten up. This fear is referred to the

father,  but  it  is  probably  the  product  of  a  transformation  of  oral

aggressivity  directed  to  the  mother.  The  child  wants  to  eat  up  its

mother from whom it has had its nourishment; in the case of the father

there is no such obvious determinant for the wish.)

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4602

 

   The women patients showing a strong attachment to their mother inwhom I have been able to study the pre-Oedipus phase have all told

me that when their mother gave them enemas or rectal douches they

used to offer the greatest resistance and react with fear and screams

of  rage.  This  behaviour  may  be  very  frequent  or  even  the  habitual

thing  in  children.  I  only  came  to  understand  the  reason  for  such  a

specially  violent  opposition  from  a  remark  made  by  Ruth  Mack

Brunswick, who was studying these problems at the same time as I

was, to the effect that she was inclined to compare the outbreak of

anger after an enema to the orgasm following genital excitation. The

accompanying  anxiety  should,  she  thought,  be  construed  as  a

transformation of the desire for aggression which had been stirred up.

I believe that this is really so and that, at the sadistic-anal level, the

intense passive stimulation of the intestinal zone is responded to by

an  outbreak  of  desire  for  aggression  which  is  manifested  either

directly as rage, or, in consequence of its suppression, as anxiety. In

later years this reaction seems to die away.

      In  regard  to  the  passive  impulses  of  the  phallic  phase,  it  is

noteworthy that girls regularly accuse their mother of seducing them.

This is because they necessarily received their first, or at any rate

their strongest, genital sensations when they were being cleaned and

having their toilet attended to by their mother (or by someone such as

a nurse who took her place). Mothers have often told me, as a matter

of observation, that their little daughters of two and three years old

enjoy  these  sensations  and  try  to  get  their  mothers  to  make  them

more  intense  by  repeated  touching  and  rubbing.  The  fact  that  the

mother thus unavoidably initiates the child into the phallic phase is, I

think,  the  reason  why,  in  phantasies  of  later  years,  the  father  so

regularly appears as the sexual seducer. When the girl turns away

from her mother, she also makes over to her father her introduction

into sexual life.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4603

 

   Lastly, intense active wishful impulses directed towards the mother

also arise during the phallic phase. The sexual activity of this periodculminates in clitoridal masturbation. This is probably accompanied by

ideas of the mother, but whether the child attaches a sexual aim to the

idea, and what that aim is, I have not been able to discover from my

observations. It is only when all her interests have received a fresh

impetus through the arrival of a baby brother or sister that we can

clearly recognize such an aim. The little girl wants to believe that she

has given her mother the new baby, just as the boy wants to; and her

reaction to this event and her behaviour to the baby is exactly the

same as his. No doubt this sounds quite absurd, but perhaps that is

only because it sounds so unfamiliar.

   The turning-away from her mother is an extremely important step in

the course of a little girl’s development. It is more than a mere change

of object. We have already described what takes place in it and the

many motives put forward for it; we may now add that hand in hand

with it there is to be observed a marked lowering of the active sexual

impulses and a rise of the passive ones. It is true that the active trends

have  been  affected  by  frustration  more  strongly;  they  have  proved

totally unrealizable and are therefore abandoned by the libido more

readily.  But  the  passive  trends  have  not  escaped  disappointment

either. With the turning-away from the mother clitoridal masturbation

frequently  ceases  as  well;  and  often  enough  when  the  small  girl

represses  her  previous  masculinity  a  considerable  portion  of  her

sexual trends in general is permanently injured too. The transition to

the father-object is accomplished with the help of the passive trends in

so  far  as  they  have  escaped  the  catastrophe.  The  path  to  the

development of femininity now lies open to the girl, to the extent to

which it is not restricted by the remains of the pre-Oedipus attachment

to her mother which she has surmounted.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4604

 

 

   If we now survey the stage of sexual development in the female

which I have been describing, we cannot resist coming to a definite

conclusion  about  female  sexuality  as  a  whole.  We  have  found  thesame libidinal forces at work in it as in the male child and we have

been able to convince ourselves that for a period of time these forces

follow the same course and have the same outcome in each.

   Biological factors subsequently deflect those libidinal forces from

their  original  aims  and  conduct  even  active  and  in  every  sense

masculine trends into feminine channels. Since we cannot dismiss the

notion that sexual excitation is derived from the operation of certain

chemical  substances,  it  seems  plausible  at  first  to  expect  that

biochemistry will one day disclose a substance to us whose presence

produces  a  male  sexual  excitation  and  another  substance  which

produces a female one. But this hope seems no less naïve than the

other one - happily obsolete to-day - that it may be possible under the

microscope  to  isolate  the  different  exciting  factors  of  hysteria,

obsessional neurosis, melancholia, and so on.

   Even in sexual chemistry things must be rather more complicated.

For psychology, however, it is a matter of indifference whether there is

a single sexually exciting substance in the body or two or countless

numbers of them. Psycho-analysis teaches us to manage with a single

libido,  which,  it  is  true,  has  both  active  and  passive  aims  (that  is,

modes of satisfaction). This antithesis and, above all, the existence of

libidinal trends with passive aims, contains within itself the remainder

of our problem.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4605

 

                                            IV

 

   An examination of the analytic literature on the subject shows that

everything that has been said by me here is already to be found in it. It

would have been superfluous to publish this paper if it were not that in

a field of research which is so difficult of access every account of first-

hand experiences or personal views may be of value. Moreover, there

are a number of points which I have defined more sharply and isolated

more  carefully.  In  some  of  the  other  papers  on  the  subject  the

description is obscured because they deal at the same time with theproblems of the super-ego and the sense of guilt. This I have avoided

doing.  Also,  in  describing  the  various  outcomes  of  this  phase  of

development,  I  have  refrained  from  discussing  the  complications

which  arise  when  a  child,  as  a  result  of  disappointment  from  her

father,  returns  to  the  attachment  to  her  mother  which  she  had

abandoned, or when, in the course of her life, she repeatedly changes

over from one position to the other. But precisely because my paper is

only one contribution among others, I may be spared an exhaustive

survey of the literature, and I can confine myself to bringing out the

more important points on which I agree or disagree with these other

writings.

   Abraham’s (1921) description of the manifestations of the castration

complex in the female is still unsurpassed; but one would be glad if it

had included the factor of the girl’s original exclusive attachment to her

mother. I am in agreement with the principal points in Jeanne Lampl-

de Groot’s¹ (1927) important paper. In this the complete identity of the

pre-Oedipus  phase  in  boys  and  girls  is  recognized,  and  the  girl’s

sexual  (phallic)  activity  towards  her  mother  is  affirmed  and

substantiated by observations. The turning-away from the mother is

traced  to  the  influence  of  the  girl’s  recognition  of  castration,  which

obliges her to give up her sexual object, and often masturbation along

with it. The whole development is summed up in the formula that the

girl goes through a phase of the ‘negative’ Oedipus complex before

she can enter the positive one. A point on which I find the writer’s

account  inadequate  is  that  it  represents  the  turning-away  from  the

mother as being merely a change of object and does not discuss the

fact that it is accompanied by the plainest manifestations of hostility.

To this hostility full justice is done in Helene Deutsch’s latest paper, on

feminine masochism and its relation to frigidity (1930), in which she

also  recognizes  the  girl’s  phallic  activity  and  the  intensity  of  her

attachment to her mother. Helene Deutsch states further that the girl’s

turning towards her father takes place viâ her passive trends (which

have already been awakened in relation to her mother). In her earlier

book (1925) the author had not yet set herself free from the endeavour

to  apply  the  Oedipus  pattern  to  the  pre-Oedipus  phase,  and  she

therefore interpreted the little girl’s phallic activity as an identification

with her father. 

   ¹ The author’s name was given when it appeared in the Zeitschrift as ‘A. Lampl-de Groot’,

and I correct it here at her request.
 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4606

 

   Fenichel (1930) rightly emphasizes the difficulty of recognizing in the

material produced in analysis what parts of it represent the unchanged

content of the pre-Oedipus phase and what parts have been distorted

by regression (or in other ways). He does not accept Jeanne Lampl-de

Groot’s assertion of the little girl’s active attitude in the phallic phase.

He also rejects the ‘displacement backwards’ of the Oedipus complex

proposed by Melanie Klein (1928), who places its beginnings as early

as the commencement of the second year of life. This dating of it,

which would also necessarily imply a modification of our view of all the

rest of the child’s development, does not in fact correspond to what we

learn from the analyses of adults, and it is especially incompatible with

my  findings  as  to  the  long  duration  of  the  girl’s  pre-Oedipus

attachment to her mother. A means of softening this contradiction is

afforded by the reflection that we are not as yet able to distinguish in

this field between what is rigidly fixed by biological laws and what is

open  to  movement  and  change  under  the  influence  of  accidental

experience. The effect of seduction has long been familiar to us and in

just the same way other factors - such as the date at which the child’s

brothers  and  sisters  are  born  or  the  time  when  it  discovers  the

difference  between  the  sexes,  or  again  its  direct  observations  of

sexual intercourse or its parents’ behaviour in encouraging or repelling

it - may hasten the child’s sexual development and bring it to maturity.

 


                                    Female Sexuality

                                                                                      4607

 

   Some writers are inclined to reduce the importance of the child’s first

and most original libidinal impulses in favour of later developmental

processes, so that - to put this view in its most extreme form - the onlyrole left to the former is merely to indicate certain paths, while the

intensities  which  flow  along  those  paths  are  supplied  by  later

regressions and reaction-formations. Thus, for instance, Karin Horney

(1926) is of the opinion that we greatly over-estimate the girl’s primary

penis-envy  and  that  the  strength  of  the  masculine  trend  which  she

develops later is to be attributed to a secondary penis-envy which is

used to fend off her feminine impulses and, in particular, her feminine

attachment  to  her  father.  This  does  not  tally  with  my  impressions.

Certain  as  is  the  occurrence  of  later  reinforcements  through

regression and reaction-formation, and difficult as it is to estimate the

relative strength of the confluent libidinal components, I nevertheless

think  that  we  should  not  overlook  the  fact  that  the  first  libidinal

impulses have an intensity of their own which is superior to any that

come later and which may indeed be termed incommensurable. It is

undoubtedly true that there is an antithesis between the attachment to

the father and the masculinity complex; it is the general antithesis that

exists between activity and passivity, masculinity and femininity. But

this gives us no right to assume that only one of them is primary and

that the other owes its strength merely to the force of defence. And if

the defence against femininity is so energetic, from what other source

can it draw its strength than from the masculine trend which found its

first expression in the child’s penis-envy and therefore deserves to be

named after it?

   A similar objection applies to Ernest Jones’s view (1927) that the

phallic phase in girls is a secondary, protective reaction rather than a

genuine developmental stage. This does not correspond either to the

dynamic or the chronological position of things.

                                                                                       4608

 

              DR. REIK AND THE PROBLEM OF QUACKERY

                  A LETTER TO THE NEUE FREIE PRESSE

                                        (1926)

 

Dear Sir,

   In an article in your issue of July 15 dealing with the case of my

pupil, Dr. Theodor Reik, or, more precisely, in a section of it headed

‘Information  from  Psycho-Analytic  Circles’,  there  is  a  passage  on

which I should like to make a few remarks by way of correction.

   The passage runs: ‘. . . during the last few years he has become

convinced that Dr. Reik, who has gained a wide reputation from his

philosophical and psychological writings, possesses a far greater gift

for  psycho-analysis  than  the  physicians  attached  to  the  Freudian

school; and he has entrusted the most difficult cases only to him and

to  his  daughter  Anna,  who  has  proved  quite  specially  adept  in  the

difficult technique of psycho-analysis.’

   Dr. Reik himself would, I think, be the first to reject any such account

of the basis of our relations. It is true, however, that I have availed

myself of his skill in particularly difficult cases, but this has only been

where the symptoms lay in a sphere far removed from the physical

one.  And  I  have  never  failed  to  inform  a  patient  that  he  is  not  a

physician but a psychologist.

   My daughter Anna has devoted herself to the pedagogic analysis of

children and adolescents. I have never yet referred to her a case of

severe  neurotic  illness  in  an  adult.  Incidentally  the  only  case  with

moderately  severe  symptoms  verging  on  the  psychiatric  which  she

has hitherto treated repaid the physician who referred it to her by its

complete success.

   I take the opportunity of informing you that I have just sent to press a

small work on The Question of Lay Analysis. In it I have tried to show

what a psycho-analysis is and what demands it makes on the analyst.

I  have  considered  the  far  from  simple  relations  between  psycho-

analysis  and  medicine,  and  have  drawn  the  conclusion  that  any

mechanical  application  to  trained  analysts  of  the  section  againstquackery is open to grave doubts.

   Since I have given up my Vienna practice and have cut down my

activity  to  the  treatment  of  a  very  few  foreigners,  I  trust  that  this

announcement  will  not  involve  me  too  in  a  prosecution  for

unprofessional advertisement.

                                                                              Yours &c.,

                                                                        Professor Freud

                                                                                       4609

 

                                DR. ERNEST JONES

                              (ON HIS 50th BIRTHDAY)

                                        (1929)

 

The first piece of work that it fell to psycho-analysis to perform was the

discovery of the instincts that are common to all men living to-day -

and  not  only  to  those  living  to-day  but  to  those  of  ancient  and  of

prehistoric times. It called for no great effort, therefore, for psycho-

analysis to ignore the differences that arise among the inhabitants of

the earth owing to the multiplicity of races, languages and countries.

From  the  start  it  was international,  and  it  is  well  known  that  its

followers overcame the dividing effects of the Great War sooner than

any others.

   Among the men who met at Salzburg in the spring of 1908 for the

first  psycho-analytical  congress,  a  young  English  physician  was

prominent,  who  delivered  a  short  paper  on  ‘Rationalization  in

Everyday Life’. The contents of this first-fruit hold good to this day: our

young  science  was  enriched  by  an  important  concept  and  an

indispensable term.

   From that time on Ernest Jones has never rested. First in his post as

a professor in Toronto, then as a physician in London, as the founder

and teacher of a Branch Society, as director of a Press, as editor of a

Journal, and as head of a Training Institute, he has worked tirelessly

for  psycho-analysis,  making  its  current  findings  generally  known  by

means  of  lectures,  defending  it  against  the  attacks  and

misunderstandings of its opponents by means of brilliant, severe but

fair criticisms, maintaining its difficult position in England against the

demands of the ‘profession’ with tact and moderation, and, alongside

of all these externally directed activities, accomplishing, in loyal co-

operation with the development of psycho-analysis on the Continent,

the scientific achievement to which, among other works, his Papers on

Psycho-Analysis  and Essays  in  Applied  Psycho-Analysis  bear

witness.  Now,  in  the  prime  of  life,  he  is  not  only  indisputably  the

leading  figure  among  English-speaking  analysts,  but  is  alsorecognized as one of the foremost representatives of psycho-analysis

as a whole - a mainstay for his friends and, as much as ever, a hope

for the future of our science.

   Now that the Director of this journal has broken the silence to which

he is condemned - or to which he has a right - owing to his age, in

order to greet his friend, he may be permitted to conclude - not with a

wish, for we do not believe in the omnipotence of thoughts - but with

the  admission  that  he  cannot  think  of  Ernest  Jones,  even  after  his

fiftieth  birthday,  as  other  than  before:  zealous  and  energetic,

combative and devoted to the cause.

                                                                                       4610

 

            THE EXPERT OPINION IN THE HALSMANN CASE

                                        (1931)

 

The Oedipus complex, as far as we know, is present in childhood in all

human  beings,  undergoes  great  alterations  during  the  years  of

development and in many individuals is found in varying degrees of

strength  even  at  a  mature  age.  Its  essential  characteristics,  its

universality, its content and its fate were recognized, long before the

days of psycho-analysis, by that acute thinker Diderot, as is shown by

a passage in his famous dialogue, Le neveu de Rameua: ‘Si le petit

sauvage  était  abandonne  à  lui-même,  qu’il  conservât  tout  son

imbécillité, et qu’il réunit au peu de raison de l’enfant au berceau la

violence des passions de l’homme de trente ans, il tordrait le cou à

son pere, et coucherait avec sa mère.’

      If  it  had  been  objectively  demonstrated  that  Philipp  Halsmann

murdered his father, there would at all events be some grounds for

introducing the Oedipus complex to provide a motive for an otherwise

unexplained deed. Since no such proof has been adduced, mention of

the Oedipus complex has a misleading effect; it is at the least idle.

Such disagreements as have been uncovered by the investigation in

the  Halsmann  family  between  the  father  and  son  are  altogether

inadequate  to  provide  a  foundation  for  assuming  in  the  son  a  bad

relationship towards his father. Even if it were otherwise, we should be

obliged to say that it is a far cry from there to the causation of such a

deed. Precisely because it is always present, the Oedipus complex is

not suited to provide a decision on the question of guilt. The situation

envisaged in a well-known anecdote might easily be brought about.

There was a burglary. A man who had a jemmy in his possession was

found guilty of the crime. After the verdict had been given and he had

been asked if he had anything to say, he begged to be sentenced for

adultery at the same time - since he was carrying the tool for that on

him as well.

   In Dostoevsky’s great novel, The Brothers Karamazov, the Oedipus

situation  stands  at  the  focal  point  of  interest.  Old  Karamazov  hasmade himself detested by his sons through heartless oppression; in

the  eyes  of  one  of  them  he  is,  in  addition,  a  powerful  rival  for  the

woman he desires. This son, Dmitri, makes no secret of his intention

to avenge himself on his father by force. It is therefore natural that

after his father has been murdered and robbed he should be accused

as  his  murderer  and,  despite  all  protestations  of  his  innocence,

condemned. And yet Dmitri is innocent; another of the brothers has

done the deed. A dictum that has become famous occurs during the

trial scene in this novel: ‘Psychology is a knife that cuts both ways.’

 


                  The Expert Opinion In The Halsmann Case

                                                                                      4611

 

   The Opinion of the Innsbruck Faculty of Medicine seems inclined to

attribute  an  ‘effective’  Oedipus  complex  to  Philipp  Halsmann,  but

refrains from defining the measure of this effectiveness, since under

the  pressure  of  the  accusation  the  necessary  conditions  for  ‘an

unreserved disclosure’ on Philipp Halsmann’s part were not fulfilled.

When  the  Faculty  go  on  to  refuse  even  ‘on  the  supposition  of  the

accused being guilty to look for the root of the deed in an Oedipus

complex’, they are carrying their denial too far without any necessity.

   In the same Opinion, we come up against a contradiction which is by

no  means  without  significance.  The  possible  influence  of  emotional

shock on the disturbance of memory with regard to impressions before

and during the critical time is minimized to the extreme, in my opinion

unjustly. The assumptions of an exceptional state of mind or of mental

illness  are  decisively  rejected,  but  the  explanation  of  a  ‘repression’

having  taken  place  in  Philipp  Halsmann  after  the  deed  is  readily

allowed. I must say, however, that a repression of this kind, occurring

out of the blue in an adult who gives no indication of a severe neurosis

- the repression of an action which would certainly be more important

than any debatable details of distance and the passage of time and

which takes place in a normal state or one altered only by physical

fatigue - would be a rarity of the first order.

                                                                                       4612

 

          INTRODUCTION TO THE SPECIAL PSYCHOPATHOLOGY

                                    NUMBER OF

                      THE MEDICAL REVIEW OF REVIEWS

                                        (1930)

 

Dr. Feigenbaum has asked me to write a few words for the Review of

which he is in charge, and I take the opportunity of wishing the best

success to his undertaking.

   I often hear that psycho-analysis is very popular in the United States

and that it does not come up against the same stubborn resistance

there  as  it  does  in  Europe.  My  satisfaction  over  this  is,  however,

clouded by several circumstances. It seems to me that the popularity

of the name of psycho-analysis in America signifies neither a friendly

attitude to the thing itself nor any specially wide or deep knowledge of

it.  As  evidence  of  the  former  fact  I  may  point  out  that,  although

financial support is to be had easily and in plenty for every kind of

scientific and pseudo-scientific enterprise, we have never succeeded

in  obtaining  a  backing  for  our  psycho-analytic  institutions.  Nor  is  it

hard  to  find  evidence  for  my  second  assertion.  Although  America

possesses several excellent analysts and, in Dr. A. A. Brill, at least

one authority, the contributions to our science from that vast country

are  exiguous  and  provide  little  that  is  new.  Psychiatrists  and

neurologists make frequent use of psycho-analysis as a therapeutic

method, but as a rule they show little interest in its scientific problems

and  its  cultural  significance.  Quite  particularly  often  we  find  in

American  physicians  and  writers  a  very  insufficient  familiarity  with

psycho-analysis, so that they know only its terms and a few catch-

words  -  though  this  does  not  shake  them  in  the  certainty  of  their

judgement.  And  these  same  men  lump  psycho-analysis  with  other

systems  of  thought,  which  may  have  developed  out  of  it  but  are

incompatible with it to-day. Or they make a hotch-potch out of psycho-

analysis and other elements and quote this procedure as evidence of

their broad-mindedness,  whereas  it  only  proves  their lack  of

judgement.   Many of these evils which I have mentioned with regret no doubt

arise  from  the  fact  that  there  is  a  general  tendency  in  America  to

shorten study and preparation and to proceed as fast as possible to

practical application. There is a preference, too, for studying a subject

like psycho-analysis not from the original sources but from second-

hand  and  often  inferior  accounts.  Thoroughness  is  bound  to  suffer

from this.

   It is to be hoped that works of the kind that Dr. Feigenbaum intends

to  publish  in  his  Review  will  be  a  powerful  encouragement  to  the

interest in psycho-analysis in America.

                                                                                       4613

 

          INTRODUCTION TO EDOARDO WEISS’S ELEMENTS OF

                                PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1931)

 

The author of these lectures, my friend and pupil Dr. Edoardo Weiss,

has expressed a wish that I should send his work on its way with a few

words of recommendation. In doing so I am fully aware that such a

recommendation is superfluous. The work speaks for itself. All who

know  how  to  appreciate  the  seriousness  of  a  scientific  endeavour,

how  to  value  the  honesty  of  an  investigator  who  does  not  seek  to

belittle or deny the difficulties, and how to take pleasure in the skill of a

teacher who brings light into darkness and order into chaos by his

exposition, must form a high estimate of this book and share my hope

that  it  will  awaken  among  cultivated  and  learned  circles  in  Italy  a

lasting interest in the young science of psycho-analysis.

 

                                                                            Sigm. Freud

                                                                                       4614

 

          PREFACE TO TEN YEARS OF THE BERLIN PSYCHO-

                              ANALYTIC INSTITUTE

                                        (1930)

 

The following pages describe the founding and achievements of the

Berlin Psycho-Analytic Institute, to which are allotted three important

functions within the psycho-analytic movement. First, it endeavours to

make our therapy accessible to the great multitude who suffer under

their neuroses no less than the wealthy, but who are not in a position

to meet the cost of their treatment. Secondly, it seeks to provide a

centre at which analysis can be taught theoretically and at which the

experience  of  older  analysts  can  be  handed  on  to  pupils  who  are

anxious to learn. And lastly, it aims at perfecting our knowledge of

neurotic illnesses and our therapeutic technique by applying them and

testing them under fresh conditions.

      An  Institute  of  this  kind  was  indispensable;  but  we  should  have

waited  in  vain  for  assistance  from  the  State  or  interest  from  the

University in its foundation. Here the energy and self-sacrifice of an

individual analyst took the initiative. Ten years ago, Dr. Max Eitingon,

now  President  of  the  International  Psycho-Analytical  Association,

created  an  Institute  such  as  this  from  his  own  resources,  and  has

since then maintained and directed it by his own efforts. This Report

on the first decade of the Berlin Institute is a tribute to its creator and

director - an attempt to render him public thanks. Everyone who, in

whatever  sense,  has  a  share  in  psycho-analysis  will  unite  in  thus

thanking him.

                                                                                       4615

 

                    PREFACE TO HERMANN NUNBERG’S

        GENERAL THEORY OF THE NEUROSES ON A PSYCHO-

                                  ANALYTIC BASIS

                                        (1932)

 

This volume by Hermann Nunberg contains the most complete and

conscientious  presentation  of  a  psycho-analytic  theory  of  neurotic

processes which we at present possess. Anyone who is anxious to

have  the  relevant  problems  simplified  and  smoothed  away  will

scarcely  find  satisfaction  in  this  work.  But  anyone  who  prefers

scientific thinking and can appreciate it as a merit when speculation

never abandons the guiding-line of experience and anyone who can

enjoy the beautiful diversity of mental happenings - he will value this

work and study it assiduously.

VIENNA, October 1931.

                                                                                       4616

 

                LETTER TO THE BURGOMASTER OF PRÍBOR

                                        (1931)

 

I offer my thanks to the Burgomaster of the town of Príbor-Freiberg, to

the organizers of this celebration and to all those who are attending it,

for the honour they have done me in marking the house of my birth

with this commemorative tablet from an artist’s hand - and this during

my  lifetime  and  while  the  world  around  us  is  not  yet  agreed  in  its

estimate of my work.

   I left Freiberg at the age of three and visited it when I was sixteen,

during my school holidays, as a guest of the Fluss family, and I have

never returned to it again. Since that time much has befallen me; my

labours  have  been  many,  I  have  experienced  some  suffering  and

happiness as well, and I have had a share of success - the common

medley  of  human  life.  At  seventy-five  it  is  not  easy  for  me  to  put

myself back into those early times; of their rich experiences but few

relics remain in my memory. But of one thing I can feel sure: deeply

buried within me there still lives the happy child of Freiberg, the first-

born  son  of  a  youthful  mother,  who  received  his  first  indelible

impressions from this air, from this soil. Thus I may be allowed to end

my  words  of  thanks  with  a  heartfelt  wish  for  the  happiness  of  this

place and of those who live in it.

                                                                                       4617

 

      NEW INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1933)

 


                                                                                      4618

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4619

 

                                      PREFACE

 

My Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis were delivered during

the two Winter Terms of 1915-16 and 1916-17 in a lecture room of the

Vienna  Psychiatric  Clinic  before  an  audience  gathered  from  all  the

Faculties  of  the  University.  The  first  half  of  the  lectures  were

improvised,  and  written  out  immediately  afterwards;  drafts  of  the

second  half  were  made  during  the  intervening  summer  vacation  at

Salzburg, and delivered word for word in the following winter. At that

time I still possessed the gift of a phonographic memory.

      These  new  lectures,  unlike  the  former  ones,  have  never  been

delivered.  My  age  had  in  the  meantime  absolved  me  from  the

obligation  of  giving  expression  to  my  membership  of  the  University

(which was in any case a peripheral one) by delivering lectures; and a

surgical operation had made speaking in public impossible for me. If,

therefore, I once more take my place in the lecture room during the

remarks that follow, it is only by an artifice of the imagination; it may

help me not to forget to bear the reader in mind as I enter more deeply

into my subject.

   The new lectures are by no means intended to take the place of the

earlier ones. They do not in any sense form an independent entity with

an  expectation  of  finding  a  circle  of  readers  of  its  own;  they  are

continuations and supplements, which, in relation to the former series,fall  into  three  groups.  A  first  group  contains  fresh  treatments  of

subjects which were already dealt with fifteen years ago but which, as

a  result  of  a  deepening  of  our  knowledge  and  an  alteration  in  our

views,  call  for  a  different  exposition  to-day  -  that  is  to  say,  critical

revisions. The two other groups contain what are true extensions, for

they deal with things which either did not exist in psycho-analysis at

the time of the first lectures or which were too little in evidence to

justify  a  special  chapter-heading.  It  is  inevitable,  but  not  to  be

regretted, if some of the new lectures unite the characteristics of more

than one of these groups.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4620

 

      I  have  also  given  expression  to  the  dependence  of  these  new

lectures  on  the Introductory  Lectures  by  giving  them  a  numbering

continuous with theirs. The first lecture in this volume is accordingly

called No. XXIX. Like their predecessors, they offer the professional

analyst  little  that  is  new;  they  are  addressed  to  the  multitude  of

educated  people  to  whom  we  may  perhaps  attribute  a  benevolent,

even though cautious, interest in the characteristics and discoveries of

the young science. This time once again it has been my chief aim to

make  no  sacrifice  to  an  appearance  of  being  simple,  complete  or

rounded-off, not to disguise problems and not to deny the existence of

gaps and uncertainties. In no other field of scientific work would it be

necessary to boast of such modest intentions. They are universally

regarded as self-evident; the public expects nothing else. No reader of

an account of astronomy will feel disappointed and contemptuous of

the science if he is shown the frontiers at which our knowledge of the

universe melts into haziness. Only in psychology is it otherwise. There

mankind’s constitutional unfitness for scientific research comes fully

into  the  open.  What  people  seem  to  demand  of  psychology  is  not

progress  in  knowledge,  but  satisfactions  of  some  other  sort;  every

unsolved problem, every admitted uncertainty is made into a reproach

against it.

   Whoever cares for the science of mental life must accept theseinjustices along with it.

                                                                                    FREUD 

VIENNA, Summer 1932

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4621

 

                                  LECTURE XXIX

 

                REVISION OF THE THEORY OF DREAMS

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - If, after an interval of more than fifteen years, I

have brought you together again to discuss with you what novelties,

and what improvements it may be, the intervening time has introduced

into psycho-analysis, it is right and fitting from more than one point of

view that we should turn our attention first to the position of the theory

of dreams. It occupies a special place in the history of psycho-analysis

and marks a turning-point; it was with it that analysis took the step

from  being  a  psychotherapeutic  procedure  to  being  a  depth-

psychology. Since then, too, the theory of dreams has remained what

is  most  characteristic  and  peculiar  about  the  young  science,

something  to  which  there  is  no  counterpart  in  the  rest  of  our

knowledge, a stretch of new country, which has been reclaimed from

popular beliefs and mysticism. The strangeness of the assertions it

was obliged to put forward has made it play the part of a shibboleth,

the use of which decided who could become a follower of psycho-

analysis and to whom it remained forever incomprehensible. I myself

found  it  a  sheet-anchor  during  those  difficult  times  when  the

unrecognized facts of the neuroses used to confuse my inexperienced

judgement. Whenever I began to have doubts of the correctness of my

wavering  conclusions,  the  successful  transformation  of  a  senseless

and muddled dream into a logical and intelligible mental process in the

dreamer would renew my confidence of being on the right track.

   It is therefore of special interest to us, in the particular instance of

the  theory  of  dreams,  on  the  one  hand  to  follow  the  vicissitudes

through which psycho-analysis has passed during this interval, and onthe  other  hand  to  learn  what  advances  it  has  made  in  being

understood and appreciated by the contemporary world. I may tell you

at once that you will be disappointed in both these directions.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4622

 

   Let us look through the volumes of the Internationale Zeitschrift für

(ärztliche)  Psychoanalyse,  in  which,  since  1913,  the  authoritative

writings in our field of work have been brought together. In the earlier

volumes  you  will  find  a  recurrent  sectional  heading  ‘On  Dream-

Interpretation’, containing numerous contributions on various points in

the  theory  of  dreams.  But  the  further  you  go  the  rarer  do  these

contributions  become,  and  finally  the  sectional  heading  disappears

completely. The analysts behave as though they had no more to say

about dreams, as though there was nothing more to be added to the

theory of dreams. But if you ask how much of dream-interpretation has

been  accepted  by  outsiders  -  by  the  many  psychiatrists  and

psychotherapists who warm their pot of soup at our fire (incidentally

without being very grateful for our hospitality), by what are described

as  educated  people,  who  are  in  the  habit  of  assimilating  the  more

striking findings of science, by the literary men and by the public at

large - the reply gives little cause for satisfaction. A few formulas have

become generally familiar, among them some that we have never put

forward - such as the thesis that all dreams are of a sexual nature -

but really important things like the fundamental distinction between the

manifest  content  of  dreams  and  the  latent  dream-thoughts,  the

realization that the wish-fulfilling function of dreams is not contradicted

by  anxiety-dreams,  the  impossibility  of  interpreting  a  dream  unless

one has the dreamer’s associations to it at one’s disposal, and, above

all, the discovery that what is essential in dreams is the process of the

dream-work  -  all  this  still  seems  about  as  foreign  to  general

awareness as it was thirty years ago. I am in a position to say this,

since in the course of that period I have received innumerable letters

whose  writers  present  their  dreams  for  interpretation  or  ask  for

information  about  the  nature  of  dreams  and  who  declare  that  theyhave read my Interpretation of Dreams, though in every sentence they

betray their lack of understanding of our theory of dreams. But all this

shall not deter us from once more giving a connected account of what

we know about dreams. You will recall that last time we devoted a

whole number of lectures to showing how we came to understand this

hitherto unexplained mental phenomenon.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4623

 

 

      Let  us  suppose,  then,  that  someone  -  a  patient  in  analysis,  for

instance - tells us one of his dreams. We shall assume that in this way

he is making us one of the communications to which he has pledged

himself by the fact of having started an analytic treatment. It is, to be

sure, a communication made by inappropriate means, for dreams are

not in themselves social utterances, not a means of giving information.

Nor, indeed, do we understand what the dreamer was trying to say to

us, and he himself is equally in the dark. And now we have to make a

quick decision. On the one hand, the dream may be, as non-analytic

doctors assure us, a sign that the dreamer has slept badly, that not

every part of his brain has come to rest equally, that some areas of it,

under the influence of unknown stimuli, endeavoured to go on working

but were only able to do so in a very incomplete fashion. If that is the

case,  we  shall  be  right  to  concern  ourselves  no  further  with  the

product of a nocturnal disturbance which has no psychical value: for

what could we expect to derive from investigating it that would be of

use for our purposes? Or on the other hand - but it is plain that we

have from the first decided otherwise. We have - quite arbitrarily, it

must be admitted - made the assumption, adopted as a postulate, that

even this unintelligible dream must be a fully valid psychical act, with

sense  and  worth,  which  we  can  use  in  analysis  like  any  other

communication.  Only  the  outcome  of  our  experiment  can  show

whether  we  are  right.  If  we  succeed  in  turning  the  dream  into  an

utterance of value of that kind, we shall evidently have a prospect of

learning  something  new  and  of  receiving  communications  of  a  sortwhich would otherwise be inaccessible to us.

   Now, however, the difficulties of our task and the enigmas of our

subject  rise  before  our  eyes.  How  do  we  propose  to  transform  the

dream into a normal communication and how do we explain the fact

that  some  of  the  patient’s  utterances  have  assumed  a  form  that  is

unintelligible both to him and to us?

   As you see, Ladies and Gentlemen, this time I am taking the path

not  of  a  genetic  but  of  a  dogmatic  exposition.  Our  first  step  is  to

establish our new attitude to the problem of dreams by introducing two

new concepts and names. What has been called the dream we shall

describe as the text of the dream or the manifest dream, and what we

are looking for, what we suspect, so to say, of lying behind the dream,

we shall describe as the latent dream-thoughts. Having done this, we

can  express  our  two  tasks  as  follows.  We  have  to  transform  the

manifest  dream  into  the  latent  one,  and  to  explain  how,  in  the

dreamer’s mind, the latter has become the former. The first portion is

a practical task, for which dream-interpretation is responsible; it calls

for  a  technique.  The  second  portion  is  a theoretical  task,  whose

business it is to explain the hypothetical dream-work; and it can only

be a theory. Both of them, the technique of dream-interpretation and

the theory of the dream-work, have to be newly created.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4624

 

   With which of the two, then, shall we start? With the technique of

dream-interpretation,  I  think;  it  will  present  a  more  concrete

appearance and make a more vivid impression on you.

 

   Well then, the patient has told us a dream, which we are to interpret.

We have listened passively, without putting our powers of reflection

into action. What do we do next? We decide to concern ourselves as

little as possible with what we have heard, with the manifest dream. Of

course this manifest dream exhibits all sorts of characteristics which

are  not  entirely  a  matter  of  indifference  to  us.  It  may  be  coherent,

smoothly constructed like a literary composition, or it may be confusedto the point of unintelligibility, almost like a delirium; it may contain

absurd  elements  or  jokes  and  apparently  witty  conclusions;  it  may

seem to the dreamer clear and sharp or obscure and hazy; its pictures

may exhibit the complete sensory strength of perceptions or may be

shadowy like an indistinct mist; the most diverse characteristics may

be present in the same dream, distributed over various portions of it;

the  dream,  finally,  may  show  an  indifferent  emotional  tone  or  be

accompanied by feelings of the strongest joy or distress. You must not

suppose  that  we  think  nothing  of  this  endless  diversity  in  manifest

dreams. We shall come back to it later and we shall find a great deal

in it that we can make use of in our interpretations. But for the moment

we  will  disregard  it  and  follow  the  main  road  that  leads  to  the

interpretation of dreams. That is to say, we ask the dreamer, too, to

free himself from the impression of the manifest dream, to divert his

attention from the dream as a whole on to the separate portions of its

content and to report to us in succession everything that occurs to him

in  relation  to  each  of  these  portions  -  what  associations  present

themselves to him if he focuses on each of them separately.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4625

 

   That is a curious technique, is it not? - not the usual way of dealing

with  a  communication  or  utterance.  And  no  doubt  you  guess  that

behind this procedure there are assumptions which have not yet been

expressly stated. But let us proceed. In what order are we to get the

patient  to  take  up  the  portions  of  his  dream?  There  are  various

possibilities open to us. We can simply follow the chronological order

in which they appeared in the account of the dream. That is what may

be called the strictest, classical method. Or we can direct the dreamer

to  begin  by  looking  out  for  the  ‘day’s  residues’  in  the  dream;  for

experience  has  taught  us  that  almost  every  dream  includes  the

remains of a memory or an allusion to some event (or often to several

events)  of  the  day  before  the  dream,  and,  if  we  follow  these

connections, we often arrive with one blow at the transition from the

apparently far remote dream-world to the real life of the patient. Or,again, we may tell him to start with those elements of the dream’s

content which strike him by their special clarity and sensory strength;

for we know that he will find it particularly easy to get associations to

these. It makes no difference by which of these methods we approach

the associations we are in search of.

   And next, we obtain these associations. What they bring us is of the

most various kinds: memories from the day before, the ‘dream-day’,

and from times long past, reflections, discussions, with arguments for

and  against,  confessions  and  enquiries.  Some  of  them  the  patient

pours out; when he comes to others he is held up for a time. Most of

them  show  a  clear  connection  to  some  element  of  the  dream;  no

wonder,  since  those  elements  were  their  starting-point.  But  it  also

sometimes  happens  that  the  patient  introduces  them  with  these

words: ‘This seems to me to have nothing at all to do with the dream,

but I tell it you because it occurs to me.’

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4626

 

   If one listens to these copious associations, one soon notices that

they have more in common with the content of the dream than their

starting-points alone. They throw a surprising light on all the different

parts of the dream, fill in gaps between them, and make their strange

juxtapositions  intelligible.  In  the  end  one  is  bound  to  become  clear

about the relation between them and the dream’s content. The dream

is  seen  to  be  an  abbreviated  selection  from  the  associations,  a

selection  made,  it  is  true,  according  to  rules  that  we  have  not  yet

understood:  the  elements  of  the  dream  are  like  representatives

chosen by election from a mass of people. There can be no doubt that

by our technique we have got hold of something for which the dream

is a substitute and in which lies the dream’s psychical value, but which

no  longer  exhibits  its  puzzling  peculiarities,  its  strangeness  and  its

confusion.

   Let there be no misunderstanding, however. The associations to the

dream are not yet the latent dream-thoughts. The latter are contained

in the associations like an alkali in the mother liquor, but yet not quitecompletely contained in them. On the one hand, the associations give

us far more than we need for formulating the latent dream-thoughts -

namely  all  the  explanations,  transitions,  and  connections  which  the

patient’s intellect is bound to produce in the course of his approach to

the dream-thoughts. On the other hand, an association often comes to

a stop precisely before the genuine dream-thought: it has only come

near to it and has only had contact with it through allusions. At that

point we intervene on our own; we fill in the hints, draw undeniable

conclusions, and give explicit utterance to what the patient has only

touched on in his associations. This sounds as though we allowed our

ingenuity and caprice to play with the material put at our disposal by

the dreamer and as though we misused it in order to interpret into his

utterances what cannot be interpreted from them. Nor is it easy to

show the legitimacy of our procedure in an abstract description of it.

But you have only to carry out a dream-analysis yourselves or study a

good account of one in our literature and you will be convinced of the

cogent manner in which interpretative work like this proceeds.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4627

 

   If in general and primarily we are dependent, in interpreting dreams,

on the dreamer’s associations, yet in relation to certain elements of

the  dream’s  content  we  adopt  a  quite  independent  attitude,  chiefly

because we have to, because as a rule associations fail to materialize

in  their  case.  We  noticed  at  an  early  stage  that  it  is  always  in

connection with the same elements that this happens; they are not

very numerous, and repeated experience has taught us that they are

to  be  regarded  and  interpreted  as symbols  of  something  else.  As

contrasted with the other dream-elements, a fixed meaning may be

attributed  to  them,  which,  however,  need  not  be  unambiguous  and

whose  range  is  determined  by  special  rules  with  which  we  are

unfamiliar. Since we know how to translate these symbols and the

dreamer does not, in spite of having used them himself, it may happen

that the sense of a dream may at once become clear to us as soon as

we have heard the text of the dream, even before we have made anyefforts at interpreting it, while it still remains an enigma to the dreamer

himself. But I have said so much to you in my earlier lectures about

symbolism, our knowledge of it and the problems it poses us, that I

need not repeat it to-day.

      That,  then,  is  our  method  of  interpreting  dreams.  The  first  and

justifiable question is: ‘Can we interpret all dreams by its help?’ And

the answer is: ‘No, not all; but so many that we feel confident in the

serviceability and correctness of the procedure.’ ‘But why not all?’ The

answer to this has something important to teach us, which at once

introduces  us  into  the  psychical  determinants  of  the  formation  of

dreams:  ‘Because  the  work  of  interpreting  dreams  is  carried  out

against  a  resistance,  which  varies  between  trivial  dimensions  and

invincibility  (at  least  so  far  as  the  strength  of  our  present  methods

reaches).’  It  is  impossible  during  our  work  to  overlook  the

manifestations of this resistance. At some points the associations are

given without hesitation and the first or second idea that occurs to the

patient brings an explanation. At other points there is a stoppage and

the patient hesitates before bringing out an association, and, if so, we

often have to listen to a long chain of ideas before receiving anything

that  helps  us  to  understand  the  dream.  We  are  certainly  right  in

thinking that the longer and more roundabout the chain of associations

the stronger the resistance. We can detect the same influence at work

in the forgetting of dreams. It happens often enough that a patient,

despite all his efforts, cannot remember one of his dreams. But after

we have been able in the course of a piece of analytic work to get rid

of a difficulty which had been disturbing his relation to the analysis, the

forgotten  dream  suddenly  re-emerges.  Two  other  observations  are

also in place here. It very frequently comes about that, to begin with, a

portion of a dream is omitted and added afterwards as an addendum.

This is to be regarded as an attempt to forget that portion. Experience

shows that it is that particular piece which is the most important; there

was a greater resistance, we suppose, in the path of communicating it

than the other parts of the dream. Furthermore, we often find that a

dreamer endeavours to prevent himself from forgetting his dreams by

fixing them in writing immediately after waking up. We can tell him that

that  is  no  use.  For  the  resistance  from  which  he  has  extorted  the

preservation of the text of the dream will then be displaced on to itsassociations  and  will  make  the  manifest  dream  inaccessible  to

interpretation. In view of these facts we need not feel surprised if a

further  increase  in  the  resistance  suppresses  the  associations

altogether and thus brings the interpretation of the dream to nothing.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4628

 

   From all this we infer that the resistance which we come across in

the work of interpreting dreams must also have had a share in their

origin. We can actually distinguish between dreams that arose under a

slight  and  under  a  high  pressure  of  resistance.  But  this  pressure

varies as well from place to place within one and the same dream; it is

responsible  for  the  gaps,  obscurities  and  confusions  which  may

interrupt the continuity of even the finest of dreams.

   But what is creating the resistance and against what is it aimed?

Well, the resistance is the surest sign to us of a conflict. There must

be a force here which is seeking to express something and another

which  is  striving  to  prevent  its  expression.  What  comes  about  in

consequence as a manifest dream may combine all the decisions into

which this struggle between two trends has been condensed. At one

point one of these forces may have succeeded in putting through what

it wanted to say, while at another point it is the opposing agency which

has managed to blot out the intended communication completely or to

replace it by something that reveals not a trace of it. The commonest

and  most  characteristic  cases  of  dream-construction  are  those  in

which  the  conflict  has  ended  in  a  compromise,  so  that  the

communicating agency has, it is true, been able to say what it wanted

but not in the way it wanted - only in a softened down, distorted and

unrecognized form. If, then, dreams do not give a faithful picture of the

dream-thoughts and if the work of interpretation is required in order to

bridge the gap between them, that is the outcome of the opposing,

inhibiting  and  restricting  agency  which  we  have  inferred  from  our

perception of the resistance while we interpret dreams. So long as we

studied dreams as isolated phenomena independent of the psychical

structures akin to them, we named this agency the censor of dreams. 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4629

 

   You have long been aware that this censorship is not an institution

peculiar  to  dream-life.  You  know  that  the  conflict  between  the  two

psychical  agencies,  which  we  -  inaccurately  -  describe  as  the

‘unconscious  repressed’  and  the  ‘conscious’,  dominates  our  whole

mental  life  and  that  the  resistance  against  the  interpretation  of

dreams, the sign of the dream-censorship, is nothing other than the

resistance  due  to  repression  by  which  the  two  agencies  are

separated. You know too that the conflict between these two agencies

may  under  certain  conditions  produce  other  psychical  structures

which, like dreams, are the outcome of compromises; and you will not

expect me to repeat to you here everything that was contained in my

introduction to the theory of the neuroses in order to demonstrate to

you  what  we  know  of  the  determinants  of  the  formation  of  such

compromises.  You  have  realized  that  the  dream  is  a  pathological

product,  the  first  member  of  the  class  which  includes  hysterical

symptoms, obsessions and delusions, but that it is distinguished from

the others by its transitoriness and by its occurrence under conditions

which are part of normal life. For let us bear firmly in mind that, as was

already pointed out by Aristotle, dream life is the way in which our

mind works during the state of sleep. The state of sleep involves a

turning-away  from  the  real  external  world,  and  there  we  have  the

necessary  condition  for  the  development  of  a  psychosis.  The  most

careful study of the severe psychoses will not reveal to us a single

feature that is more characteristic of those pathological conditions. In

psychoses, however, the turning-away from reality is brought about in

two  kinds  of  way:  either  by  the  unconscious  repressed  becoming

excessively  strong  so  that  it  overwhelms  the  conscious,  which  is

attached  to  reality,  or  because  reality  has  become  so  intolerably

distressing that the threatened ego throws itself into the arms of the

unconscious  instinctual  forces  in  a  desperate  revolt.  The  harmless

dream-psychosis is the result of a withdrawal from the external world

which  is  consciously  willed  and  only  temporary,  and  it  disappearswhen relations to the external world are resumed. During the isolation

of  the  sleeping  individual  an  alteration  in  the  distribution  of  his

psychical energy also sets in; a part of the expenditure on repression,

which is normally required in order to hold the unconscious down, can

be saved, for if the unconscious makes use of its relative liberation for

active purposes, it finds its path to motility closed and the only path

open  to  it  is  the  harmless  one  leading  to  hallucinatory  satisfaction.

Now, therefore, a dream can be formed; but the fact of the dream-

censorship  shows  that  even  during  sleep  enough  of  the  resistance

due to repression is retained.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4630

 

   Here we are presented with a means of answering the question of

whether dreams have a function too, whether they are entrusted with

any  useful  achievement.  The  condition  of  rest  free  from  stimulus,

which the state of sleep wishes to establish, is threatened from three

directions: in a relatively accidental manner by external stimuli during

sleep, and by interests of the previous day which cannot be broken

off, and in an unavoidable manner by unsated repressed instinctual

impulses  which  are  on  the  watch  for  an  opportunity  of  finding

expression. In consequence of the diminishing of repressions at night

there  would  be  a  risk  that  the  rest  afforded  by  sleep  would  be

interrupted  whenever  an  instigation  from  outside  or  from  inside

succeeded in linking up with an unconscious instinctual source. The

process of dreaming allows the product of a collaboration of this kind

to find an outlet in a harmless hallucinatory experience and in that way

assures a continuation of sleep. The fact that a dream occasionally

awakens  the  sleeper,  to  the  accompaniment  of  a  generation  of

anxiety,  is  no  contradiction  of  this  function  but  rather,  perhaps,  a

signal that the watchman regards the situation as too dangerous and

no longer feels able to control it. And very often then, while we are still

asleep, a consolation occurs to us which seeks to prevent our waking

up: ‘But after all it’s only a dream!’

   This was what I wanted to say to you, Ladies and Gentlemen, aboutdream-interpretation,  whose  task  it  is  to  lead  the  way  from  the

manifest  dream  to  the  latent  dream-thoughts.  When  this  has  been

achieved,  interest  in  a  dream,  so  far  as  practical  analysis  is

concerned, is for the most part at an end. We add the communication

we have received in the form of a dream to the rest of the patient’s

communications and proceed with the analysis. We, however, have an

interest in dwelling a little longer on the dream. We are tempted to

study  the  process  by  which  the  latent  dream-thoughts  were

transformed into the manifest dream. We call this the ‘dream-work’. As

you will recall, I described it in such detail in my earlier lectures that I

can restrict my present survey to the most concise summary.

 

   The process of the dream-work, then, is something entirely new and

strange, nothing resembling which was known before. It has given us

our first glimpse of the processes which take place in the unconscious

system and has shown us that they are quite other than what we know

from  our  conscious  thinking  and  are  bound  to  appear  to  the  latter

preposterous and incorrect. The importance of this finding was then

increased  by  the  discovery  that  in  the  construction  of  neurotic

symptoms  the  same  mechanisms  (we  do  not  venture  to  say

‘processes of thought’) are operative as those which have transformed

the latent dream-thoughts into the manifest dream.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4631

 

   In what follows I shall not be able to avoid a schematic method of

exposition. Let us assume that in a particular case we have before us

all the latent thoughts, charged with a greater or less amount of affect,

by which the manifest dream has been replaced after its interpretation

has  been  completed.  We  shall  then  be  struck  by  one  difference

among these latent thoughts, and that difference will take us a long

way. Almost all these dream-thoughts are recognized by the dreamer

or acknowledged by him; he admits that he has thought this, now or at

some other time, or that he might have thought it. There is only one

single thought that he refuses to accept; it is strange to him or evenperhaps repellent; he may possibly reject it with passionate feeling. It

now becomes evident to us that the other thoughts are portions of a

conscious, or, more accurately, a preconscious train of thinking. They

might  have  been  thought  in  waking  life  too,  and  indeed  they  were

probably formed during the previous day. This one repudiated thought,

however, or, properly speaking, this one impulse, is a child of night; it

belongs  to  the  dreamer’s  unconscious  and  on  that  account  it  is

repudiated and rejected by him. It had to wait for the nightly relaxation

of repression in order to arrive at any kind of expression. And in any

case  this  expression  is  a  weakened,  distorted  and  disguised  one;

without our work of dream-interpretation we should not have found it.

This  unconscious  impulse  has  to  thank  its  link  with  the  other,

unobjectionable, dream-thoughts for the opportunity of slipping past

the  barrier  of  the  censorship  in  an  inconspicuous  disguise.  On  the

other hand, the preconscious dream-thoughts have to thank this same

link for the power to occupy mental life during sleep as well. For there

is no doubt about it: this unconscious impulse is the true creator of the

dream;  it  is  what  produces  the  psychical  energy  for  the  dream’s

construction.  Like  any  other  instinctual  impulse,  it  cannot  strive  for

anything  other  than  its  own  satisfaction;  and  our  experience  in

interpreting  dreams  shows  us  too  that  that  is  the  sense  of  all

dreaming. In every dream an instinctual wish has to be represented as

fulfilled.  The  shutting-off  of  mental  life  from  reality  at  night  and  the

regression to primitive mechanisms which this makes possible enable

this  wished-for  instinctual  satisfaction  to  be  experienced  in  a

hallucinatory manner as occurring in the present. As a result of this

same  regression,  ideas  are  transformed  in  the  dream  into  visual

pictures: the latent dream-thoughts, that is to say, are dramatized and

illustrated.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4632

 

   This piece of the dream-work gives us information about some of the

most striking and peculiar features of dreams. I will repeat the course

of events in dream-formation. As an introduction: the wish to sleepand  intentional  turning  away  from  the  external  world.  Next,  two

consequences of this for the mental apparatus: first, the possibility for

older  and  more  primitive  methods  of  working  to  emerge  in  it  -

regression; secondly, the lowering of the resistance due to repression

which  weighs  down  upon  the  unconscious.  As  a  result  of  this  last

factor the possibility arises for the formation of a dream and this is

taken  advantage  of  by  the  precipitating  causes,  the  internal  and

external  stimuli  which  have  become  active.  The  dream  which

originates  in  this  way  is  already  a  compromise-structure.  It  has  a

double function; on the one hand it is ego-syntonic, since, by getting

rid of the stimuli which are interfering with sleep, it serves the wish to

sleep; on the other hand it allows a repressed instinctual impulse to

obtain the satisfaction that is possible in these circumstances, in the

form  of  the  hallucinated  fulfilment  of  a  wish.  The  whole  process  of

forming a dream which is permitted by the sleeping ego is, however,

subject to the condition of the censorship, which is exercised by the

residue  of  the  repression  still  in  operation.  I  cannot  present  the

process more simply: it is not more simple. But I can proceed now with

my description of the dream-work.

   Let us go back once more to the latent dream-thoughts. Their most

powerful  element  is  the  repressed  instinctual  impulse  which  has

created in them an expression for itself on the basis of the presence of

chance stimuli and by transference on to the day’s residues - though

an expression that is toned down and disguised. Like every instinctual

impulse, it too presses for satisfaction by action; but its path to motility

is  blocked  by  the  physiological  regulations  implied  in  the  state  of

sleep; it is compelled to take the backwards course in the direction of

perception  and  to  be  content  with  a  hallucinated  satisfaction.  The

latent  dream-thoughts  are  thus  transformed  into  a  collection  of

sensory images and visual scenes. It is as they travel on this course

that what seems to us so novel and so strange occurs to them. All the

linguistic  instruments  by  which  we  express  the  subtler  relations  of

thought - the conjunctions and prepositions, the changes in declension

and  conjugation  -  are  dropped,  because  there  are  no  means  of

representing  them;  just  as  in  a  primitive  language  without  any

grammar, only the raw material of thought is expressed and abstract

terms are taken back to the concrete ones that are at their basis. Whatis  left  over  after  this  may  well  appear  disconnected.  The  copious

employment  of  symbols,  which  have  become  alien  to  conscious

thinking, for representing certain objects and processes is in harmony

alike with the archaic regression in the mental apparatus and with the

demands of the censorship.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4633

 

   But other changes made in the elements of the dream-thoughts go

far beyond this. Such of those elements as allow any point of contact

to  be  found  between  them  are condensed  into  new  unities.  In  the

process  of  transforming  the  thoughts  into  pictures,  preference  is

unmistakably  given  to  such  as  permit  of  this  putting-together,  this

condensation;  it  is  as  though  a  force  were  at  work  which  was

subjecting the material to compression and concentration. As a result

of condensation, one element in the manifest dream may correspond

to numerous elements in the latent dream-thoughts; but, conversely

too,  one  element  in  the  dream-thoughts  may  be  represented  by

several images in the dream.

   Still more remarkable is the other process - displacement or shifting

of accent - which in conscious thinking we come across only as faulty

reasoning or as means for a joke. The different ideas in the dream-

thoughts are, indeed, not all of equal value; they are cathected with

quotas of affect of varying magnitude and are correspondingly judged

to be important and deserving of interest to a greater or less degree.

In  the  dream-work  these  ideas  are  separated  from  the  affects

attaching to them. The affects are dealt with independently; they may

be displaced on to something else, they may be retained, they may

undergo alterations, or they may not appear in the dream at all. The

importance of the ideas that have been stripped of their affect returns

in  the  dream  as  sensory  strength  in  the  dream-pictures;  but  we

observe that this accent has passed over from important elements to

indifferent ones. Thus something that played only a minor part in the

dream-thoughts seems to be pushed into the foreground in the dream

as the main thing, while, on the contrary, what was the essence of thedream-thoughts finds only passing and indistinct representation in the

dream. No other part of the dream-work is so much responsible for

making  the  dream  strange  and  incomprehensible  to  the  dreamer.

Displacement is the principal means used in the dream-distortion to

which  the  dream-thoughts  must  submit  under  the  influence  of  the

censorship.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4634

 

   After these influences have been brought to bear upon the dream-

thoughts the dream is almost complete. A further, somewhat variable,

factor also comes into play - known as ‘secondary revision’ - after the

dream  has  been  presented  before  consciousness  as  an  object  of

perception. At that point we treat it as we are in general accustomed

to treat the contents of our perception: we fill in gaps and introduce

connections,  and  in  doing  so  are  often  guilty  of  gross

misunderstandings. But this activity, which might be described as a

rationalizing one and which at best provides the dream with a smooth

façade that cannot fit its true content, may also be omitted or only be

expressed to a very modest degree - in which case the dream will

display all its rents and cracks openly. It must not be forgotten, on the

other hand, that the dream-work does not always operate with equal

energy either; it often restricts itself to certain portions of the dream-

thoughts only and others of them are allowed to appear in the dream

unaltered. In such cases an impression is given of the dream having

carried out the most delicate and complex intellectual operations, of its

having  speculated,  made  jokes,  arrived  at  decisions  and  solved

problems, whereas all this is a product of our normal mental activity,

may  have  been  performed  equally  well  during  the  day  before  the

dream as during the night, has nothing to do with the dream-work and

brings  nothing  to  light  that  is  characteristic  of  dreams.  Nor  is  it

superfluous  to  insist  once  more  on  the  contrast  within  the  dream-

thoughts themselves between the unconscious instinctual impulse and

the day’s residues. While the latter exhibit all the multiplicity of our

mental acts, the former, which becomes the motive force proper of theforming of the dream, finds its outlet invariably in the fulfilment of a

wish.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

 4635

 

 

   I could have told you all this fifteen years ago, and indeed I believe I

did in fact tell it you then. And now let me bring together such changes

and new discoveries as may have been made during the interval. I

have said already that I am afraid you will find that it amounts to very

little, and you will fail to understand why I obliged you to listen to the

same thing twice over, and obliged myself to say it. But fifteen years

have passed meanwhile and I hope that this will be my easiest way of

re-establishing  contact  with  you.  Moreover,  these  are  such

fundamental  things,  of  such  decisive  importance  for  understanding

psycho-analysis, that one may be glad to hear them a second time,

and it is in itself worth knowing that they have remained so much the

same for fifteen years.

   In the literature of this period you will of course find a large quantity

of  confirmatory  material  and  of  presentation  of  details,  of  which  I

intend only to give you samples. I shall also, incidentally, be able to

tell you a few things that were in fact already known earlier. What is in

question is principally the symbolism in dreams and the other methods

of representation in them. Now listen to this. Only quite a short while

ago  the  medical  faculty  in  an  American  University  refused  to  allow

psycho-analysis the status of a science, on the ground that it did not

admit of any experimental proof. They might have raised the same

objection  to  astronomy;  indeed,  experimentation  with  the  heavenly

bodies  is  particularly  difficult.  There  one  has  to  fall  back  on

observation. Nevertheless, some Viennese investigators have actually

made  a  beginning  with  experimental  confirmation  of  our  dream

symbolism.  As  long  ago  as  in  1912  a  Dr.  Schrötter  found  that  if

instructions to dream of sexual matters are given to deeply hypnotized

subjects, then in the dream that is thus provoked the sexual material

emerges with its place taken by the symbols that are familiar to us.For instance, a woman was told to dream of sexual intercourse with a

female friend. In her dream this friend appeared with a travelling-bag

on  which  was  pasted  the  label  ‘Ladies  Only’.  Still  more  impressive

experiments  were  carried  out  by  Betlheim  and  Hartmann  in  1924.

They  worked  with  patients  suffering  from  what  is  known  as  the

Korsakoff confusional psychosis. They told these patients stories of a

grossly  sexual  kind  and  observed  the  distortions  which  appeared

when the patients were instructed to reproduce what they had been

told. Once more there emerged the symbols for sexual organs and

sexual intercourse that are familiar to us - among them the symbol of

the  staircase  which,  as  the  writers  justly  remark,  could  never  have

been reached by a conscious wish to distort.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4636

 

   In a very interesting series of experiments, Herbert Silberer has

shown that one can catch the dream-work red-handed, as it were, in

the act of turning abstract thoughts into visual pictures. If he tried to

force himself to do intellectual work while he was in a state of fatigue

and drowsiness, the thought would often vanish and be replaced by a

vision, which was obviously a substitute for it.

   Here is a simple example. ‘I thought’, says Silberer, ‘of having to

revise  an  uneven  passage  in  an  essay.’  The  vision:  ‘I  saw  myself

planing a piece of wood.’ It often happened during these experiments

that the content of the vision was not the thought that was being dealt

with but his own subjective state while he was making the effort - the

state  instead  of  the  object.  This  is  described  by  Silberer  as  a

‘functional phenomenon’. An example will show you at once what is

meant. The author was endeavouring to compare the opinions of two

philosophers on a particular question. But in his sleepy condition one

of these opinions kept on escaping him and finally he had a vision that

he was asking for information from a disobliging secretary who was

bent over his writing-table and who began by disregarding him and

then gave him a disagreeable and uncomplying look. The conditions

under which the experiments were made probably themselves explainwhy the vision that was induced represented so often an event of self-

observation.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4637

 

   We have not yet finished with symbols. There are some which we

believed we recognized but which nevertheless worried us because

we could not explain how this particular symbol had come to have that

particular meaning. In such cases confirmations from elsewhere - from

philology, folklore, mythology or ritual - were bound to be especially

welcome.  An  instance  of  this  sort  is  the  symbol  of  an  overcoat  or

cloak. We have said that in a woman’s dreams this stands for a man. I

hope it will impress you when you hear that Theodor Reik (1920) gives

us this information: ‘During the extremely ancient bridal ceremonial of

the Bedouins, the bridegroom covers the bride with a special cloak

known as "Aba" and speaks the following ritual words: "Henceforth

none save I shall cover thee!" (Quoted from Robert Eisler). We have

also found several fresh symbols, at least two of which I will tell you of.

According to Abraham (1922) a spider in dreams is a symbol of the

mother, but of the phallic mother, of whom we are afraid; so that the

fear  of  spiders  expresses  dread  of  mother-incest  and  horror  of  the

female genitals. You know, perhaps, that the mythological creation,

Medusa’s  head,  can  be  traced  back  to  the  same motif  of  fright  at

castration. The other symbol I want to talk to you about is that of the

bridge, which has been explained by Ferenczi (1921 and 1922). First it

means  the  male  organ,  which  unites  the  two  parents  in  sexual

intercourse;  but  afterwards  it  develops  further  meanings  which  are

derived from this first one. In so far as it is thanks to the male organ

that we are able to come into the world at all, out of the amniotic fluid,

a bridge becomes the crossing from the other world (the unborn state,

the womb) to this world (life); and, since men also picture death as a

return to the womb (to the water), a bridge also acquires the meaning

of something that leads to death, and finally, at a further remove from

its  original  sense,  it  stands  for  transitions  or  changes  in  condition

generally.  It  tallies  with  this,  accordingly,  if  a  woman  who  has  notovercome her wish to be a man has frequent dreams of bridges that

are too short to reach the further shore.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4638

 

   In the manifest content of dreams we very often find pictures and

situations recalling familiar themes in fairy tales, legends and myths.

The interpretation of such dreams thus throws a light on the original

interests which created these themes, though we must at the same

time  not  forget,  of  course,  the  change  in  meaning  by  which  this

material  has  been  affected  in  the  course  of  time.  Our  work  of

interpretation uncovers, so to say, the raw material, which must often

enough be described as sexual in the widest sense, but has found the

most varied application in later adaptations. Derivations of this kind

are apt to bring down on us the wrath of all non-analytically schooled

workers, as though we were seeking to deny or undervalue everything

that  was  later  erected  on  the  original  basis.  Nevertheless,  such

discoveries are instructive and interesting. The same is true of tracing

back  the  origin  of  particular  themes  in  plastic  art,  as,  for  instance,

when M. J. Eisler (1919), following indications in his patients’ dreams,

gave an analytic interpretation of the youth playing with a little boy

represented  in  the  Hermes  of  Praxiteles.  And  lastly  I  cannot  resist

pointing out how often light is thrown by the interpretation of dreams

on mythological themes in particular. Thus, for instance, the legend of

the Labyrinth can be recognized as a representation of anal birth: the

twisting paths are the bowels and Ariadne’s thread is the umbilical

cord.

      The  methods  of  representation  employed  by  the  dream-work  -

fascinating material, scarcely capable of exhaustion - have been made

more and more familiar to us by closer study. I will give you a few

examples of them. Thus, for instance, dreams represent the relation of

frequency by a multiplication of similar things. Here is a young girl’s

remarkable dream. She dreamt she came into a great hall and found

some one in it sitting on a chair; this was repeated six or eight times or

more, but each time it was her father. This is easy to understand whenwe  discover,  from  accessory  details  in  the  interpretation,  that  this

room stood for the womb. The dream then becomes equivalent to the

phantasy, familiarly found in girls, of having met their rather already

during  their  intra-uterine  life  when  he  visited  the  womb  while  their

mother was pregnant. You should not be confused by the fact that

something is reversed in the dream - that her father’s ‘coming-in’ is

displaced on to herself; incidentally, this has a special meaning of its

own  as  well.  The  multiplication  of  the  figure  of  the  father  can  only

express the fact that the event in question occurred repeatedly. After

all, it must be allowed that the dream is not taking very much on itself

in expressing frequency by multiplicity. It has only needed to go back

to the original significance of the former word; to-day it means to us a

repetition in time, but it is derived from an accumulation in space. In

general,  indeed,  where  it  is  possible,  the  dream-work  changes

temporal relations into spatial ones and represents them as such. In a

dream, for instance, one may see a scene between two people who

look very small and a long way off, as though one were seeing them

through  the  wrong  end  of  a  pair  of  opera-glasses.  Here,  both  the

smallness and the remoteness in space have the same significance:

what is meant is remoteness in time and we are to understand that the

scene is from the remote past.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4639

 

   Again, you may remember that in my earlier lectures I already told

you (and illustrated the fact by examples) that we had learnt to make

use for our interpretations even of the purely formal features of the

manifest dream - that is, to transform them into material coming from

the latent dream-thoughts. As you already know, all dreams that are

dreamt  in  a  single  night  belong  in  a  single  context.  But  it  is  not  a

matter of indifference whether these dreams appear to the dreamer as

a continuum or whether he divides them into several parts and into

how many. The number of such parts often corresponds to an equal

number of separate focal points in the structural formation of the latent

dream-thoughts or to contending trends in the dreamer’s mental life,each  of  which  finds  a  dominant,  even  though  never  an  exclusive,

expression in one particular part of the dream. A short introductory

dream and a longer main dream following it often stand in the relation

of protasis and apodosis, of which a very clear instance will be found

in the old lectures. A dream which is described by the dreamer as

‘somehow interpolated’ will actually correspond to a dependent clause

in the dream-thoughts. Franz Alexander (1925) has shown in a study

on pairs of dreams that it not infrequently happens that two dreams in

one night share the carrying-out of the dream’s task by producing a

wish-fulfilment in two stages if they are taken together, though each

dream separately would not effect that result. Suppose, for instance,

that the dream-wish had as its content some illicit action in regard to a

particular  person.  Then  in  the  first  dream  the  person  will  appear

undisguised, but the action will be only timidly hinted at. The second

dream  will  behave  differently.  The  action  will  be  named  without

disguise,  but  the  person  will  either  be  made  unrecognizable  or

replaced by someone indifferent. This, you will admit, gives one an

impression of actual cunning. Another and similar relation between the

two members of a pair of dreams is found where one represents a

punishment and the other the sinful wish-fulfilment. It amounts to this:

‘if one accepts the punishment for it, one can go on to allow oneself

the forbidden thing.’

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4640

 

 

   I cannot detain you any longer over such minor discoveries or over

the discussions relating to the employment of dream-interpretation in

the  work  of  analysis.  I  feel  sure  you  are  impatient  to  hear  what

changes have been made in our fundamental views on the nature and

significance of dreams. I have already warned you that precisely on

this there is little to report to you. The most disputed point in the whole

theory was no doubt the assertion that all dreams are the fulfilments of

wishes.  The  inevitable  and  ever  recurring  objection  raised  by  the

layman that there are nevertheless so many anxiety-dreams was, Ithink I may say, completely disposed of in my earlier lectures. With the

division into wishful dreams, anxiety-dreams and punishment dreams,

we have kept our theory intact.

   Punishment-dreams, too, are fulfilments of wishes, though not of

wishes of the instinctual impulses but of those of the critical, censoring

and  punishing  agency  in  the  mind.  If  we  have  a  pure  punishment-

dream before us, an easy mental operation will enable us to restore

the  wishful  dream  to  which  the  punishment-dream  was  the  correct

rejoinder and which, owing to this repudiation, was replaced as the

manifest dream. As you know, Ladies and Gentlemen, the study of

dreams was what first helped us to understand the neuroses, and you

will find it natural that our knowledge of the neuroses was later able to

influence our view of dreams. As you will hear, we have been obliged

to  postulate  the  existence  in  the  mind  of  a  special  critical  and

prohibiting  agency  which  we  have  named  the  ‘super-ego’.  Since

recognizing that the censorship of dreams is also a function of this

agency, we have been led to examine the part played by the super-

ego in the construction of dreams more carefully.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4641

 

   Only two serious difficulties have arisen against the wish-fulfilment

theory of dreams. A discussion of them leads far afield and has not

yet, indeed, brought us to any wholly satisfying conclusion.

   The first of these difficulties is presented in the fact that people who

have  experienced  a  shock,  a  severe  psychical  trauma  -  such  as

happened so often during the war and such as affords the basis for

traumatic hysteria - are regularly taken back in their dreams into the

traumatic situation. According to our hypotheses about the function of

dreams this should not occur. What wishful impulse could be satisfied

by harking back in this way to this exceedingly distressing traumatic

experience? It is hard to guess.

   We meet with the second of these facts almost every day in the

course of our analytic work; and it does not imply such an important

objection as the other does. One of the tasks of psycho-analysis, asyou know, is to lift the veil of amnesia which hides the earliest years of

childhood  and  to  bring  to  conscious  memory  the  manifestations  of

early infantile sexual life which are contained in them. Now these first

sexual  experiences  of  a  child  are  linked  to  painful  impressions  of

anxiety,  prohibition,  disappointment  and  punishment.  We  can

understand their having been repressed; but, that being so, we cannot

understand how it is that they have such free access to dream-life,

that they provide the pattern for so many dream-phantasies and that

dreams are filled with reproductions of these scenes from childhood

and  with  allusions  to  them.  It  must  be  admitted  that  their

unpleasurable character and the dream-work’s wish-fulfilling purpose

seem far from mutually compatible. But it may be that in this case we

are magnifying the difficulty. After all, these same infantile experiences

have  attached  to  them  all  the  imperishable,  unfulfilled  instinctual

wishes which throughout life provide the energy for the construction of

dreams, and to which we may no doubt credit the possibility, in their

mighty  uprush,  of  forcing  to  the  surface,  along  with  the  rest,  the

material of distressing events. And on the other hand the manner and

form  in  which  this  material  is  reproduced  shows  unmistakably  the

efforts  of  the  dream-work  directed  to  denying  the  unpleasure  by

means  of  distortion  and  to  transforming  disappointment  into

attainment.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4642

 

   With the traumatic neuroses things are different. In their case the

dreams regularly end in the generation of anxiety. We should not, I

think, be afraid to admit that here the function of the dream has failed.

I  will  not  invoke  the  saying  that  the  exception  proves  the  rule:  its

wisdom seems to me most questionable. But no doubt the exception

does not overturn the rule. If, for the sake of studying it, we isolate one

particular  psychical  function,  such  as  dreaming,  from  the  psychical

machinery as a whole, we make it possible to discover the laws that

are peculiar to it; but when we insert it once more into the general

context  we  must  be  prepared  to  discover  that  these  findings  areobscured  or  impaired  by  collision  with  other  forces.  We  say  that  a

dream is the fulfilment of a wish; but if you want to take these latter

objections into account, you can say nevertheless that a dream is an

attempt  at  the  fulfilment  of  a  wish.  No  one  who  can  properly

appreciate the dynamics of the mind will suppose that you have said

anything different by this. In certain circumstances a dream is only

able to put its intention into effect very incompletely, or must abandon

it  entirely.  Unconscious  fixation  to  a  trauma  seems  to  be  foremost

among these obstacles to the function of dreaming. While the sleeper

is  obliged  to  dream,  because  the  relaxation  of  repression  at  night

allows the upward pressure of the traumatic fixation to become active,

there is a failure in the functioning of his dream-work, which would like

to  transform  the  memory-traces  of  the  traumatic  event  into  the

fulfilment  of  a  wish.  In  these  circumstances  it  will  happen  that  one

cannot sleep, that one gives up sleep from dread of the failure of the

function  of  dreaming.  Traumatic  neuroses  are  here  offering  us  an

extreme case; but we must admit that childhood experiences, too, are

of a traumatic nature, and we need not be surprised if comparatively

trivial interferences with the function of dreams may arise under other

conditions as well.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4643

 

                                    LECTURE XXX

 

                          DREAMS AND OCCULTISM

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - To-day we will proceed along a narrow path,

but one which may lead us to a wide prospect.

   You will scarcely be surprised by the news that I am going to speak

to you on the relation of dreams to occultism. Dreams have, indeed,

often been regarded as the gateway into the world of mysticism, and

even to-day are themselves looked on by many people as an occult

phenomenon.  Even  we,  who  have  made  them  into  a  subject  for

scientific study, do not dispute that one or more threads link them tothose obscure matters. Mysticism, occultism - what is meant by these

words? You must not expect me to make any attempt at embracing

this ill-circumscribed region with definitions. We all know in a general

and indefinite manner what the words imply to us. They refer to some

sort  of  ‘other  world’,  lying  beyond  the  bright  world  governed  by

relentless laws which has been constructed for us by science.

   Occultism asserts that there are in fact ‘more things in heaven and

earth than are dreamt of in our philosophy’. Well, we need not feel

bound  by  the  narrow-mindedness  of  academic  philosophy;  we  are

ready to believe what is shown to us to deserve belief.

   We propose to proceed with these things as we do with any other

scientific  material:  first  of  all  to  establish  whether  such  events  can

really be shown to occur, and then and only then, when their factual

nature cannot be doubted, to concern ourselves with their explanation.

It cannot be denied, however, that even the putting of this decision

into  action  is  made  hard  for  us  by  intellectual,  psychological  and

historical  factors.  The  case  is  not  the  same  as  when  we  approach

other investigations.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4644

 

   First, the intellectual difficulty. Let me give you a crude and obvious

explanation of what I have in mind. Let us suppose that the question

at issue is the constitution of the interior of the earth. We have, as you

are aware, no certain knowledge about it. We suspect that it consists

of heavy metals in an incandescent state. Then let us imagine that

someone  puts  forward  an  assertion  that  the  interior  of  the  earth

consists of water saturated with carbonic acid - that is to say, with a

kind  of  soda-water.  We  shall  no  doubt  say  that  this  is  most

improbable,  that  it  contradicts  all  our  expectations  and  pays  no

attention  to  the  known  facts  which  have  led  us  to  adopt  the  metal

hypothesis. Nevertheless it is not inconceivable; if someone were to

show us a way of testing the soda-water hypothesis we should follow

it without objecting. But suppose now that someone else comes along

and seriously asserts that the core of the earth consists of jam. Ourreaction to this will be quite different. We shall tell ourselves that jam

does not occur in nature, that it is a product of human cooking, that,

moreover, the existence of this material presupposes the presence of

fruit-trees and their fruit, and that we cannot see how we can locate

vegetation and human cookery in the interior of the earth. The result of

these intellectual objections will be a switching of our interest: instead

of starting upon an investigation of whether the core of the earth really

consists of jam, we shall ask ourselves what sort of person this must

be who can arrive at such a notion, or at most we shall ask him where

he  got  it  from.  The  unlucky  inventor  of  the  jam  theory  will  be  very

much  insulted  and  will  complain  that  we  are  refusing  to  make  an

objective investigation of his assertion on the ground of a pretendedly

scientific prejudice. But this will be of no help to him. We perceive that

prejudices  are  not  always  to  be  reprobated,  but  that  they  are

sometimes  justified  and  expedient  because  they  save  us  useless

labour. In fact they are only conclusions based on an analogy with

other well-founded judgements.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4645

 

   A whole number of occultist assertions have the same sort of effect

on us as the jam hypothesis; so that we consider ourselves justified in

rejecting them at sight, without further investigation. But all the same,

the position is not so simple. A comparison like the one I have chosen

proves  nothing,  or  proves  as  little  as  comparisons  in  general.  It

remains doubtful whether it fits the case, and it is clear that its choice

was  already  determined  by  our  attitude  of  contemptuous  rejection.

Prejudices are sometimes expedient and justified; but sometimes they

are erroneous and detrimental, and one can never tell when they are

the one and when the other. The history of science itself abounds in

instances which are a warning against premature condemnation. For a

long time it was regarded as a senseless hypothesis to suppose that

the  stones,  which  we  now  call  meteorites,  could  have  reached  the

earth from outer space or that the rocks forming mountains, in which

the remains of shells are imbedded, could have once formed the bedof the sea. Incidentally, much the same thing happened to our psycho-

analysis  when  it  brought  forward  its  inference  of  there  being  an

unconscious. Thus we analysts have special reason to be careful in

using  intellectual  considerations  for  rejecting  new  hypotheses  and

must admit that they do not relieve us from feelings of antipathy, doubt

and uncertainty.

   I have spoken of the second factor as the psychological one. By that

I mean the general tendency of mankind to credulity and a belief in the

miraculous. From the very beginning, when life takes us under its strict

discipline, a resistance stirs within us against the relentlessness and

monotony of the laws of thought and against the demands of reality-

testing. Reason becomes the enemy which withholds from us so many

possibilities of pleasure. We discover how much pleasure it gives us to

withdraw  from  it,  temporarily  at  least,  and  to  surrender  to  the

allurements of nonsense. Schoolboys delight in the twisting of words;

when a scientific congress is over, the specialists make fun of their

own activities; even earnest-minded men enjoy a joke. More serious

hostility to ‘Reason and Science, the highest strength possessed by

man’, awaits its opportunity; it hastens to prefer the miracle-doctor or

the  practitioner  of  nature-cures  to  the  ‘qualified’  physician;  it  is

favourable  to  the  assertions  of  occultism  so  long  as  those  alleged

facts can be taken as breaches of laws and rules; it lulls criticism to

sleep,  falsifies  perceptions  and  enforces  confirmations  and

agreements which cannot be justified. If this human tendency is taken

into account, there is every reason to discount much of the information

put forward in occultist literature.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4646

 

   I have called the third doubt the historical one; and by it I mean to

point out that there is in fact nothing new in the world of occultism.

There emerge in it once more all the signs, miracles, prophecies and

apparitions which have been reported to us from ancient times and in

ancient books and which we thought had long since been disposed of

as the offspring of unbridled imagination or of tendentious fraud, asthe product of an age in which man’s ignorance was very great and

the scientific spirit was still in its cradle. If we accept the truth of what,

according to the occultists’ information, still occurs to-day, we must

also believe in the authenticity of the reports which have come down

to us from ancient times. And we must then reflect that the tradition

and sacred books of all peoples are brimful of similar marvellous tales

and that the religions base their claim to credibility on precisely such

miraculous  events  and  find  proof  in  them  of  the  operation  of

superhuman powers. That being so, it will be hard for us to avoid a

suspicion that the interest in occultism is in fact a religious one and

that one of the secret motives of the occultist movement is to come to

the help of religion, threatened as it is by the advance of scientific

thought.  And  with  the  discovery  of  this  motive  our  distrust  must

increase and our disinclination to embark on the examination of these

supposedly occult phenomena.

   Sooner or later, however, this disinclination must be overcome. We

are faced by a question of fact: is what the occultists tell us true or

not? It must, after all, be possible to decide this by observation. At

bottom we have cause for gratitude to the occultists. The miraculous

stories from ancient times are beyond the reach of our testing. If in our

opinion they cannot be substantiated, we must admit that they cannot,

strictly speaking, be disproved. But about contemporary happenings,

at which we are able to be present, it must be possible for us to reach

a definite judgement. If we arrive at a conviction that such miracles do

not  occur  to-day,  we  need  not  fear  the  counter-argument  that  they

may nevertheless have taken place in ancient times: in that case other

explanations will be much more plausible. Thus we have settled our

doubts  and  are  ready  to  take  part  in  an  investigation  of  occult

phenomena.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4647

 

      But  here  unluckily  we  are  met  by  circumstances  which  are

exceedingly unfavourable to our honest intentions. The observations

on  which  our  judgement  is  supposed  to  depend  take  place  underconditions which make our sensory perceptions uncertain and which

blunt our power of attention; they occur in darkness or in dimmed light

after long periods of blank expectation. We are told that in fact our

unbelieving - that is to say, critical - attitude may prevent the expected

phenomena  from  happening.  The  situation  thus  brought  about  is

nothing less than a caricature of the circumstances in which we are

usually accustomed to carry out scientific enquiries. The observations

are  made  upon  what  are  called  ‘mediums’  -  individuals  to  whom

peculiarly ‘sensitive’ faculties are ascribed, but who are by no means

distinguished by outstanding qualities of intellect or character and who

are not, like the miracle-workers of the past, inspired by any great idea

or serious purpose. On the contrary, they are looked upon, even by

those who believe in their secret powers, as particularly untrustworthy;

most  of  them  have  already  been  detected  as  cheats  and  we  may

reasonably  expect  that  the  same  fate  awaits  the  remainder.  Their

performances  give  one  the  impression  of  children’s  mischievous

pranks or of conjuring tricks. Never has anything of importance yet

emerged from séances with these mediums - the revelation of a new

source of power, for instance. We do not, it is true, expect to receive

hints on pigeon-breeding from the conjurer who produces pigeons by

magic from his empty top-hat. I can easily put myself in the place of a

person who tries to fulfil the demands of an objective attitude and so

takes part in occult séances, but who grows tired after a while and

turns away in disgust from what is expected of him and goes back

unenlightened to his former prejudices. The reproach may be made

against such a person that this is not the right way of behaving: that

one ought not to lay down in advance what the phenomena one is

seeking to study shall be like and in what circumstances they shall

appear. One should, on the contrary, persevere, and give weight to

the  precautionary  and  supervisory  measures  by  which  efforts  have

recently  been  made  to  provide  against  the  untrustworthiness  of

mediums. Unfortunately this modern protective technique makes an

end  of  the  easy  accessibility  of  occult  observations.  The  study  of

occultism becomes a specialized and difficult profession - an activity

one cannot pursue alongside of one’s other interests. And until those

concerned in these investigations have reached their conclusions, we

are left to our doubts and our own conjectures. 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4648

 

   Of these conjectures no doubt the most probable is that there is a

real core of yet unrecognized facts in occultism round which cheating

and phantasy have spun a veil which it is hard to pierce. But how can

we  even  approach  this  core?  at  what  point  can  we  attack  the

problem? It is here, I think, that dreams come to our help, by giving us

a  hint  that  from  out  of  this  chaos  we  should  pick  the  subject  of

telepathy.

 

   What we call ‘telepathy’ is, as you know, the alleged fact that an

event  which  occurs  at  a  particular  time  comes  at  about  the  same

moment to the consciousness of someone distant in space, without

the  paths  of  communication  that  are  familiar  to  us  coming  into

question. It is implicitly presupposed that this event concerns a person

in whom the other one (the receiver of the intelligence) has a strong

emotional interest. For instance, Person A may be the victim of an

accident or may die, and Person B, someone nearly attached to him -

his mother or daughter or fiancée - learns the fact at about the same

time through a visual or auditory perception. In this latter case, then, it

is as if she had been informed by telephone, though such was not the

case;  it  is  a  kind  of  psychical  counterpart  to  wireless  telegraphy.  I

need not insist to you on the improbability of such events, and there is

good reason for dismissing the majority of such reports. A few are left

over which cannot be so easily disposed of in this way. Permit me

now, for the purpose of what I have to tell you, to omit the cautious

little  word  ‘alleged’  and  to  proceed  as  though  I  believed  in  the

objective reality of the phenomenon of telepathy. But bear firmly in

mind that that is not the case and that I have committed myself to no

conviction.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4649

    Actually I have little to tell you - only a modest fact. I will also at once

reduce your expectations still further by saying that at bottom dreams

have little to do with telepathy. Telepathy does not throw any fresh

light on the nature of dreams nor do dreams give any direct evidence

of the reality of telepathy. Moreover the phenomenon of telepathy is

by no means bound up with dreams; it can occur as well during the

waking  state.  The  only  reason  for  discussing  the  relation  between

dreams  and  telepathy  is  that  the  state  of  sleep  seems  particularly

suited for receiving telepathic messages. In such cases one has what

is called a telepathic dream and, when it is analysed, one forms a

conviction that the telepathic news has played the same part as any

other portion of the day’s residues and that it has been changed in the

same way by the dream-work and made to serve its purpose.

      During  the  analysis  of  one  such  telepathic  dream,  something

occurred which seems to me of sufficient interest in spite of its triviality

to serve as the starting-point of this lecture. When in 1922 I gave my

first  account  of  this  matter  I  had  only  a  single  observation  at  my

disposal. Since then I have made a number of similar ones, but I will

keep to the first example, because it is easiest to describe, and I will

take you straight away in medias res.

 

   An obviously intelligent man, who from his own account was not in

the least ‘inclined towards occultism’, wrote to me about a dream he

had had which seemed to him remarkable. He began by informing me

that  his  married  daughter,  who  lived  at  a  distance  from  him,  was

expecting  her  first  confinement  in  the  middle  of  December.  This

daughter meant a great deal to him and he knew too that she was

very much attached to him. During the night of November 16-17, then,

he dreamt that his wife had given birth to twins. A number of details

followed, which I may here pass over, and all of which were never in

fact explained. The wife who in the dream had become the mother of

twins was his second wife, his daughter’s stepmother. He did not wish

to have a child by his present wife who, he said, had no aptitude for

bringing up children sensibly; moreover, at the time of the dream he

had long ceased to have sexual relations with her. What led him to

write to me was not doubt about the theory of dreams, though the

manifest content of his dream would have justified it, for why did thedream, in complete contradiction to his wishes, make his wife give

birth to children? Nor, according to him, was there any reason to fear

that this unwished-for event might occur. What induced him to report

this  dream  to  me  was  the  circumstance  that  on  the  morning  of

November 18 he received a telegram announcing that his daughter

had given birth to twins. The telegram had been handed in the day

before and the birth had taken place during the night of November 16-

17, at about the same time at which he had had the dream of his

wife’s  twin  birth.  The  dreamer  asked  me  whether  I  thought  the

coincidence  between  dream  and  event  was  accidental.  He  did  not

venture  to  call  the  dream  a  telepathic  one,  since  the  difference

between its content and the event affected precisely what seemed to

him essential in it - the identity of the person who gave birth to the

children. But one of his comments shows that he would not have been

astonished at an actual telepathic dream: he believed his daughter

would have thought particularly of him during her labour.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4650

 

      I  feel  sure,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  that  you  have  been  able  to

explain this dream already and understand too why I have told it you.

Here was a man who was dissatisfied with his second wife and who

would prefer his wife to be like the daughter of his first marriage. This

‘like’  dropped  out,  of  course,  so  far  as  the  unconscious  was

concerned. And now the telepathic message arrived during the night

to say that his daughter had given birth to twins. The dream-work took

control of the news, allowed the unconscious wish to operate on it -

the wish that he could put his daughter in the place of his second wife

- and thus arose the puzzling manifest dream, which disguised the

wish and distorted the message. We must admit that it is only the

interpretation of the dream that has shown us that it was a telepathic

one: psycho-analysis has revealed a telepathic event which we should

not otherwise have discovered.

   But pray do not let yourselves be misled! In spite of all this, dream-

interpretation  has  told  us  nothing  about  the  objective  reality  of  thetelepathic event. It may equally be an illusion which can be explained

in another way. The man’s latent dream-thoughts may have run: ‘To-

day is the day the confinement should take place if my daughter is

really out in her reckoning by a month, as I suspect. And when I saw

her last she looked just as though she was going to have twins. How

my dead wife who has so fond of children would have rejoiced over

twins!’ (I base this last factor on some associations of the dreamer’s

which I have not mentioned.) In that case the instigation to the dream

would have been well-grounded suspicions on the dreamer’s part and

not a telepathic message; but the outcome would remain the same.

You see then that even the interpretation of this dream has told us

nothing on the question of whether we are to allow objective reality to

telepathy.  That  could  only  be  decided  by  a  thorough-going

investigation  of  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case  -  which  was

unfortunately  no  more  possible  in  this  instance  than  in  any  of  the

others in my experience. Granted that the telepathy hypothesis offers

by far the simplest explanation, yet that does not help us much. The

simplest explanation is not always the correct one; the truth is often no

simple matter, and before deciding in favour of such a far-reaching

hypothesis we should like to have taken every precaution.

 

   We may now leave the subject of dreams and telepathy: I have

nothing more to say to you on it. But kindly observe that what seemed

to us to teach us something about telepathy was not the dream but the

interpretation  of  the  dream,  its  psycho-analytic  working-over.

Accordingly, in what follows we may leave dreams entirely on one side

and  may  follow  an  expectation  that  the  employment  of  psycho-

analysis may throw a little light on other events described as occult.

There is, for instance, the phenomenon of thought-transference, which

is  so  close  to  telepathy  and  can  indeed  without  much  violence  be

regarded as the same thing. It claims that mental processes in one

person  -  ideas,  emotional  states,  conative  impulses  -  can  be

transferred to another person through empty space without employing

the familiar methods of communication by means of words and signs.

You  will  realize  how  remarkable,  and  perhaps  even  of  what  great

practical  importance,  it  would  be  if  something  of  the  kind  really

happened.  It  may  be  noted,  incidentally,  that  strangely  enoughprecisely  this  phenomenon  is  referred  to  least  frequently  in  the

miraculous stories of the past.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4651

 

   I have formed an impression in the course of the psycho-analytic

treatment of patients that the activities of professional fortune-tellers

conceal  an  opportunity  for  making  particularly  unobjectionable

observations  on  thought-transference.  These  are  insignificant  and

even  inferior  people,  who  immerse  themselves  in  some  sort  of

performance - lay out cards, study writing or lines upon the palm of the

hand, or make astrological calculations - and at the same time, after

having shown themselves familiar with portions of their visitor’s past or

present circumstances, go on to prophesy their future. As a rule their

clients exhibit great satisfaction over these achievements and feel no

resentment if later on these prophecies are not fulfilled. I have come

across  several  such  cases  and  have  been  able  to  study  them

analytically, and in a moment I will tell you the most remarkable of

these instances. Their convincingness is unfortunately impaired by the

numerous  reticences  to  which  I  am  compelled  by  the  obligation  of

medical  discretion.  I  have,  however,  of  set  purpose  avoided

distortions. So listen now to the story of one of my women patients,

who had an experience of this kind with a fortune-teller.

 

   She had been the eldest of a numerous family and had grown up

with an extremely strong attachment to her father. She had married

young  and  had  found  entire  satisfaction  in  her  marriage.  Only  one

thing was wanting to her happiness: she had remained childless, so

she could not bring her beloved husband completely into the place of

her father. When, after long years of disappointment, she decided to

undergo a gynaecological operation, her husband revealed to her that

the  blame  was  his:  an  illness  before  their  marriage  had  made  him

incapable of procreating children. She took the disappointment badly,

became neurotic and clearly suffered from fears of being tempted. To

cheer her up, he took her with him on a business trip to Paris. Theywere sitting there one day in the hall of their hotel when she noticed a

stir among the hotel servants. She asked what was going on and was

told  that  Monsieur  le  Professeur  had  arrived  and  was  giving

consultations in a little room over there. She expressed a wish to have

a try. Her husband rejected the idea, but while he was not watching

she slipped into the consulting-room and faced the fortune-teller. She

was 27 years old, but looked much younger and had taken off her

wedding-ring. Monsieur le Professeur made her lay her hand on a tray

filled with ashes and carefully studied the imprint; he then told her all

kinds of things about hard struggles that lay before her, and ended

with the comforting assurance that all the same she would still get

married and would have two children by the time she was 32. When

she told me this story she was 43 years old, seriously ill and without

any prospect of ever having a child. Thus the prophecy had not come

true;  yet  she  spoke  of  it  without  any  sort  of  bitterness  but  with  an

unmistakable expression of satisfaction, as though she were recalling

a cheerful event. It was easy to establish that she had not the slightest

notion  of  what  the  two  numbers  in  the  prophecy  might  mean  or

whether they meant anything at all.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4652

 

   You will say that this is a stupid and incomprehensible story and ask

why I have told it you. I should be entirely of your opinion if - and this

is the salient point - analysis had not made it possible to arrive at an

interpretation of the prophecy which is convincing precisely from the

explanation it affords of the details. For the two numbers find their

place in the life of my patient’s mother. She had married late - not till

she was over thirty, and in the family they had often dwelt on the fact

of the success with which she had hastened to make up for lost time.

Her two first children (with our patient the elder) had been born with

the shortest possible interval between them, in a single calendar year;

and  she  had  in  fact  two  children  by  the  time  she  was  32.  What

Monsieur le Professeur had said to my patient meant therefore: ‘Take

comfort from the fact of being so young. You’ll have the same destinyas your mother, who also had to wait a long time for children, and

you’ll have two children by the time you’re 32.’ But to have the same

destiny as her mother, to put herself in her mother’s place, to take her

place with her father - that had been the strongest wish of her youth,

the wish on account of whose non-fulfilment she was just beginning to

fall ill. The prophecy promised her that the wish would still be fulfilled

in spite of everything; how could she fail to feel friendly to the prophet?

Do you regard it as possible, however, that Monsieur le Professeur

was familiar with the facts of the intimate family history of his chance

client? Out of the question! How, then, did he arrive at the knowledge

which enabled him to give expression to my patient’s strongest and

most secret wish by including the two numbers in his prophecy? I can

see only two possible explanations. Either the story as it was told me

is untrue and the events occurred otherwise, or thought-transference

exists as a real phenomenon. One can suppose, no doubt, that after

an interval of 16 years the patient had introduced the two numbers

concerned into her recollection from her unconscious. I have no basis

for this suspicion, but I cannot exclude it, and I imagine that you will be

readier  to  believe  in  a  way  out  of  that  kind  than  in  the  reality  of

thought-transference.  If  you  do  decide  on  the  latter  course,  do  not

forget that it was only analysis that created the occult fact - uncovered

it when it lay distorted to the point of being unrecognizable.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4653

 

 

   If it were a question of one case only like that of my patient, one

would shrug it aside. No one would dream of erecting upon a single

observation a belief which implies taking such a decisive line. But you

must believe me when I assure you that this is not the only case in my

experience. I have collected a whole number of such prophecies and

from  all  of  them  I  gained  the  impression  that  the  fortune-teller  had

merely brought to expression the thoughts, and more especially the

secret wishes, of those who were questioning him, and that we were

therefore justified in analysing these prophecies as though they weresubjective products, phantasies or dreams of the people concerned.

Not every case, of course, is equally convincing and in not every case

is it equally possible to exclude more rational explanations; but, taking

them  as  a  whole,  there  remains  a  strong  balance  of  probability  in

favour of thought-transference as a fact. The importance of the subject

would justify me in producing all my cases to you; but that I cannot do,

owing to the prolixity of description that would be involved and to the

inevitable breach of the obligations of discretion. I will try so far as

possible  to  appease  my  conscience  in  giving  you  a  few  more

examples.

 

   One day I was visited by a highly intelligent young man, a student

preparing for his final examinations for a doctorate, but unable to take

them since, as he complained, he had lost all interest and power of

concentration and even any faculty for orderly memory. The previous

history of this condition of quasi-paralysis was soon revealed: he had

fallen ill after carrying out a great act of self-discipline. He had a sister,

to  whom  he  was  attached  by  an  intense  but  always  restrained

devotion, just as she was to him. ‘What a pity we can’t get married!’

they would often say to each other. A respectable man fell in love with

the  sister;  she  responded  to  his  affection,  but  her  parents  did  not

assent to the union. In their difficulty the young couple turned to her

brother, nor did he refuse his help. He made it possible for them to

correspond with each other, and his influence eventually persuaded

the parents to consent. In the course of the engagement, however, an

occurrence took place whose meaning it was easy to guess. He went

with his future brother-in-law on a difficult mountain-climb without a

guide; they lost their way and were in danger of not returning safe and

sound. Shortly after his sister’s marriage he fell into this condition of

mental exhaustion.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4654

 

   The influence of psycho-analysis restored his ability to work and he

left me in order to go in for his examinations; but after he had passedthem successfully he came back to me for a short time in the autumn

of the same year. It was then that he related a remarkable experience

to me which he had had before the summer. In his University town

there  lived  a  fortune-teller  who  enjoyed  great  popularity.  Even  the

Princes  of  the  Royal  House  used  to  consult  her  before  important

undertakings. Her mode of operation was very simple. She asked to

be given the date of the relevant person’s birth; she required to know

nothing else about him, not even his name. She then proceeded to

consult  her  astrological  books,  made  long  calculations  and  finally

uttered  a  prophecy  relating  to  the  person  in  question.  My  patient

decided to call upon her mystical arts in connection with his brother-in-

law. He visited her and told her the relevant date. After carrying out

her calculations she made her prophecy: ‘The person in question will

die in July or August of this year of crayfish- or oyster-poisoning.’ My

patient finished his story with the words: ‘It was quite marvellous!’

   From the first I had listened with irritation. After this exclamation of

his I went so far as to ask: ‘What do you see that’s so marvellous in

this prophecy? Here we are in late autumn and your brother-in-law

isn’t dead or you’d have told me long ago. So the prophecy hasn’t

come  true.’  ‘No  doubt  that’s  so,’  he  replied,  ‘but  here  is  what’s

marvellous. My brother-in-law is passionately devoted to crayfish and

oysters and in the previous summer - that’s to say, before my visit to

the fortune-teller - he had an attack of oyster-poisoning of which he

nearly died.’ What was I to say to this? I could only feel annoyed that

this  highly-educated  man  (who  had  moreover  been  through  a

successful analysis) should not have a clearer view of the position. I

for my part, rather than believe that it is possible to calculate the onset

of an attack of crayfish- or oyster-poisoning from astrological tables,

prefer to suppose that my patient had not yet overcome his hatred for

his rival, the repression of which had earlier led to his falling ill, and

that  the  fortune-teller  was  simply  giving  expression  to  his  own

expectation: ‘a taste of that kind isn’t to be given up, and one day, all

the same, it will be the end of him.’ I must admit that I cannot think of

any other explanation for this case, unless, perhaps, that my patient

was having a joke with me. But neither then nor at a later time did he

give me grounds for such a suspicion, and he seemed to be meaning

what he said seriously. 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4655

 

 

   Here is another case. A young man in a position of consequence

was  involved  in  a liaison  with  a demi-mondaine  which  was

characterized by a curious compulsion. He was obliged from time to

time to provoke her with derisive and insulting remarks till she was

driven  to  complete  desperation.  When  he  had  brought  her  to  that

point, he was relieved, became reconciled with her and made her a

present. But now he wanted to be free of her: the compulsion seemed

to  him  uncanny.  He  noticed  that  this liaison  was  damaging  his

reputation; he wanted to have a wife of his own and to raise a family.

But since he could not get free from this demi-mondaine by his own

strength, he called analysis to his help. After one of these abusive

scenes, when the analysis had already started, he got her to write

something on a piece of paper, so as to show it to a graphologist. The

report  that  he  received  from  him  was  that  the  writing  was  that  of

someone in extreme despair, who would certainly commit suicide in

the next few days. This did not, it is true, occur and the lady remained

alive; but the analysis succeeded in loosening his bonds. He left the

lady and turned to a young girl who he expected would be able to

make  him  a  good  wife.  Soon  afterwards  a  dream  appeared  which

could  only  hint  at  a  dawning  doubt  as  to  the  girl’s  worthiness.  He

obtained a specimen of her writing too, took it to the same authority,

and  was  given  a  verdict  on  her  writing  which  confirmed  his

apprehensions. He therefore abandoned the idea of making her his

wife.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4656

 

   In order to form an opinion of the graphologist’s reports, especially

the first one, we must know something of our subject’s secret history.

In his early youth he had (in accordance with his passionate nature)fallen in love to the pitch of frenzy with a married woman who was still

young but nevertheless older than he was. When she rejected him, he

made  an  attempt  at  suicide  which,  there  can  be  no  doubt,  was

seriously intended. It was only by a hair’s breadth that he escaped

death and he was only restored after a long period of nursing. But this

wild  action  made  a  deep  impression  on  the  woman  he  loved;  she

granted  him  her  favours,  he  became  her  lover  and  thenceforward

remained  secretly  attached  to  her  and  served  her  with  a  truly

chivalrous devotion. More than twenty years later, when they had both

grown older - but the woman, naturally, more than he - the need was

awakened in him to detach himself from her, to make himself free, to

lead a life of his own, to set up a house and raise a family. And along

with  this  feeling  of  satiety  there  arose  in  him  his  long-suppressed

craving for vengeance on his mistress. As he had once tried to kill

himself because she had spurned him, so he wished now to have the

satisfaction of her seeking death because he left her. But his love was

still too strong for it to be possible for this wish to become conscious in

him; nor was he in a position to do her enough harm to drive her into

death. In this frame of mind he took on the demi-mondaine as a sort of

whipping-boy, to satisfy his thirst for revenge in corpore vili; and he

allowed himself to practise upon her all the torments which he might

expect would bring about with her the result he wished to produce on

his mistress. The fact that the vengeance applied to the latter was

betrayed by his making her into a confidante and adviser in his liaison

instead of concealing his defection from her. The wretched woman,

who had long fallen from giving to receiving favours, probably suffered

more  from  his  confidences  than  the demi-mondaine  did  from  his

brutalities. The compulsion of which he complained in regard to this

substitutive  figure,  and  which  drove  him  to  analysis,  had  of  course

been transferred on to her from his old mistress; it was from her that

he  wanted  to  free  himself  but  could  not.  I  am  not  an  authority  on

handwriting and have no high opinion of the art of divining character

from it; still less do I believe in the possibility of foretelling the writer’s

future in this way. You can see, however, whatever one may think of

the value of graphology, that there is no mistaking the fact that the

expert, when he promised that the writer of the specimen presented to

him would commit suicide in the next few days, had once again onlybrought  to  light  a  powerful  secret  wish  of  the  person  who  was

questioning him. Something of the same kind happened afterwards in

the case of the second report. What was there concerned, however,

was not an unconscious wish; it was the questioner’s dawning doubt

and  apprehension  that  found  a  clear  expression  from  the

graphologist’s  mouth.  Incidentally,  my  patient  succeeded,  with  the

help of analysis, in finding an object for his love outside the magic

circle in which he had been spellbound.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4657

 

 

      Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  -  You  have  now  heard  how  dream-

interpretation and psycho-analysis in general assist occultism. I have

shown you from examples that by their application occult facts have

been brought to light which would otherwise have remained unknown.

Psycho-analysis cannot give a direct answer to the question that no

doubt  interests  you  the  most  -  whether  we  are  to  believe  in  the

objective reality of these findings. But the material revealed by its help

makes  an  impression  which  is  at  all  events  favourable  to  an

affirmative reply. Your interest will not come to a stop at this point,

however. You will want to know what conclusions are justified by the

incomparably richer material in which psycho-analysis has no part. But

I cannot follow you there: it lies outside my province. The only further

thing I could do would be to report observations to you which have at

least so much relation to analysis that they were made during psycho-

analytic  treatment  and  were  even  perhaps  made  possible  by  its

influence. I will tell you one such example - the one which has left the

strongest impression behind on me. I shall tell it at great length and

shall ask for your attention to a large number of details, though even

so I shall have to suppress much that would have greatly increased

the convincing force of the observation. It is an example in which the

fact  came  clearly  to  light  and  did  not  need  to  be  developed  by

analysis. In discussing it, however, we shall not be able to do without

the help of analysis. But I will tell you in advance that this example tooof apparent thought-transference in the analytic situation is not exempt

from all doubts and that it does not allow us to take up an unqualified

position in support of the reality of occult phenomena.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4658

 

   Listen then:- One autumn day in the year 1919, at about 10.45 a.m.,

Dr. David Forsyth, who had just arrived from London, sent in his card

to me while I was working with a patient. (My respected colleague

from London University will not, I feel sure, regard it as an indiscretion

if  in  this  way  I  betray  the  fact  that  he  spent  some  months  being

initiated by me into the arts of psycho-analytic technique.) I only had

time to greet him and to make an appointment to see him later. Dr.

Forsyth had a claim to my particular interest; he was the first foreigner

to come to me after I had been cut off by the war years and to bring a

promise of better times. Soon afterwards, at eleven o’clock, Herr P.,

one  of  my  patients,  arrived  -  an  intelligent  and  agreeable  man,

between forty and fifty years of age, who had originally come to me on

account  of  difficulties  with  women.  His  case  did  not  promise  any

therapeutic  success;  I  had  long  before  proposed  our  stopping  the

treatment, but he had wished to continue it, evidently because he felt

comfortable  in  a  well-tempered  father-transference  to  me.  At  that

period  money  played  no  part:  there  was  too  little  of  it  about.  The

sessions which I spent with him were stimulating and refreshing for

me  as  well,  and  consequently,  in  disregard  of  the  strict  rules  of

medical practice, analytic work was being carried on up to a foreseen

time-limit.

   That day P. returned to his attempts at having erotic relations with

women and once again mentioned a pretty, piquante, penniless girl,

with whom he felt he might succeed, if the fact of her being a virgin did

not  scare  him  off  any  serious  attempt.  He  had  often  talked  of  her

before but that day he told me for the first time that, though of course

she had no notion of the true grounds of his impediment, she used to

call  him  ‘Herr  von  Vorsicht’.  I  was  struck  by  this  information;  Dr.

Forsyth’s visiting card lay beside me, and I showed it to him. 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4659

 

   These are the facts of the case. I expect they will seem to you paltry;

but listen a little longer, there is more behind them.

   When he was young, P. had spent some years in England and since

then  had  retained  a  permanent  interest  in  English  literature.  He

possessed a rich English library and used to bring me books from it. I

owe  to  him  an  acquaintance  with  such  authors  as  Bennett  and

Galsworthy, of whom till then I had read little. One day he lent me a

novel of Galsworthy’s with the title The Man of Property, whose scene

is laid in the bosom of a family invented by the author, bearing the

name of ‘Forsyte’. Galsworthy himself was evidently captivated by this

creation of his, for in later volumes he repeatedly came back to the

members of this family and finally collected all the tales relating to

them under the title of The Forsyte Saga. Only a few days before the

occurrence I am speaking of, he had brought me a fresh volume from

this series. The name ‘Forsyte’, and everything typical that the author

had  sought  to  embody  in  it,  had  played  a  part,  too,  in  my

conversations with P. and it had become part of the secret language

which so easily grows up between two people who see a lot of each

other. Now the name ‘Forsyte’ in these novels differs little from that of

my visitor ‘Forsyth’ and, as pronounced by a German, the two can

scarcely  be  distinguished;  and  there  is  an  English  word  with  a

meaning - ‘foresight’ - which we should also pronounce in the same

way and which would be translated ‘Voraussicht’ or ‘Vorsicht’. Thus P.

had in fact selected from his personal concerns the very name with

which I was occupied at the same time as a result of an occurrence of

which he was unaware.

   That begins to look better, you will agree. But we shall, I think,

receive a stronger impression of the striking phenomenon and even

obtain an insight into its determinants, if we throw some analytic light

upon  two  other  associations  brought  up  by  P.  during  the  same

session.

                 New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4660

 

   Firstly: One day of the previous week I had waited in vain for Herr P.

at eleven o’clock, and had then gone out to visit Dr. Anton von Freund

in his pension. I was surprised to find that Herr P. lived on another

floor  of  the  same  building  in  which  the pension  was  located.  In

connection with this I had later told P. that I had in a sense paid him a

visit in his house; but I know definitely that I did not tell him the name

of  the  person  I  visited  in  the pension.  And  now,  shortly  after

mentioning  ‘Herr  von  Vorsicht’  he  asked  me  whether  perhaps  the

Freud-Ottorego who was giving a course of lectures on English at the

Volks universität’ was my daughter. And for the first time during our

long  period  of  intercourse  he  gave  my  name  the  distorted  form  to

which I have indeed become habituated by functionaries, officials and

compositors: instead of ‘Freud’ he said ‘Freund’.

   Secondly: At the end of the same session he told me a dream, from

which he had woken in a fright - a regular ‘Alptraum’, he said. He

added that not long ago he had forgotten the English word for that,

and when someone had asked him said that the English for ‘Alptraum’

was ‘a mare’s next’. This was nonsense, of course, he went on; ‘a

mare’s nest’ meant something incredible, a cock-and-bull story: the

translation of ‘Alptraum’ was ‘nightmare’. The only element in common

between  this  association  and  the  previous  one  seemed  to  be  the

element ‘English’. I was however reminded of a small incident which

had occurred about a month earlier. P. was sitting with me in the room

when another visitor, a dear friend from London, Dr. Ernest Jones,

unexpectedly came in after a long separation. I signed to him to go

into the next room while I finished with P. The latter, however, had at

once  recognized  him  from  his  photograph  hanging  in  the  waiting-

room, and even expressed a wish to be introduced to him. Now Jones

is the author of a monograph on the Alptraum - the nightmare. I did

not  know  whether  P.  was  acquainted  with  it;  he  avoided  reading

analytic literature.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4661 

   I should like to begin by putting before you an investigation of what

analytic  understanding  can  be  arrived  at  of  the  background  of  P.’s

associations and of the motives for them. P. was placed similarly to

me in relation to the name ‘Forsyte’ or ‘Forsyth’; it meant the same to

him, and it was entirely to him that I owed my acquaintance with the

name. The remarkable fact was that he brought the name into the

analysis  unheralded,  only  the  briefest  time  after  it  had  become

significant to me in another sense owing to a new event - the London

doctor’s arrival. But the manner in which the name emerged in his

analytic session is perhaps not less interesting than the fact itself. He

did not say, for instance: ‘The name "Forsyte", out of the novels you

are familiar with, has just occurred to me.’ He was able, without any

conscious  relation  to  that  source,  to  weave  the  name  into  his  own

experiences  and  to  produce  it  thence  -  a  thing  that  might  have

happened long before but had not happened till then. What he did say

now was: ‘I’m a Forsyth too: that’s what the girl calls me.’ It is hard to

mistake  the  mixture  of  jealous  demand  and  melancholy  self-

depreciation which finds its expression in this remark. We shall not be

going astray if we complete it in some such way as this: ‘It’s mortifying

to me that your thoughts should be so intensely occupied with this

new arrival. Do come back to me; after all I’m a Forsyth too though it’s

true I’m only a Herr von Vorsicht, as the girl says.’ And thereupon his

train of thought, passing along the associative threads of the element

‘English’ went back to two earlier events, which were able to stir up

the same feelings of jealousy. ‘A few days ago you paid a visit to my

house  -  not,  alas,  to  me  but  to  a  Herr  von  Freund.’  This  thought

caused  him  to  distort  the  name  ‘Freud’  into  ‘Freund’.  The  ‘Freud-

Ottorego’ from the lecture-syllabus must come in here because as a

teacher of English she provided the manifest association. And now

came the recollection of another visitor a few weeks before, of whom

he was no doubt equally jealous, but for whom he also felt he was no

match, for Dr. Jones was able to write a monograph on the nightmare

whereas he was at best only able to produce such dreams himself.

His  mention  of  his  mistake  about  the  meaning  of  ‘a  mare’s  nest’

comes into this connection, for it can only mean to say: ‘After all I’m

not a genuine Englishman any more than I’m a genuine Forsyth.’   Now I cannot describe his feelings of jealousy as either out of place

or  unintelligible.  He  had  been  warned  that  his  analysis,  and  at  the

same  time  our  contact,  would  come  to  an  end  as  soon  as  foreign

pupils  and  patients  returned  to  Vienna;  and  that  was  in  fact  what

happened shortly afterwards. What we have so far achieved, however,

has  been  a  piece  of  analytic  work  -  the  explanation  of  three

associations brought up by him in the same session and nourished by

the same motive: and this has not much to do with the other question

of  whether  these  associations  could  or  could  not  have  been  made

without thought-transference. This question arises in the case of each

of the three associations and thus falls into three separate questions:

Could P. have known that Dr. Forsyth had just paid me his first visit?

Could he know the name of the person I had visited in his house? Did

he know that Dr. Jones had written a monograph on the nightmare?

Or was it only my knowledge about these things that was revealed in

his  associations?  It  will  depend  on  the  reply  to  these  separate

questions whether my observation allows of a conclusion favourable

to thought-transference.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4662

 

   Let us leave the first question aside for a while; the other two can be

dealt with more easily. The case of my visit to his pension makes a

particularly convincing impression at first sight. I am certain that in my

short, joking reference to my visit to his house I mentioned no name. I

think it is most unlikely that P. made enquiries at the pension as to the

name of the person concerned; I believe rather that the existence of

that person remained entirely unknown to him. But the evidential value

of this case is totally destroyed by a chance circumstance. The man

whom I had visited at the pension was not only called ‘Freund’; he was

a true friend to us all. He was Dr. Anton von Freund whose donation

had made the foundation of our publishing house possible. His early

death, together with that of our colleague Karl Abraham a few years

later, are the gravest misfortunes which have befallen the growth of

psycho-analysis. It is possible, therefore, that I had said to Herr P.: ‘Ivisited  a  friend  in  your  house’  and  with  this  possibility  the  occult

interest of his second association vanishes.

   The impression made by the third association evaporates equally

quickly. Could P. know that Jones had published a monograph on the

nightmare if he never read any analytic literature? Yes, he could. He

possessed books from our publishing house and could in any case

have  seen  the  titles  of  the  new  publications  advertised  on  the

wrappers. This cannot be proved, but neither can it be disproved. We

can reach no decision, therefore, along this path. To my regret, this

observation  of  mine  suffers  from  the  same  weakness  as  so  many

similar ones: it was written down too late and was discussed at a time

when  I  was  no  longer  seeing  Herr  P.  and  could  not  question  him

further.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4663

 

   Let us go back to the first event, which even taken by itself supports

the  apparent  fact  of  thought-transference.  Could  P.  know  that  Dr.

Forsyth had been with me a quarter of an hour before him? Could he

have  any  knowledge  at  all  of  his  existence  or  of  his  presence  in

Vienna?  We  must  not  give  way  to  an  inclination  to  deny  both

questions  flatly.  I  can  see  a  way  that  leads  to  a  partly  affirmative

answer. I may after all have told Herr P. that I was expecting a doctor

from  England  for  instruction  in  analysis,  as  a  first  dove  after  the

Deluge. This might have happened in the summer of 1919, for Dr.

Forsyth  had  made  arrangements  with  me  by  letter  some  months

before his arrival. I may even have mentioned his name, though that

seems to me most improbable. In view of the other connection which

the name carried for both of us, a discussion of it must inevitably have

followed, of which something would have remained in my memory.

Nevertheless such a discussion may have taken place and I may have

totally  forgotten  it  afterwards,  so  that  it  became  possible  for  the

emergence of ‘Herr von Vorsicht’ in the analytic session to strike me

as a miracle. If one regards oneself as a sceptic, it is a good plan to

have occasional doubts about one’s scepticism too. It may be that Itoo have a secret inclination towards the miraculous which thus goes

half way to meet the creation of occult facts.

   If we have thus got one miraculous possibility out of the way, there

is another waiting for us, and the most difficult of all. Assuming that

Herr P. knew that there was a Dr. Forsyth and that he was expected in

Vienna  in  the  autumn,  how  is  it  to  be  explained  that  he  became

receptive  to  his  presence  on  the  very  day  of  his  arrival  and

immediately after his first visit? One might say it was chance - that is,

leave it unexplained. But it was precisely in order to exclude chance

that I discussed P.’s other two associations, in order to show you that

he was really occupied with jealous thoughts about people who visited

me.  Or  one  might,  not  to  neglect  the  most  extreme  possibility,

experiment  with  the  hypothesis  that  P.  had  observed  a  special

excitement about me (which, to be sure, I myself knew nothing of) and

drew his conclusion from it. Or Herr P. (though he arrived a quarter of

an  hour  after  the  Englishman  left)  met  him  on  the  short  stretch  of

street  which  they  both  had  to  pass  along,  recognized  him  by  his

characteristically English appearance and, being in a permanent state

of jealous expectation, thought: ‘Ah, so that’s Dr. Forsyth with whose

arrival my analysis is to come to an end! And he’s probably just come

straight  from  the  Professor.’  I  cannot  carry  these  rationalistic

speculations any further. We are once again left with a non liquet; but I

must confess that I have a feeling that here too the scales weigh in

favour of thought-transference. Moreover, I am certainly not alone in

having been in the position of experiencing ‘occult’ events like this in

the  analytic  situation.  Helene  Deutsch  published  some  similar

observations  in  1926  and  studied  the  question  of  their  being

determined by the transference relations between patient and analyst.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4664

 

 

   I am sure you will not feel very well satisfied with my attitude to this

problem - with my not being entirely convinced but prepared to be

convinced. You may perhaps say to yourselves: ‘Here’s another caseof a man who has done honest work as a scientist all through his life

and has grown feeble-minded, pious and credulous in his old age.’ I

am aware that a few great names must be included in this class, but

you should not reckon me among them. At least I have not become

pious, and I hope not credulous. It is only that, if one has gone about

all one’s life bending in order to avoid a painful collision with the facts,

so too in one’s old age one still keeps one’s back ready to bow before

new realities. No doubt you would like me to hold fast to a moderate

theism and show myself relentless in my rejection of everything occult.

But I am incapable of currying favour and I must urge you to have

kindlier thoughts on the objective possibility of thought-transference

and at the same time of telepathy as well.

   You will not forget that here I am only treating these problems in so

far as it is possible to approach them from the direction of psycho-

analysis. When they first came into my range of vision more than ten

years  ago,  I  too  felt  a  dread  of  a  threat  against  our  scientific

Weltanschauung,  which,  I  feared,  was  bound  to  give  place  to

spiritualism or mysticism if portions of occultism were proved true. To-

day I think otherwise. In my opinion it shows no great confidence in

science if one does not think it capable of assimilating and working

over whatever may perhaps turn out to be true in the assertions of

occultists.  And  particularly  so  far  as  thought-transference  is

concerned, it seems actually to favour the extension of the scientific -

or, as our opponents say, the mechanistic - mode of thought to the

mental phenomena which are so hard to lay hold of. The telepathic

process  is  supposed  to  consist  in  a  mental  act  in  one  person

instigating the same mental act in another person. What lies between

these two mental acts may easily be a physical process into which the

mental one is transformed at one end and which is transformed back

once more into the same mental one at the other end. The analogy

with other transformations, such as occur in speaking and hearing by

telephone, would then be unmistakable. And only think if one could

get hold of this physical equivalent of the psychical act! It would seem

to  me  that  psycho-analysis,  by  inserting  the  unconscious  between

what is physical and what was previously called ‘psychical’, has paved

the way for the assumption of such processes as telepathy. If only one

accustoms  oneself  to  the  idea  of  telepathy,  one  can  accomplish  agreat deal with it - for the time being, it is true, only in imagination. It is

a familiar fact that we do not know how the common purpose comes

about in the great insect communities: possibly it is done by means of

a direct psychical transference of this kind. One is led to a suspicion

that  this  is  the  original,  archaic  method  of  communication  between

individuals and that in the course of phylogenetic evolution it has been

replaced by the better method of giving information with the help of

signals  which  are  picked  up  by  the  sense  organs.  But  the  older

method might have persisted in the background and still be able to put

itself into effect under certain conditions - for instance, in passionately

excited mobs. All this is still uncertain and full of unsolved riddles; but

there is no reason to be frightened by it.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4665

 

   If there is such a thing as telepathy as a real process, we may

suspect that, in spite of its being so hard to demonstrate, it is quite a

common phenomenon. It would tally with our expectations if we were

able to point to it particularly in the mental life of children. Here we are

reminded of the frequent anxiety felt by children over the idea that

their parents know all their thoughts without having to be told them -

an exact counterpart and perhaps the source of the belief of adults in

the  omniscience  of  God.  A  short  time  ago  Dorothy  Burlingham,  a

trustworthy  witness,  in  a  paper  on  child  analysis  and  the  mother

published some observations which, if they can be confirmed, would

be  bound  to  put  an  end  to  the  remaining  doubts  on  the  reality  of

thought-transference. She made use of the situation, no longer a rare

one, in which a mother and child are simultaneously in analysis, and

reported some remarkable events such as the following. One day the

mother  spoke  during  her  analytic  session  of  a  gold  coin  that  had

played  a  particular  part  in  one  of  the  scenes  of  her  childhood.

Immediately afterwards, after she had returned home, her little boy,

about ten years old, came to her room and brought her a gold coin

which he asked her to keep for him. She asked him in astonishment

where he had got it from. He had been given it on his birthday; but hisbirthday had been several months earlier and there was no reason

why the child should have remembered the gold coin precisely then.

The mother reported the occurrence to the child’s analyst and asked

her to find out from the child the reason for his action. But the child’s

analysis threw no light on the matter; the action had forced its way that

day  into  the  child’s  life  like  a  foreign  body.  A  few  weeks  later  the

mother was sitting at her writing-desk to write down, as she had been

told to do, an account of the experience, when in came the boy and

asked for the gold coin back, as he wanted to take it with him to show

in his analytic session. Once again the child’s analysis could discover

no explanation of his wish.

   And this brings us back to psycho-analysis, which was what we

started out from.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4666

 

                                  LECTURE XXXI

 

      THE DISSECTION OF THE PSYCHICAL PERSONALITY

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - I know you are aware in regard to your own

relations,  whether  with  people  or  things,  of  the  importance  of  your

starting-point. This was also the case with psycho-analysis. It has not

been a matter of indifference for the course of its development or for

the reception it met with that it began its work on what is, of all the

contents  of  the  mind,  most  foreign  to  the  ego  -  on  symptoms.

Symptoms are derived from the repressed, they are, as it were, its

representatives before the ego; but the repressed is foreign territory to

the ego - internal foreign territory - just as reality (if you will forgive the

unusual  expression)  is  external  foreign  territory.  The  path  led  from

symptoms to the unconscious, to the life of the instincts, to sexuality;

and it was then that psycho-analysis was met by the brilliant objection

that human beings are not merely sexual creatures but have nobler

and higher impulses as well. It might have been added that, exalted by

their consciousness of these higher impulses, they often assume theright to think nonsense and to neglect facts.

      You  know  better.  From  the  very  first  we  have  said  that  human

beings fall ill of a conflict between the claims of instinctual life and the

resistance which arises within them against it; and not for a moment

have we forgotten this resisting, repelling, repressing agency, which

we thought of as equipped with its special forces, the ego-instincts,

and which coincides with the ego of popular psychology. The truth

was merely that, in view of the laborious nature of the progress made

by scientific work, even psycho-analysis was not able to study every

field simultaneously and to express its views on every problem in a

single breath. But at last the point was reached when it was possible

for  us  to  divert  our  attention  from  the  repressed  to  the  repressing

forces, and we faced this ego, which had seemed so self-evident, with

the secure expectation that here once again we should find things for

which we could not have been prepared. It was not easy, however, to

find a first approach; and that is what I intend to talk to you about to-

day.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4667

 

   I must, however, let you know of my suspicion that this account of

mine of ego-psychology will affect you differently from the introduction

into  the  psychical  underworld  which  preceded  it.  I  cannot  say  with

certainty why this should be so. I thought first that you would discover

that  whereas  what  I  reported  to  you  previously  were,  in  the  main,

facts,  however  strange  and  peculiar,  now  you  will  be  listening

principally to opinions - that is, to speculations. But that does not meet

the  position.  After  further  consideration  I  must  maintain  that  the

amount of intellectual working-over of the factual material in our ego-

psychology is not much greater than it was in the psychology of the

neuroses. I have been obliged to reject other explanations as well of

the result I anticipate: I now believe that it is somehow a question of

the  nature  of  the  material  itself  and  of  our  being  unaccustomed  to

dealing  with  it.  In  any  case,  I  shall  not  be  surprised  if  you  show

yourselves even more reserved and cautious in your judgement thanhitherto.

 

   The situation in which we find ourselves at the beginning of our

enquiry may be expected itself to point the way for us. We wish to

make the ego the matter of our enquiry, our very own ego. But is that

possible? After all, the ego is in its very essence a subject; how can it

be made into an object? Well, there is no doubt that it can be. The ego

can  take  itself  as  an  object,  can  treat  itself  like  other  objects,  can

observe itself, criticize itself, and do Heaven knows what with itself. In

this, one part of the ego is setting itself over against the rest. So the

ego  can  be  split;  it  splits  itself  during  a  number  of  its  functions  -

temporarily  at  least.  Its  parts  can  come  together  again  afterwards.

That is not exactly a novelty, though it may perhaps be putting an

unusual emphasis on what is generally known. On the other hand, we

are familiar with the notion that pathology, by making things larger and

coarser,  can  draw  our  attention  to  normal  conditions  which  would

otherwise have escaped us. Where it points to a breach or a rent,

there may normally be an articulation present. If we throw a crystal to

the  floor,  it  breaks;  but  not  into  haphazard  pieces.  It  comes  apart

along its lines of cleavage into fragments whose boundaries, though

they  were  invisible,  were  predetermined  by  the  crystal’s  structure.

Mental patients are split and broken structures of this same kind. Even

we cannot withhold from them something of the reverential awe which

peoples of the past felt for the insane. They have turned away from

external  reality,  but  for  that  very  reason  they  know  more  about

internal, psychical reality and can reveal a number of things to us that

would otherwise be inaccessible to us.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4668

 

   We describe one group of these patients as suffering from delusions

of being observed. They complain to us that perpetually, and down to

their  most  intimate  actions,  they  are  being  molested  by  the

observation of unknown powers - presumably persons - and that in

hallucinations they hear these persons reporting the outcome of theirobservation: ‘now he’s going to say this, now he’s dressing to go out’

and  so  on.  Observation  of  this  sort  is  not  yet  the  same  thing  as

persecution, but it is not far from it; it presupposes that people distrust

them,  and  expect  to  catch  them  carrying  out  forbidden  actions  for

which they would be punished. How would it be if these insane people

were right, if in each of us there is present in his ego an agency like

this which observes and threatens to punish, and which in them has

merely  become  sharply  divided  from  their  ego  and  mistakenly

displaced into external reality?

   I cannot tell whether the same thing will happen to you as to me.

Ever  since,  under  the  powerful  impression  of  this  clinical  picture,  I

formed the idea that the separation of the observing agency from the

rest of the ego might be a regular feature of the ego’s structure, that

idea  has  never  left  me,  and  I  was  driven  to  investigate  the  further

characteristics  and  connections  of  the  agency  which  was  thus

separated  off.  The  next  step  is  quickly  taken.  The  content  of  the

delusions of being observed already suggests that the observing is

only  a  preparation  for  judging  and  punishing,  and  we  accordingly

guess that another function of this agency must be what we call our

conscience. There is scarcely anything else in us that we so regularly

separate from our ego and so easily set over against it as precisely

our conscience. I feel an inclination to do something that I think will

give me pleasure, but I abandon it on the ground that my conscience

does not allow it. Or I have let myself be persuaded by too great an

expectation of pleasure into doing something to which the voice of

conscience has objected and after the deed my conscience punishes

me with distressing reproaches and causes me to feel remorse for the

deed. I might simply say that the special agency which I am beginning

to distinguish in the ego is conscience. But it is more prudent to keep

the  agency  as  something  independent  and  to  suppose  that

conscience is one of its functions and that self-observation, which is

an  essential  preliminary  to  the  judging  activity  of  conscience,  is

another of them. And since when we recognize that something has a

separate existence we give it a name of its own, from this time forward

I will describe this agency in the ego as the ‘super-ego’.

                 New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4669

 

   I am now prepared to hear you ask me scornfully whether our ego-

psychology comes down to nothing more than taking commonly used

abstractions literally and in a crude sense, and transforming them from

concepts into things - by which not much would be gained. To this I

would reply that in ego-psychology it will be difficult to escape what is

universally known; it will rather be a question of new ways of looking

at things and new ways of arranging them than of new discoveries. So

hold  to  your  contemptuous  criticism  for  the  time  being  and  await

further  explanations.  The  facts  of  pathology  give  our  efforts  a

background that you would look for in vain in popular psychology. So I

will proceed.

   Hardly have we familiarized ourselves with the idea of a super-ego

like this which enjoys a certain degree of autonomy, follows its own

intentions and is independent of the ego for its supply of energy, than

a clinical picture forces itself on our notice which throws a striking light

on  the  severity  of  this  agency  and  indeed  its  cruelty,  and  on  its

changing  relations  to  the  ego.  I  am  thinking  of  the  condition  of

melancholia, or, more precisely, of melancholic attacks, which you too

will have heard plenty about, even if you are not psychiatrists. The

most  striking  feature  of  this  illness,  of  whose  causation  and

mechanism we know much too little, is the way in which the super-ego

-  ‘conscience’,  you  may  call  it,  quietly  -  treats  the  ego.  While  a

melancholic can, like other people, show a greater or lesser degree of

severity to himself in his healthy periods, during a melancholic attack

his super-ego becomes over-severe, abuses the poor ego, humiliates

it and ill-treats it, threatens it with the direst punishments, reproaches

it for actions in the remotest past which had been taken lightly at the

time  -  as  though  it  had  spent  the  whole  interval  in  collecting

accusations  and  had  only  been  waiting  for  its  present  access  of

strength  in  order  to  bring  them  up  and  make  a  condemnatory

judgement on their basis. The super-ego applies the strictest moral

standard  to  the  helpless  ego  which  is  at  its  mercy;  in  general  it

represents the claims of morality, and we realize all at once that our

moral sense of guilt is the expression of the tension between the egoand the super-ego. It is a most remarkable experience to see morality,

which is supposed to have been given us by God and thus deeply

implanted in us, functioning as a periodic phenomenon. For after a

certain number of months the whole moral fuss is over, the criticism of

the super-ego is silent, the ego is rehabilitated and again enjoys all the

rights of man till the next attack. In some forms of the disease, indeed,

something of a contrary sort occurs in the intervals; the ego finds itself

in a blissful state of intoxication, it celebrates a triumph, as though the

super-ego had lost all its strength or had melted into the ego; and this

liberated, manic ego permits itself a truly uninhibited satisfaction of all

its appetites. Here are happenings rich in unsolved riddles!

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4670

 

      No  doubt  you  will  expect  me  to  give  you  more  than  a  mere

illustration when I inform you that we have found out all kinds of things

about the formation of the super-ego - that is to say, about the origin

of conscience. Following a well-known pronouncement of Kant’s which

couples  the  conscience  within  us  with  the  starry  Heavens,  a  pious

man  might  well  be  tempted  to  honour  these  two  things  as  the

masterpieces  of  creation.  The  stars  are  indeed  magnificent,  but  as

regards conscience God has done an uneven and careless piece of

work, for a large majority of men have brought along with them only a

modest amount of it or scarcely enough to be worth mentioning. We

are  far  from  overlooking  the  portion  of  psychological  truth  that  is

contained in the assertion that conscience is of divine origin; but the

thesis  needs  interpretation.  Even  if  conscience  is  something  ‘within

us’, yet it is not so from the first. In this it is a real contrast to sexual

life, which is in fact there from the beginning of life and not only a later

addition.  But,  as  is  well  known,  young  children  are  amoral  and

possess  no  internal  inhibitions  against  their  impulses  striving  for

pleasure. The part which is later taken on by the super-ego is played

to  begin  with  by  an  external  power,  by  parental  authority.  Parental

influence  governs  the  child  by  offering  proofs  of  love  and  by

threatening punishments which are signs to the child of loss of loveand are bound to be feared on their own account. This realistic anxiety

is the precursor of the later moral anxiety. So long as it is dominant

there is no need to talk of a super-ego and of a conscience. It is only

subsequently that the secondary situation develops (which we are all

too ready to regard as the normal one), where the external restraint is

internalized and the super-ego takes the place of the parental agency

and observes, directs and threatens the ego in exactly the same way

as earlier the parents did with the child.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4671

 

   The super-ego, which thus takes over the power, function and even

the  methods  of  the  parental  agency,  is  however  not  merely  its

successor  but  actually  the  legitimate  heir  of  its  body.  It  proceeds

directly  out  of  it,  we  shall  learn  presently  by  what  process.  First,

however, we must dwell upon a discrepancy between the two. The

super-ego  seems  to  have  made  a  one-sided  choice  and  to  have

picked out only the parents’ strictness and severity, their prohibiting

and punitive function, whereas their loving care seems not to have

been taken over and maintained. If the parents have really enforced

their authority with severity we can easily understand the child’s in turn

developing  a  severe  super-ego.  But,  contrary  to  our  expectation,

experience  shows  that  the  super-ego  can  acquire  the  same

characteristic of relentless severity even if the upbringing had been

mild  and  kindly  and  had  so  far  as  possible  avoided  threats  and

punishments. We shall come back later to this contradiction when we

deal with the transformations of instinct during the formation of the

super-ego.

   I cannot tell you as much as I should like about the metamorphosis

of  the  parental  relationship  into  the  super-ego,  partly  because  that

process  is  so  complicated  that  an  account  of  it  will  not  fit  into  the

framework of an introductory course of lectures such as I am trying to

give you, but partly also because we our selves do not feel sure that

we understand it completely. So you must be content with the sketch

that follows. 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4672

 

   The basis of the process is what is called an ‘identification’ - that is

to say, the assimilation of one ego to another one, as a result of which

the first ego behaves like the second in certain respects, imitates it

and  in  a  sense  takes  it  up  into  itself.  Identification  has  been  not

unsuitably compared with the oral, cannibalistic incorporation of the

other person. It is a very important form of attachment to someone

else, probably the very first, and not the same thing as the choice of

an object. The difference between the two can be expressed in some

such way as this. If a boy identifies himself with his father, he wants to

be like his father; if he makes him the object of his choice, he wants to

have him, to possess him. In the first case his ego is altered on the

model  of  his  father;  in  the  second  case  that  is  not  necessary.

Identification and object-choice are to a large extent independent of

each other; it is however possible to identify oneself with someone

whom, for instance, one has taken as a sexual object, and to alter

one’s ego on his model. It is said that the influencing of the ego by the

sexual  object  occurs  particularly  often  with  women  and  is

characteristic of femininity. I must already have spoken to you in my

earlier lectures of what is by far the most instructive relation between

identification and object-choice. It can be observed equally easily in

children and adults, in normal as in sick people. If one has lost an

object  or  has  been  obliged  to  give  it  up,  one  often  compensates

oneself by identifying oneself with it and by setting it up once more in

one’s  ego,  so  that  here  object-choice  regresses,  as  it  were,  to

identification.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4673

 

   I myself am far from satisfied with these remarks on identification;

but it will be enough if you can grant me that the installation of the

super-ego can be described as a successful instance of identificationwith the parental agency. The fact that speaks decisively for this view

is that this new creation of a superior agency within the ego is most

intimately linked with the destiny of the Oedipus complex, so that the

super-ego appears as the heir of that emotional attachment which is of

such importance for childhood. With his abandonment of the Oedipus

complex a child must, as we can see, renounce the intense object-

cathexes  which  he  has  deposited  with  his  parents,  and  it  is  as  a

compensation  for  this  loss  of  objects  that  there  is  such  a  strong

intensification  of  the  identifications  with  his  parents  which  have

probably long been present in his ego. Identifications of this kind as

precipitates  of  object-cathexes  that  have  been  given  up  will  be

repeated  often  enough  later  in  the  child’s  life;  but  it  is  entirely  in

accordance with the emotional importance of this first instance of such

a transformation that a special place in the ego should be found for its

outcome. Close investigation has shown us, too, that the super-ego is

stunted in its strength and growth if the surmounting of the Oedipus

complex is only incompletely successful. In the course of development

the super-ego also takes on the influences of those who have stepped

into the place of parents - educators, teachers, people chosen as ideal

models. Normally it departs more and more from the original parental

figures;  it  becomes,  so  to  say,  more  impersonal.  Nor  must  it  be

forgotten that a child has a different estimate of its parents at different

periods of its life. At the time at which the Oedipus complex gives

place to the super-ego they are something quite magnificent; but later

they lose much of this. Identifications then come about with these later

parents  as  well,  and  indeed  they  regularly  make  important

contributions to the formation of character; but in that case they only

affect the ego, they no longer influence the super-ego, which has been

determined by the earliest parental imagos.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4674

 

   I hope you have already formed an impression that the hypothesis of

the super-ego really describes a structural relation and is not merely a

personification of some such abstraction as that of conscience. Onemore important function remains to be mentioned which we attribute to

this super-ego. It is also the vehicle of the ego ideal by which the ego

measures  itself,  which  it  emulates,  and  whose  demand  for  ever

greater perfection it strives to fulfil. There is no doubt that this ego

ideal is the precipitate of the old picture of the parents, the expression

of admiration for the perfection which the child then attributed to them.

 

   I am sure you have heard a great deal of the sense of inferiority

which is supposed particularly to characterize neurotics. It especially

haunts the pages of what are known as belles lettres. An author who

uses  the  term  ‘inferiority  complex’  thinks  that  by  so  doing  he  has

fulfilled  all  the  demands  of  psycho-analysis  and  has  raised  his

composition  to  a  higher  psychological  plane.  In  fact  ‘inferiority

complex’ is a technical term that is scarcely used in psycho-analysis.

For  us  it  does  not  bear  the  meaning  of  anything  simple,  let  alone

elementary. To trace it back to the self-perception of possible organic

defects, as the school of what are known as ‘Individual Psychologists’

likes to do, seems to us a short-sighted error. The sense of inferiority

has strong erotic roots. A child feels inferior if he notices that he is not

loved, and so does an adult. The only bodily organ which is really

regarded  as  inferior  is  the  atrophied  penis,  a  girl’s  clitoris.  But  the

major part of the sense of inferiority derives from the ego’s relation to

its super-ego; like the sense of guilt it is an expression of the tension

between them. Altogether, it is hard to separate the sense of inferiority

and the sense of guilt. It would perhaps be right to regard the former

as  the  erotic  complement  to  the  moral  sense  of  inferiority.  Little

attention  has  been  given  in  psycho-analysis  to  the  question  of  the

delimitation of the two concepts.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4675

 

   If only because the inferiority complex has become so popular, I will

venture  to  entertain  you  here  with  a  short  digression.  A  historical

personality of our own days, who is still alive though at the moment he

has retired into the background, suffers from a defect in one of hislimbs owing to an injury at the time of his birth. A very well-known

contemporary  writer  who  is  particularly  fond  of  compiling  the

biographies of celebrities has dealt, among others, with the life of the

man  I  am  speaking  of.  Now  in  writing  a  biography  it  may  well  be

difficult to suppress a need to plumb the psychological depths. For this

reason our author has ventured on an attempt to erect the whole of

the  development  of  his  hero’s  character  on  the  sense  of  inferiority

which must have been called up by his physical defect. In doing so, he

has  overlooked  one  small  but  not  insignificant  fact.  It  is  usual  for

mothers  whom  Fate  has  presented  with  a  child  who  is  sickly  or

otherwise at a disadvantage to try to compensate him for his unfair

handicap by a superabundance of love. In the instance before us, the

proud mother behaved otherwise; she withdrew her love from the child

on account of his infirmity. When he had grown up into a man of great

power,  he  proved  unambiguously  by  his  actions  that  he  had  never

forgiven his mother. When you consider the importance of a mother’s

love  for  the  mental  life  of  a  child,  you  will  no  doubt  make  a  tacit

correction of the biographer’s inferiority theory.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4676

 

 

   But let us return to the super-ego. We have allotted it the functions

of self-observation, of conscience and of the ideal. It follows from what

we  have  said  about  its  origin  that  it  presupposes  an  immensely

important biological fact and a fateful psychological one: namely, the

human  child’s  long  dependence  on  its  parents  and  the  Oedipus

complex,  both  of  which,  again,  are  intimately  interconnected.  The

super-ego is the representative for us of every moral restriction, the

advocate of a striving towards perfection - it is, in short, as much as

we have been able to grasp psychologically of what is described as

the higher side of human life. Since it itself goes back to the influence

of parents, educators and so on, we learn still more of its significance

if  we  turn  to  those  who  are  its  sources.  As  a  rule  parents  and

authorities analogous to them follow the precepts of their own super-egos  in  educating  children.  Whatever  understanding  their  ego  may

have come to with their super-ego, they are severe and exacting in

educating  children.  They  have  forgotten  the  difficulties  of  their  own

childhood and they are glad to be able now to identify themselves fully

with their own parents who in the past laid such severe restrictions

upon  them.  Thus  a  child’s  super-ego  is  in  fact  constructed  on  the

model not of its parents but of its parents’ super-ego; the contents

which fill it are the same and it becomes the vehicle of tradition and of

all  the  time-resisting  judgements  of  value  which  have  propagated

themselves in this manner from generation to generation. You may

easily  guess  what  important  assistance  taking  the  super-ego  into

account will give us in our understanding of the social behaviour of

mankind - in the problem of delinquency, for instance - and perhaps

even what practical hints on education. It seems likely that what are

known  as  materialistic  views  of  history  sin  in  under-estimating  this

factor. They brush it aside with the remark that human ‘ideologies’ are

nothing  other  than  the  product  and  superstructure  of  their

contemporary economic conditions. That is true, but very probably not

the whole truth. Mankind never lives entirely in the present. The past,

the tradition of the race and of the people, lives on in the ideologies of

the super-ego, and yields only slowly to the influences of the present

and to new changes; and so long as it operates through the super-ego

it  plays  a  powerful  part  in  human  life,  independently  of  economic

conditions.

   In 1921 I endeavoured to make use of the differentiation between

the ego and the super-ego in a study of group psychology. I arrived at

a  formula  such  as  this:  a  psychological  group  is  a  collection  of

individuals who have introduced the same person into their super-ego

and, on the basis of this common element, have identified themselves

with one another in their ego. This applies, of course, only to groups

that have a leader. If we possessed more applications of this kind, the

hypothesis of the super-ego would lose its last touch of strangeness

for us, and we should become completely free of the embarrassment

that  still  comes  over  us  when,  accustomed  as  we  are  to  the

atmosphere  of  the  underworld,  we  move  in  the  more  superficial,

higher strata of the mental apparatus. We do not suppose, of course,

that with the separation off of the super-ego we have said the lastword on the psychology of the ego. It is rather a first step; but in this

case it is not only the first step that is hard.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4677

 

 

   Now, however, another problem awaits us - at the opposite end of

the ego, as we might put it. It is presented to us by an observation

during the work of analysis, an observation which is actually a very old

one. As not infrequently happens, it has taken a long time to come to

the point of appreciating its importance. The whole theory of psycho-

analysis  is,  as  you  know,  in  fact  built  up  on  the  perception  of  the

resistance offered to us by the patient when we attempt to make his

unconscious conscious to him. The objective sign of this resistance is

that his associations fail or depart widely from the topic that is being

dealt with. He may also recognize the resistance subjectively by the

fact that he has distressing feelings when he approaches the topic.

But this last sign may also be absent. We then say to the patient that

we infer from his behaviour that he is now in a state of resistance; and

he replies that he knows nothing of that, and is only aware that his

associations  have  become  more  difficult.  It  turns  out  that  we  were

right;  but  in  that  case  his  resistance  was  unconscious  too,  just  as

unconscious as the repressed, at the lifting of which we were working.

We should long ago have asked the question: from what part of his

mind does an unconscious resistance like this arise? The beginner in

psycho-analysis will be ready at once with the answer: it is, of course,

the resistance of the unconscious. An ambiguous and unserviceable

answer! If it means that the resistance arises from the repressed, we

must rejoin: certainly not! We must rather attribute to the repressed a

strong  upward  drive,  an  impulsion  to  break  through  into

consciousness. The resistance can only be a manifestation of the ego,

which  originally  put  the  repression  into  force  and  now  wishes  to

maintain  it.  That,  moreover,  is  the  view  we  always  took.  Since  we

have come to assume a special agency in the ego, the super-ego,

which represents demands of a restrictive and rejecting character, wemay say that repression is the work of this super-ego and that it is

carried out either by itself or by the ego in obedience to its orders. If

then we are met by the case of the resistance in analysis not being

conscious  to  the  patient,  this  means  either  that  in  quite  important

situations the super-ego and the ego can operate unconsciously, or -

and this would be still more important - that portions of both of them,

the  ego  and  the  super-ego  themselves,  are  unconscious.  In  both

cases we have to reckon with the disagreeable discovery that on the

one  hand  (super-)  ego  and  conscious  and  on  the  other  hand

repressed and unconscious are far from coinciding.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4678

 

 

   And here, Ladies and Gentlemen, I feel that I must make a pause to

take breath - which you too will welcome as a relief - and, before I go

on, to apologize to you. My intention is to give you some addenda to

the  introductory  lectures  on  psycho-analysis  which  I  began  fifteen

years ago, and I am obliged to behave as though you as well as I had

in the interval done nothing but practise psycho-analysis. I know that

that  assumption  is  out  of  place;  but  I  am  helpless,  I  cannot  do

otherwise. This is no doubt related to the fact that it is in general so

hard to give anyone who is not himself a psycho-analyst an insight

into psycho-analysis. You can believe me when I tell you that we do

not enjoy giving an impression of being members of a secret society

and  of  practising  a  mystical  science.  Yet  we  have  been  obliged  to

recognize and express as our conviction that no one has a right to join

in  a  discussion  of  psycho-analysis  who  has  not  had  particular

experiences which can only be obtained by being analysed oneself.

When I gave you my lectures fifteen years ago I tried to spare you

certain speculative portions of our theory; but it is precisely from them

that are derived the new acquisitions of which I must speak to you to-

day.

 

   I return now to our topic. In face of the doubt whether the ego andsuper-ego  are  themselves  unconscious  or  merely  produce

unconscious effects, we have, for good reasons, decided in favour of

the former possibility. And it is indeed the case that large portions of

the  ego  and  super-ego  can  remain  unconscious  and  are  normally

unconscious.  That  is  to  say,  the  individual  knows  nothing  of  their

contents  and  it  requires  an  expenditure  of  effort  to  make  them

conscious.  It  is  a  fact  that  ego  and  conscious,  repressed  and

unconscious do not coincide. We feel a need to make a fundamental

revision of our attitude to the problem of conscious-unconscious. At

first we are inclined greatly to reduce the value of the criterion of being

conscious since it has shown itself so untrustworthy. But we should be

doing it an injustice. As may be said of our life, it is not worth much,

but it is all we have. Without the illumination thrown by the quality of

consciousness,  we  should  be  lost  in  the  obscurity  of  depth-

psychology; but we must attempt to find our bearings afresh.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4679

 

   There is no need to discuss what is to be called conscious: it is

removed  from  all  doubt.  The  oldest  and  best  meaning  of  the  word

‘unconscious’  is  the  descriptive  one;  we  call  a  psychical  process

unconscious whose existence we are obliged to assume - for some

such reason as that we infer it from its effects -, but of which we know

nothing. In that case we have the same relation to it as we have to a

psychical process in another person, except that it is in fact one of our

own. If we want to be still more correct, we shall modify our assertion

by  saying  that  we  call  a  process  unconscious  if  we  are  obliged  to

assume that it is being activated at the moment, though at the moment

we know nothing about it. This qualification makes us reflect that the

majority of conscious processes are conscious only for a short time;

very  soon  they  become latent,  but  can  easily  become  conscious

again. We might also say that they had become unconscious, if it were

at all certain that in the condition of latency they are still something

psychical. So far we should have learnt nothing new; nor should we

have acquired the right to introduce the concept of an unconsciousinto psychology. But then comes the new observation that we were

already able to make in parapraxes. In order to explain a slip of the

tongue,  for  instance,  we  find  ourselves  obliged  to  assume  that  the

intention to make a particular remark was present in the subject. We

infer it with certainty from the interference with his remark which has

occurred;  but  the  intention  did  not  put  itself  through  and  was  thus

unconscious. If, when we subsequently put it before the speaker, he

recognizes  it  as  one  familiar  to  him,  then  it  was  only  temporarily

unconscious to him; but if he repudiates it as something foreign to

him, then it was permanently unconscious. From this experience we

retrospectively  obtain  the  right  also  to  pronounce  as  something

unconscious what had been described as latent. A consideration of

these dynamic relations permits us now to distinguish two kinds of

unconscious  -  one  which  is  easily,  under  frequently  occurring

circumstances,  transformed  into  something  conscious,  and  another

with which this transformation is difficult and takes place only subject

to a considerable expenditure of effort or possibly never at all. In order

to escape the ambiguity as to whether we mean the one or the other

unconscious, whether we are using the word in the descriptive or in

the dynamic sense, we make use of a permissible and simple way out.

We call the unconscious which is only latent, and thus easily becomes

conscious, the ‘preconscious’ and retain the term ‘unconscious’ for the

other.  We  now  have  three  terms,  ‘conscious’,  ‘preconscious’  and

‘unconscious’,  with  which  we  can  get  along  in  our  description  of

mental  phenomena.  Once  again:  the  preconscious  is  also

unconscious in the purely descriptive sense, but we do not give it that

name, except in talking loosely or when we have to make a defence of

the existence in mental life of unconscious processes in general.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4680

 

   You will admit, I hope, that so far that is not too bad and allows of

convenient handling. Yes, but unluckily the work of psycho-analysis

has  found  itself  compelled  to  use  the  word  ‘unconscious’  in  yet

another, third, sense, and this may, to be sure, have led to confusion.Under the new and powerful impression of there being an extensive

and important field of mental life which is normally withdrawn from the

ego’s  knowledge  so  that  the  processes  occurring  in  it  have  to  be

regarded as unconscious in the truly dynamic sense, we have come to

understand  the  term  ‘unconscious’  in  a  topographical  or  systematic

sense  as  well;  we  have  come  to  speak  of  a  ‘system’  of  the

preconscious and a ‘system’ of the unconscious, of a conflict between

the ego and the system Ucs., and have used the word more and more

to denote a mental province rather than a quality of what is mental.

The discovery, actually an inconvenient one, that portions of the ego

and  super-ego  as  well  are  unconscious  in  the  dynamic  sense,

operates at this point as a relief - it makes possible the removal of a

complication. We perceive that we have no right to name the mental

region  that  is  foreign  to  the  ego  ‘the  system Ucs’,  since  the

characteristic of being unconscious is not restricted to it. Very well; we

will no longer use the term ‘unconscious’ in the systematic sense and

we will give what we have hitherto so described a better name and

one no longer open to misunderstanding. Following a verbal usage of

Nietzsche’s and taking up a suggestion by Georg Groddeck, we will in

future call it the ‘id’. This impersonal pronoun seems particularly well

suited for expressing the main characteristic of this province of the

mind - the fact of its being alien to the ego. The super-ego, the ego

and the id - these, then, are the three realms, regions, provinces, into

which we divide an individual’s mental apparatus, and with the mutual

relations of which we shall be concerned in what follows.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4681

 

 

   But first a short interpolation. I suspect that you feel dissatisfied

because the three qualities of the characteristic of consciousness and

the three provinces of the mental apparatus do not fall together into

three peaceable couples, and you may regard this as in some sense

obscuring our findings. I do not think, however, that we should regret

it, and we should tell ourselves that we had no right to expect anysuch smooth arrangement. Let me give you an analogy; analogies, it

is true, decide nothing, but they can make one feel more at home. I

am imagining a country with a landscape of varying configuration - hill-

country, plains, and chains of lakes -, and with a mixed population; it is

inhabited by Germans, Magyars and Slovaks, who carry on different

activities.  Now  things  might  be  partitioned  in  such  a  way  that  the

Germans, who breed cattle, live in the hill-country, the Magyars, who

grow cereals and wine, live in the plains, and the Slovaks, who catch

fish and plait reeds, live by the lakes. If the partitioning could be neat

and clear-cut like this, a Woodrow Wilson would be delighted by it; it

would also be convenient for a lecture in a geography lesson. The

probability is, however, that you will find less orderliness and more

mixing,  if  you  travel  through  the  region.  Germans,  Magyars  and

Slovaks  live  interspersed  all  over  it;  in  the  hill-country  there  is

agricultural land as well, cattle are bred in the plains too. A few things

are  naturally  as  you  expected,  for  fish  cannot  be  caught  in  the

mountains and wine does not grow in the water. Indeed, the picture of

the region that you brought with you may on the whole fit the facts; but

you will have to put up with deviations in the details.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4682

 

 

   You will not expect me to have much to tell you that is new about the

id apart from its new name. It is the dark, inaccessible part of our

personality; what little we know of it we have learnt from our study of

the  dream-work  and  of  the  construction  of  neurotic  symptoms,  and

most of that is of a negative character and can be described only as a

contrast to the ego. We approach the id with analogies: we call it a

chaos, a cauldron full of seething excitations. We picture it as being

open at its end to somatic influences, and as there taking up into itself

instinctual needs which find their psychical expression in it, but we

cannot say in what substratum. It is filled with energy reaching it from

the instincts, but it has no organization, produces no collective will, but

only a striving to bring about the satisfaction of the instinctual needssubject to the observance of the pleasure principle. The logical laws of

thought do not apply in the id, and this is true above all of the law of

contradiction. Contrary impulses exist side by side, without cancelling

each  other  out  or  diminishing  each  other:  at  the  most  they  may

converge  to  form  compromises  under  the  dominating  economic

pressure towards the discharge of energy. There is nothing in the id

that could be compared with negation; and we perceive with surprise

an exception to the philosophical theorem that space and time are

necessary forms of our mental acts. There is nothing in the id that

corresponds to the idea of time; there is no recognition of the passage

of time, and - a thing that is most remarkable and awaits consideration

in  philosophical  thought  -  no  alteration  in  its  mental  processes  is

produced by the passage of time. Wishful impulses which have never

passed beyond the id, but impressions, too, which have been sunk

into the id by repression, are virtually immortal; after the passage of

decades they behave as though they had just occurred. They can only

be recognized as belonging to the past, can only lose their importance

and  be  deprived  of  their  cathexis  of  energy,  when  they  have  been

made  conscious  by  the  work  of  analysis,  and  it  is  on  this  that  the

therapeutic effect of analytic treatment rests to no small extent.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4683

 

   Again and again I have had the impression that we have made too

little theoretical use of this fact, established beyond any doubt, of the

unalterability  by  time  of  the  repressed.  This  seems  to  offer  an

approach to the most profound discoveries. Nor, unfortunately, have I

myself made any progress here.

   The id of course knows no judgements of value: no good and evil,

no  morality.  The  economic  or,  if  you  prefer,  the  quantitative  factor,

which is intimately linked to the pleasure principle, dominates all its

processes. Instinctual cathexes seeking discharge - that, in our view,

is  all  there  is  in  the  id.  It  even  seems  that  the  energy  of  these

instinctual impulses is in a state different from that in the other regions

of the mind, far more mobile and capable of discharge; otherwise thedisplacements  and  condensations  would  not  occur  which  are

characteristic of the id and which so completely disregard the quality

of what is cathected - what in the ego we should call an idea. We

would  give  much  to  understand  more  about  these  things!  You  can

see,  incidentally,  that  we  are  in  a  position  to  attribute  to  the  id

characteristics other than that of its being unconscious, and you can

recognize the possibility of portions of the ego and super-ego being

unconscious  without  possessing  the  same  primitive  and  irrational

characteristics.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4684

 

   We can best arrive at the characteristics of the actual ego, in so far

as  it  can  be  distinguished  from  the  id  and  from  the  super-ego,  by

examining its relation to the outermost superficial portion of the mental

apparatus, which we describe as the system Pcpt.-Cs. This system is

turned towards the external world, it is the medium for the perceptions

arising  thence,  and  during  its  functioning  the  phenomenon  of

consciousness  arises  in  it.  It  is  the  sense-organ  of  the  entire

apparatus; moreover it is receptive not only to excitations from outside

but  also  to  those  arising  from  the  interior  of  the  mind.  We  need

scarcely look for a justification of the view that the ego is that portion

of the id which was modified by the proximity and influence of the

external world, which is adapted for the reception of stimuli and as a

protective shield against stimuli, comparable to the cortical layer by

which a small piece of living substance is surrounded. The relation to

the external world has become the decisive factor for the ego; it has

taken  on  the  task  of  representing  the  external  world  to  the  id  -

fortunately for the id, which could not escape destruction if, in its blind

efforts for the satisfaction of its instincts, it disregarded that supreme

external power. In accomplishing this function, the ego must observe

the  external  world,  must  lay  down  an  accurate  picture  of  it  in  the

memory-traces of its perceptions, and by its exercise of the function of

‘reality-testing’ must put aside whatever in this picture of the external

world is an addition derived from internal sources of excitation. Theego  controls  the  approaches  to  motility  under  the  id’s  orders;  but

between a need and an action it has interposed a postponement in the

form  of  the  activity  of  thought,  during  which  it  makes  use  of  the

mnemic  residues  of  experience.  In  that  way  it  has  dethroned  the

pleasure  principle  which  dominates  the  course  of  events  in  the  id

without  any  restriction  and  has  replaced  it  by  the  reality  principle,

which promises more certainty and greater success.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4685

 

   The relation to time, which is so hard to describe, is also introduced

into the ego by the perceptual system; it can scarcely be doubted that

the mode of operation of that system is what provides the origin of the

idea  of  time.  But  what  distinguishes  the  ego  from  the  id  quite

especially is a tendency to synthesis in its contents, to a combination

and unification in its mental processes which are totally lacking in the

id. When presently we come to deal with the instincts in mental life we

shall, I hope, succeed in tracing this essential characteristic of the ego

back to its source. It alone produces the high degree of organization

which  the  ego  needs  for  its  best  achievements.  The  ego  develops

from perceiving the instincts to controlling them; but this last is only

achieved by the representative of the instinct being allotted its proper

place  in  a  considerable  assemblage,  by  its  being  taken  up  into  a

coherent context. To adopt a popular mode of speaking, we might say

that the ego stands for reason and good sense while the id stands for

the untamed passions.

   So far we have allowed ourselves to be impressed by the merits and

capabilities of the ego; it is now time to consider the other side as well.

The ego is after all only a portion of the id, a portion that has been

expediently  modified  by  the  proximity  of  the  external  world  with  its

threat  of  danger.  From  a  dynamic  point  of  view  it  is  weak,  it  has

borrowed  its  energies  from  the  id,  and  we  are  not  entirely  without

insight into the methods - we might call them dodges - by which it

extracts further amounts of energy from the id. One such method, for

instance, is by identifying itself with actual or abandoned objects. Theobject-cathexes spring from the instinctual demands of the id. The ego

has in the first instance to take note of them. But by identifying itself

with the object it recommends itself to the id in place of the object and

seeks to divert the id’s libido on to itself. We have already seen that in

the  course  of  its  life  the  ego  takes  into  itself  a  large  number  of

precipitates like this of former object-cathexes. The ego must on the

whole carry out the id’s intentions, it fulfils its task by finding out the

circumstances in which those intentions can best be achieved. The

ego’s relation to the id might be compared with that of a rider to his

horse. The horse supplies the locomotive energy, while the rider has

the  privilege  of  deciding  on  the  goal  and  of  guiding  the  powerful

animal’s movement. But only too often there arises between the ego

and the id the not precisely ideal situation of the rider being obliged to

guide the horse along the path by which it itself wants to go.

   There is one portion of the id from which the ego has separated

itself  by  resistances  due  to  repression.  But  the  repression  is  not

carried over into the id: the repressed merges into the remainder of

the id.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4686

 

   We are warned by a proverb against serving two masters at the

same  time.  The  poor  ego  has  things  even  worse:  it  serves  three

severe  masters  and  does  what  it  can  to  bring  their  claims  and

demands  into  harmony  with  one  another.  These  claims  are  always

divergent and often seem incompatible. No wonder that the ego so

often  fails  in  its  task.  Its  three  tyrannical  masters  are  the  external

world, the super-ego and the id. When we follow the ego’s efforts to

satisfy them simultaneously - or rather, to obey them simultaneously -

we cannot feel any regret at having personified this ego and having

set it up as a separate organism. It feels hemmed in on three sides,

threatened by three kinds of danger, to which, if it is hard pressed, it

reacts by generating anxiety. Owing to its origin from the experiences

of  the  perceptual  system,  it  is  earmarked  for  representing  the

demands of the external world, but it strives too to be a loyal servantof the id, to remain on good terms with it, to recommend itself to it as

an object and to attract its libido to itself. In its attempts to mediate

between  the  id  and  reality,  it  is  often  obliged  to  cloak  the Ucs.

commands of the id with its own Pcs. rationalizations, to conceal the

id’s conflicts with reality, to profess, with diplomatic disingenuousness,

to be taking notice of reality even when the id has remained rigid and

unyielding. On the other hand it is observed at every step it takes by

the  strict  super-ego,  which  lays  down  definite  standards  for  its

conduct, without taking any account of its difficulties from the direction

of the id and the external world, and which, if those standards are not

obeyed, punishes it with tense feelings of inferiority and of guilt. Thus

the  ego,  driven  by  the  id,  confined  by  the  super-ego,  repulsed  by

reality,  struggles  to  master  its  economic  task  of  bringing  about

harmony among the forces and influences working in and upon it; and

we can understand how it is that so often we cannot suppress a cry:

‘Life is not easy!’ If the ego is obliged to admit its weakness it breaks

out in anxiety - realistic anxiety regarding the external world, moral

anxiety  regarding  the  super-ego  and  neurotic  anxiety  regarding  the

strength of the passions in the id.

      I  should  like  to  portray  the  structural  relations  of  the  mental

personality,  as  I  have  described  them  to  you,  in  the  unassuming

sketch which I now present you with:

 

 













 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      4687

 

   As you see here, the super-ego merges into the id; indeed, as heir

to the Oedipus complex it has intimate relations with the id; it is more

remote  than  the  ego  from  the  perceptual  system.  The  id  has

intercourse  with  the  external  world  only  through  the  ego  -  at  least,

according to this diagram. It is certainly hard to say to-day how far the

drawing is correct. In one respect it is undoubtedly not. The space

occupied  by  the  unconscious  id  ought  to  have  been  incomparably

greater than that of the ego or the preconscious. I must ask you to

correct it in your thoughts.

 

   And here is another warning, to conclude these remarks, which have

certainly been exacting and not, perhaps, very illuminating. In thinking

of this division of the personality into an ego, a super-ego and an id,

you will not, of course, have pictured sharp frontiers like the artificial

ones  drawn  in  political  geography.  We  cannot  do  justice  to  the

characteristics of the mind by linear outlines like those in a drawing or

in  primitive  painting,  but  rather  by  areas  of  colour  melting  into  one

another  as  they  are  presented  by  modern  artists.  After  making  the

separation we must allow what we have separated to merge together

once more. You must not judge too harshly a first attempt at giving a

pictorial  representations  of  something  so  intangible  as  psychical

processes.  It  is  highly  probable  that  the  development  of  these

divisions  is  subject  to  great  variations  in  different  individuals;  it  is

possible that in the course of actual functioning they may change and

go through a temporary phase of involution. Particularly in the case of

what is phylogenetically the last and most delicate of these divisions -

the differentiation between the ego and the super-ego - something of

the sort seems to be true. There is no question but that the same thing

results from psychical illness. It is easy to imagine, too, that certain

mystical  practices  may  succeed  in  upsetting  the  normal  relations

between  the  different  regions  of  the  mind,  so  that,  for  instance,

perception may be able to grasp happenings in the depths of the ego

and in the id which were otherwise inaccessible to it. It may safely be

doubted, however, whether this road will lead us to the ultimate truths

from  which  salvation  is  to  be  expected.  Nevertheless  it  may  beadmitted that the therapeutic efforts of psycho-analysis have chosen a

similar line of approach. Its intention is, indeed, to strengthen the ego,

to make it more independent of the super-ego, to widen its field of

perception  and  enlarge  its  organization,  so  that  it  can  appropriate

fresh portions of the id. Where id was, there ego shall be. It is a work

of culture - not unlike the draining of the Zuider Zee.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4688

 

                                  LECTURE XXXII

 

                      ANXIETY AND INSTINCTUAL LIFE

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - You will not be surprised to hear that I have a

number of novelties to report to you about our conception of anxiety

and of the basic instincts of mental life; nor will you be surprised to

learn that none of these novelties can claim to offer a final solution of

these still unsettled problems. I have a particular reason for using the

word ‘conception’ here. These are the most difficult problems that are

set  to  us,  but  their  difficulty  does  not  lie  in  any  insufficiency  of

observations;  what  present  us  with  these  riddles  are  actually  the

commonest and most familiar of phenomena. Nor does the difficulty lie

in  the  recondite  nature  of  the  speculations  to  which  they  give  rise;

speculative consideration plays little part in this sphere. But it is truly a

matter of conceptions - that is to say, of introducing the right abstract

ideas,  whose  application  to  the  raw  material  of  observation  will

produce order and clarity in it.

 

   I devoted a lecture (the twenty-fifth) to anxiety in my previous series;

and I must briefly recapitulate what I said in it. We described anxiety

as an affective state - that is to say, a combination of certain feelings

in the pleasure-unpleasure series with the corresponding innervations

of  discharge  and  a  perception  of  them,  but  probably  also  the

precipitate of a particular important event, incorporated by inheritance

-  something  that  may  thus  be  likened  to  an  individually  acquiredhysterical attack. The event which we look upon as having left behind

it an affective trace of this sort is the process of birth, at the time of

which  the  effects  upon  the  heart’s  action  and  upon  respiration

characteristic of anxiety were expedient ones. The very first anxiety

would  thus  have  been  a  toxic  one.  We  then  started  off  from  a

distinction between realistic anxiety and neurotic anxiety, of which the

former was a reaction, which seemed intelligible to us, to a danger -

that  is,  to  an  expected  injury  from  outside  -  while  the  latter  was

completely enigmatic, and appeared to be pointless.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4689

 

   In an analysis of realistic anxiety we brought it down to the state of

increased sensory attention and motor tension which we describe as

‘preparedness for anxiety’. It is out of this that the anxiety reaction

develops. Here two outcomes are possible. Either the generation of

anxiety - the repetition of the old traumatic experience - is limited to a

signal, in which case the remainder of the reaction can adapt itself to

the new situation of danger and can proceed to flight or defence; or

the old situation can retain the upper hand and the total reaction may

consist in no more than a generation of anxiety, in which case the

affective state becomes paralysing and will be inexpedient for present

purposes.

   We then turned to neurotic anxiety and pointed out that we observe

it under three conditions. We find it first as a freely floating, general

apprehensiveness,  ready  to  attach  itself  temporarily,  in  the  form  of

what  is  known  as  ‘expectant  anxiety’,  to  any  possibility  that  may

freshly arise - as happens, for instance, in a typical anxiety neurosis.

Secondly, we find it firmly attached to certain ideas in the so-called

‘phobias’, in which it is still possible to recognize a relation to external

danger but in which we must judge the fear exaggerated out of all

proportion.  Thirdly  and  lastly,  we  find  anxiety  in  hysteria  and  other

forms of severe neurosis, where it either accompanies symptoms or

emerges  independently  as  an  attack  or  more  persistent  state,  but

always without any visible basis in an external danger. We then askedourselves  two  questions:  ‘What  are  people  afraid  of  in  neurotic

anxiety?’ and ‘How are we to bring it into relation with realistic anxiety

felt in the face of external dangers?’

      Our  investigations  were  far  from  remaining  unsuccessful:  we

reached a few important conclusions. In regard to anxious expectation

clinical experience revealed that it had a regular connection with the

libidinal economics of sexual life. The commonest cause of anxiety

neurosis is unconsummated excitation. Libidinal excitation is aroused

but  not  satisfied,  not  employed;  apprehensiveness  then  appears

instead of this libido that has been diverted from its employment. I

even thought I was justified in saying that this unsatisfied libido was

directly changed into anxiety. This view found support in some quite

regularly occurring phobias of small children. Many of these phobias

are very puzzling to us, but others, such as the fear of being alone and

the fear of strangers, can be explained with certainty. Loneliness as

well  as  a  strange  face  arouse  the  child’s  longing  for  his  familiar

mother; he is unable to control this libidinal excitation, he cannot hold

it in suspense but changes it into anxiety. This infantile anxiety must

therefore be regarded not as of the realistic but as of the neurotic kind.

Infantile phobias and the expectation of anxiety in anxiety neurosis

offer us two examples of one way in which neurotic anxiety originates:

by a direct transformation of libido. We shall at once come to know of

a second mechanism, but it will turn out not to be very different from

the first.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4690

 

   For we consider that what is responsible for the anxiety in hysteria

and  other  neuroses  is  the  process  of  repression.  We  believe  it  is

possible to give a more complete account of this than before, if we

separate what happens to the idea that has to be repressed from what

happens to the quota of libido attaching to it. It is the idea which is

subjected to repression and which may be distorted to the point of

being unrecognizable; but its quota of affect is regularly transformed

into anxiety - and this is so whatever the nature of the affect may be,whether it is aggressiveness or love. It makes no essential difference,

then, for what reason a quota of libido has become unemployable:

whether it is on account of the infantile weakness of the ego, as in

children’s phobias, or on account of somatic processes in sexual life,

as in anxiety neurosis, or owing to repression, as in hysteria. Thus in

reality the two mechanisms that bring about neurotic anxiety coincide.

   In the course of these investigations our attention was drawn to a

highly significant relation between the generation of anxiety and the

formation of symptoms - namely, that these two represent and replace

each other. For instance, an agoraphobic patient may start his illness

with an attack of anxiety in the street. This would be repeated every

time he went into the street again. He will now develop the symptom

of  agoraphobia;  this  may  also  be  described  as  an  inhibition,  a

restriction  of  the  ego’s  functioning,  and  by  means  of  it  he  spares

himself  anxiety  attacks.  We  can  witness  the  converse  of  this  if  we

interfere in the formation of symptoms, as is possible, for instance,

with obsessions. If we prevent a patient from carrying out a washing

ceremonial,  he  falls  into  a  state  of  anxiety  which  he  finds  hard  to

tolerate  and  from  which  he  had  evidently  been  protected  by  his

symptom. And it seems, indeed, that the generation of anxiety is the

earlier and the formation of symptoms the later of the two, as though

the symptoms are created in order to avoid the outbreak of the anxiety

state.  This  is  confirmed  too  by  the  fact  that  the  first  neuroses  of

childhood  are  phobias  -  states  in  which  we  see  so  clearly  how  an

initial  generation  of  anxiety  is  replaced  by  the  later  formation  of  a

symptom; we get an impression that it is from these interrelations that

we shall best obtain access to an understanding of neurotic anxiety.

And  at  the  same  time  we  have  also  succeeded  in  answering  the

question of what it is that a person is afraid of in neurotic anxiety and

so  in  establishing  the  connection  between  neurotic  and  realistic

anxiety. What he is afraid of is evidently his own libido. The difference

between this situation and that of realistic anxiety lies in two points:

that the danger is an internal instead of an external one and that it is

not consciously recognized.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      4691

 

   In phobias it is very easy to observe the way in which this internal

danger  is  transformed  into  an  external  one  -  that  is  to  say,  how  a

neurotic anxiety is changed into an apparently realistic one. In order to

simplify what is often a very complicated business, let us suppose that

the agoraphobic patient is invariably afraid of feelings of temptation

that are aroused in him by meeting people in the street. In his phobia

he  brings  about  a  displacement  and  henceforward  is  afraid  of  an

external situation. What he gains by this is obviously that he thinks he

will be able to protect himself better in that way. One can save oneself

from an external danger by flight; fleeing from an internal danger is a

difficult enterprise.

   At the conclusion of my earlier lecture on anxiety I myself expressed

the opinion that, although these various findings of our enquiry were

not  mutually  contradictory,  somehow  they  did  not  fit  in  with  one

another. Anxiety, it seems, in so far as it is an affective state, is the

reproduction of an old event which brought a threat of danger; anxiety

serves  the  purposes  of  self-preservation  and  is  a  signal  of  a  new

danger;  it  arises  from  libido  that  has  in  some  way  become

unemployable and it also arises during the process of repression; it is

replaced by the formation of a symptom, is, as it were, psychically

bound - one has a feeling that something is missing here which would

bring all these pieces together into a whole.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4692

 

 

   Ladies and Gentlemen, the dissection of the mental personality into

a  super-ego,  an  ego  and  an  id,  which  I  put  before  you  in  my  last

lecture, has obliged us to take our bearings afresh in the problem of

anxiety as well. With the thesis that the ego is the sole seat of anxiety

-  that  the  ego  alone  can  produce  and  feel  anxiety  -  we  have

established a new and stable position from which a number of things

take on a new aspect. And indeed it is difficult to see what sense there

would  be  in  speaking  of  an  ‘anxiety  of  the  id’  or  in  attributing  acapacity for apprehensiveness to the super-ego. On the other hand,

we have welcomed a desirable element of correspondence in the fact

that the three main species of anxiety, realistic, neurotic and moral,

can be so easily connected with the ego’s three dependent relations -

to the external world, to the id and to the super-ego. Along with this

new view, moreover, the function of anxiety as a signal announcing a

situation of danger (a notion, incidentally, not unfamiliar to us) comes

into  prominence,  the  question  of  what  the  material  is  out  of  which

anxiety is made loses interest, and the relations between realistic and

neurotic anxiety have become surprisingly clarified and simplified. It is

also  to  be  remarked  that  we  now  understand  the  apparently

complicated cases of the generation of anxiety better than those which

were considered simple.

   For we have recently been examining the way in which anxiety is

generated in certain phobias which we class as anxiety hysteria, and

have  chosen  cases  in  which  we  were  dealing  with  the  typical

repression of wishful impulses arising from the Oedipus complex. We

should  have  expected  to  find  that  it  was  a  libidinal  cathexis  of  the

boy’s  mother  as  object  which,  as  a  result  of  repression,  had  been

changed  into  anxiety  and  which  now  emerged,  expressed  in

symptomatic terms, attached to a substitute for his father. I cannot

present you with the detailed steps of an investigation such as this; it

will be enough to say that the surprising result was the opposite of

what we expected. It was not the repression that created the anxiety;

the  anxiety  was  there  earlier;  it  was  the  anxiety  that  made  the

repression. But what sort of anxiety can it have been? Only anxiety in

the face of a threatening external danger - that is to say, a realistic

anxiety. It is true that the boy felt anxiety in the face of a demand by

his libido - in this instance, anxiety at being in love with his mother; so

the case was in fact one of neurotic anxiety. But this being in love only

appeared  to  him  as  an  internal  danger,  which  he  must  avoid  by

renouncing that object, because it conjured up an external situation of

danger. And in every case we examine we obtain the same result. It

must  be  confessed  that  we  were  not  prepared  to  find  that  internal

instinctual danger would turn out to be a determinant and preparation

for an external, real, situation of danger.

                 New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4693

 

   But we have not made any mention at all so far of what the real

danger is that the child is afraid of as a result of being in love with his

mother. The danger is the punishment of being castrated, of losing his

genital organ. You will of course object that after all that is not a real

danger. Our boys are not castrated because they are in love with their

mothers  during  the  phase  of  the  Oedipus  complex.  But  the  matter

cannot  be  dismissed  so  simply.  Above  all,  it  is  not  a  question  of

whether castration is really carried out; what is decisive is that the

danger is one that threatens from outside and that the child believes in

it. He has some ground for this, for people threaten him often enough

with cutting off his penis during the phallic phase, at the time of his

early masturbation, and hints at that punishment must regularly find a

phylogenetic reinforcement in him. It is our suspicion that during the

human family’s primaeval period castration used actually to be carried

out  by  a  jealous  and  cruel  father  upon  growing  boys,  and  that

circumcision, which so frequently plays a part in puberty rites among

primitive peoples, is a clearly recognizable relic of it. We are aware

that here we are diverging widely from the general opinion; but we

must  hold  fast  to  the  view  that  fear  of  castration  is  one  of  the

commonest  and  strongest  motives  for  repression  and  thus  for  the

formation of neuroses. The analysis of cases in which circumcision,

though not, it is true, castration, has been carried out on boys as a

cure or punishment for masturbation (a far from rare occurrence in

Anglo-American  society)  has  given  our  conviction  a  last  degree  of

certainty. It is very tempting at this point to go more deeply into the

castration complex, but I will stick to our subject.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4694

 

   Fear of castration is not, of course, the only motive for repression:

indeed, it finds no place in women, for though they have a castration

complex they cannot have a fear of being castrated. Its place is takenin  their  sex  by  a  fear  of  loss  of  love,  which  is  evidently  a  later

prolongation of the infant’s anxiety if it finds its mother absent. You will

realize how real a situation of danger is indicated by this anxiety. If a

mother is absent or has withdrawn her love from her child, it is no

longer sure of the satisfaction of its needs and is perhaps exposed to

the most distressing feelings of tension. Do not reject the idea that

these determinants of anxiety may at bottom repeat the situation of

the  original  anxiety  at  birth,  which,  to  be  sure,  also  represented  a

separation from the mother. Indeed, if you follow a train of thought

suggested  by  Ferenczi,  you  may  add  the  fear  of  castration  to  this

series, for a loss of the male organ results in an inability to unite once

more with the mother (or a substitute for her) in the sexual act. I may

mention to you incidentally that the very frequent phantasy of returning

into the mother’s womb is a substitute for this wish to copulate. There

would be many interesting things and surprising connections to tell

you  at  this  point,  but  I  cannot  go  outside  the  framework  of  an

introduction to psycho-analysis. I will only draw your attention to the

fact  that  here  psychological  researches  trench  upon  the  facts  of

biology.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4695

 

   Otto Rank, to whom psycho-analysis is indebted for many excellent

contributions, also has the merit of having expressly emphasized the

significance  of  the  act  of  birth  and  of  separation  from  the  mother.

Nevertheless we have all found it impossible to accept the extreme

inferences  which  he  has  drawn  from  this  factor  as  bearing  on  the

theory of the neuroses and even on analytic therapy. The core of his

theory - that the experience of anxiety at birth is the model of all later

situations of danger - he found already there. If we dwell on these

situations of danger for a moment, we can say that in fact a particular

determinant of anxiety (that is, situation of danger) is allotted to every

age  of  development  as  being  appropriate  to  it.  The  danger  of

psychical helplessness fits the stage of the ego’s early immaturity; the

danger  of  loss  of  an  object  (or  loss  of  love)  fits  the  lack  of  self-sufficiency  in  the  first  years  of  childhood;  the  danger  of  being

castrated fits the phallic phase; and finally fear of the super-ego, which

assumes a special position, fits the period of latency. In the course of

development the old determinants of anxiety should be dropped, since

the  situations  of  danger  corresponding  to  them  have  lost  their

importance owing to the strengthening of the ego. But this only occurs

most incompletely. Many people are unable to surmount the fear of

loss  of  love;  they  never  become  sufficiently  independent  of  other

people’s love and in this respect carry on their behaviour as infants.

Fear of the super-ego should normally never cease, since, in the form

of moral anxiety, it is indispensable in social relations, and only in the

rarest cases can an individual become independent of human society.

A few of the old situations of danger, too, succeed in surviving into

later  periods  by  making  contemporary  modifications  in  their

determinants of anxiety. Thus, for instance, the danger of castration

persists under the mark of syphilidophobia. It is true that as an adult

one knows that castration is no longer customary as a punishment for

the indulgence of sexual desires, but on the other hand one has learnt

that instinctual liberty of that kind is threatened by serious diseases.

There is no doubt that the people we describe as neurotics remain

infantile in their attitude to danger and have not surmounted obsolete

determinants of anxiety. We may take this as a factual contribution to

the characterization of neurotics; it is not so easy to say why it should

be so.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4696

 

      I  hope  you  have  not  lost  the  thread  of  what  I  am  saying  and

remember that we are investigating the relations between anxiety and

repression. In the course of this we have learnt two new things: first,

that anxiety makes repression and not, as we used to think, the other

way round, and that the instinctual situation which is feared goes back

ultimately to an external situation of danger. The next question will be:

how  do  we  now  picture  the  process  of  a  repression  under  the

influence of anxiety? The answer will, I think, be as follows. The egonotices that the satisfaction of an emerging instinctual demand would

conjure  up  one  of  the  well-remembered  situations  of  danger.  This

instinctual cathexis must therefore be somehow suppressed, stopped,

made powerless. We know that the ego succeeds in this task if it is

strong  and  has  drawn  the  instinctual  impulse  concerned  into  its

organization. But what happens in the case of repression is that the

instinctual impulse still belongs to the id and that the ego feels weak.

The  ego  thereupon  helps  itself  by  a  technique  which  is  at  bottom

identical  with  normal  thinking.  Thinking  is  an  experimental  action

carried  out  with  small  amounts  of  energy,  in  the  same  way  as  a

general shifts small figures about on a map before setting his large

bodies of troops in motion. Thus the ego anticipates the satisfaction of

the questionable instinctual impulse and permits it to bring about the

reproduction  of  the  unpleasurable  feelings  at  the  beginning  of  the

feared situation of danger. With this the automatism of the pleasure-

unpleasure principle is brought into operation and now carries out the

repression of the dangerous instinctual impulse.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4697

 

   ‘Stop a moment!’ you will exclaim; ‘we can’t follow you any further

there!’ You are quite right; I must add a little more before it can seem

acceptable to you. First, I must admit that I have tried to translate into

the language of our normal thinking what must in fact be a process

that  is  neither  conscious  nor  preconscious,  taking  place  between

quotas of energy in some unimaginable substratum. But that is not a

strong objection, for it cannot be done in any other way. What is more

important is that we should distinguish clearly what happens in the

ego and what happens in the id when there is a repression. We have

just said what the ego does: it makes use of an experimental cathexis

and  starts  up  the  pleasure-unpleasure  automatism  by  means  of  a

signal  of  anxiety.  After  that,  several  reactions  are  possible  or  a

combination of them in varying proportions. Either the anxiety attack is

fully generated and the ego withdraws entirely from the objectionable

excitation;  or,  in  place  of  the  experimental  cathexis  it  opposes  theexcitation with an anticathexis, and this combines with the energy of

the repressed impulse to form a symptom; or the anticathexis is taken

up into the ego as a reaction-formation, as an intensification of certain

of the ego’s dispositions, as a permanent alteration of it. The more the

generation of anxiety can be restricted to a mere signal, so much the

more does the ego expend on actions of defence which amount to the

psychical binding of the repressed, and so much the closer, too, does

the  process  approximate  to  a  normal  working-over  of  it,  though  no

doubt without attaining to it.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4698

 

   Incidentally, here is a point on which we may dwell for a moment.

You  yourselves  have  no  doubt  assumed  that  what  is  known  as

‘character’, a thing so hard to define, is to be ascribed entirely to the

ego.  We  have  already  made  out  a  little  of  what  it  is  that  creates

character. First and foremost there is the incorporation of the former

parental agency as a super-ego, which is no doubt its most important

and decisive portion, and, further, identifications with the two parents

of  the  later  period  and  with  other  influential  figures,  and  similar

identifications  formed  as  precipitates  of  abandoned  object-relations.

And we may now add as contributions to the construction of character

which  are  never  absent  the  reaction-formations  which  the  ego

acquires - to begin with in making its repressions and later, by a more

normal method, when it rejects unwished-for instinctual impulses.

   Now let us go back and turn to the id. It is not so easy to guess what

occurs  during  repression  in  connection  with  the  instinctual  impulse

that  is  being  fought  against.  The  main  question  which  our  interest

raises is as to what happens to the energy, to the libidinal charge, of

that  excitation  -  how  is  it  employed?  You  recollect  that  the  earlier

hypothesis  was  that  it  is  precisely  this  that  is  transformed  by

repression  into  anxiety.  We  no  longer  feel  able  to  say  that.  The

modest reply will rather be that what happens to it is probably not

always the same thing. There is probably an intimate correspondence

which we ought to get to know about between what is occurring at thetime in the ego and in the id in connection with the repressed impulse.

For  since  we  have  decided  that  the  pleasure-unpleasure  principle,

which  is  set  in  action  by  the  signal  of  anxiety,  plays  a  part  in

repression, we must alter our expectations. That principle exercises

an entirely unrestricted dominance over what happens in the id. We

can rely on its bringing about quite profound changes in the instinctual

impulse in question. We are prepared to find that repression will have

very various consequences, more or less far-reaching. In some cases

the repressed instinctual impulse may retain its libidinal cathexis, and

may  persist  in  the  id  unchanged,  although  subject  to  constant

pressure from the ego. In other cases what seems to happen is that it

is totally destroyed, while its libido is permanently diverted along other

paths.  I  expressed  the  view  that  this  is  what  happens  when  the

Oedipus  complex  is  dealt  with  normally  -  in  this  desirable  case,

therefore, being not simply repressed but destroyed in the id. Clinical

experience has further shown us that in many cases, instead of the

customary result of repression, a degradation of the libido takes place

- a regression of the libidinal organization to an earlier stage. This can,

of course, only occur in the id, and if it occurs it will be under the

influence of the same conflict which was introduced by the signal of

anxiety.  The  most  striking  example  of  this  kind  is  provided  by  the

obsessional  neurosis,  in  which  libidinal  regression  and  repression

operate together.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4699

 

   I fear, Ladies and Gentlemen, that you will find this exposition hard

to follow, and you will guess that I have not stated it exhaustively. I am

sorry to have had to rouse your displeasure. But I can set myself no

other aim than to give you an impression of the nature of our findings

and of the difficulties involved in working them out. The deeper we

penetrate into the study of mental processes the more we recognize

their abundance and complexity. A number of simple formulas which

to begin with seemed to meet our needs have later turned out to be

inadequate.  We  do  not  tire  of  altering  and  improving  them.  In  mylecture on the theory of dreams I introduced you to a region in which

for  fifteen  years  there  has  scarcely  been  a  new  discovery.  Here,

where we are dealing with anxiety, you see everything in a state of

flux  and  change.  These  novelties,  moreover,  have  not  yet  been

thoroughly worked through and perhaps this too adds to the difficulties

of demonstrating them. But have patience! We shall soon be able to

take leave of the subject of anxiety. I cannot promise that it will have

been settled to our satisfaction, but it is to be hoped that we shall have

made a little bit of progress. And in the meantime we have made all

sorts of new discoveries. Now, for instance, our study of anxiety leads

us to add a new feature to our description of the ego. We have said

that  the  ego  is  weak  in  comparison  with  the  id,  that  it  is  its  loyal

servant, eager to carry out its orders and to fulfil its demands. We

have no intention of withdrawing this statement. But on the other hand

this same ego is the better organized part of the id, with its face turned

towards reality. We must not exaggerate the separation between the

two of them too much, and we must not be surprised if the ego on its

part can bring its influence to bear on the processes in the id. I believe

the  ego  exercises  this  influence  by  putting  into  action  the  almost

omnipotent pleasure-unpleasure principle by means of the signal of

anxiety. On the other hand, it shows its weakness again immediately

afterwards, for by the act of repression it renounces a portion of its

organization  and  has  to  allow  the  repressed  instinctual  impulse  to

remain permanently withdrawn from its influence.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4700

 

   And now, only one more remark on the problem of anxiety. Neurotic

anxiety has changed in our hands into realistic anxiety, into fear of

particular external situations of danger. But we cannot stop there, we

must take another step - though it will be a step backward. We ask

ourselves what it is that is actually dangerous and actually feared in a

situation of danger of this kind. It is plainly not the injury to the subject

as  judged  objectively,  for  this  need  be  of  no  significance

psychologically, but something brought about by it in the mind. Birth,for instance, our model for an anxiety state, can after all scarcely be

regarded on its own account as an injury, although it may involve a

danger  of  injuries.  The  essential  thing  about  birth,  as  about  every

situation of danger, is that it calls up in mental experience a state of

highly tense excitation, which is felt as unpleasure and which one is

not able to master by discharging it. Let us call a state of this kind,

before  which  the  efforts  of  the  pleasure  principle  break  down,  a

‘traumatic’ moment. Then, if we take in succession neurotic anxiety,

realistic anxiety and the situation of danger, we arrive at this simple

proposition:  what  is  feared,  what  is  the  object  of  the  anxiety,  is

invariably  the  emergence  of  a  traumatic  moment,  which  cannot  be

dealt  with  by  the  normal  rules  of  the  pleasure  principle.  We

understand at once that our endowment with the pleasure principle

does not guarantee us against objective injuries but only against a

particular injury to our psychical economics. It is a long step from the

pleasure principle to the self-preservative instinct; the intentions of the

two of them are very far from coinciding from the start. But we see

something else besides; perhaps it is the solution we are in search of.

Namely, that in all this it is a question of relative quantities. It is only

the magnitude of the sum of excitation that turns an impression into a

traumatic moment, paralyses the function of the pleasure principle and

gives the situation of danger its significance. And if that is how things

are, if these puzzles can be solved so prosaically, why should it not be

possible for similar traumatic moments to arise in mental life without

reference to hypothetical situations of danger - traumatic moments,

then,  in  which  anxiety  is  not  aroused  as  a  signal  but  is  generated

anew for a fresh reason. Clinical experience declares decidedly that

such is in fact the case. It is only the later repressions that exhibit the

mechanism we have described, in which anxiety is awakened as a

signal  of  an  earlier  situation  of  danger.  The  first  and  original

repressions  arise  directly  from  traumatic  moments,  when  the  ego

meets with an excessively great libidinal demand; they construct their

anxiety afresh, although, it is true, on the model of birth. The same

may apply to the generation of anxiety in anxiety neurosis owing to

somatic damage to the sexual function. We shall no longer maintain

that it is the libido itself that is turned into anxiety in such cases. But I

can see no objection to there being a twofold origin of anxiety - one asa  direct  consequence  of  the  traumatic  moment  and  the  other  as  a

signal threatening a repetition of such a moment.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4701

 

 

   I feel sure you are rejoicing, Ladies and Gentlemen, at not having to

listen to any more about anxiety. But you have gained nothing by it:

what follows is no better. It is my design to introduce you to-day as

well to the field of the libido theory or theory of the instincts, where

there have equally been a number of new developments. I will not

claim that we have made great advances in it, so that it would be

worth your taking any amount of trouble to learn about them. No. This

is a region in which we are struggling laboriously to find our bearings

and make discoveries; you will only be witnesses of our efforts. Here

too I shall have to go back to some of the things I told you earlier.

   The theory of the instincts is so to say our mythology. Instincts are

mythical entities, magnificent in their indefiniteness. In our work we

cannot for a moment disregard them, yet we are never sure that we

are seeing them clearly. You know how popular thinking deals with the

instincts. People assume as many and as various instincts as they

happen to need at the moment - a self-assertive instinct, an imitative

instinct, an instinct of play, a gregarious instinct and many others like

them.  People  take  them  up,  as  it  were,  make  each  of  them  do  its

particular  job,  and  then  drop  them  again.  We  have  always  been

moved by a suspicion that behind all these little ad hoc instincts there

lay concealed something serious and powerful which we should like to

approach  cautiously.  Our  first  step  was  modest  enough.  We  told

ourselves  we  should  probably  not  be  going  astray  if  we  began  by

separating  two  main  instincts  or  classes  of  instincts  or  groups  of

instincts in accordance with the two great needs - hunger and love.

However jealously we usually defend the independence of psychology

from  every  other  science,  here  we  stood  in  the  shadow  of  the

unshakable biological fact that the living individual organism is at the

command of two intentions, self-preservation and the preservation ofthe species, which seem to be independent of each other, which, so

far  as  we  know  at  present,  have  no  common  origin  and  whose

interests are often in conflict in animal life. Actually what we are talking

now  is  biological  psychology,  we  are  studying  the  psychical

accompaniments of biological processes. It was as representing this

aspect of the subject that the ‘ego-instincts’ and the ‘sexual instincts’

were  introduced  into  psycho-analysis.  We  included  in  the  former

everything  that  had  to  do  with  the  preservation,  assertion  and

magnification of the individual. To the latter we had to attribute the

copiousness  called  for  by  infantile  and  perverse  sexual  life.  In  the

course of investigating the neuroses we came to know the ego as the

restricting  and  repressing  power  and  the  sexual  trends  as  the

restricted and repressed one; we therefore believed that we had clear

evidence not only of the difference between the two groups of instincts

but also of the conflict between them. The first object of our study was

only the sexual instincts, whose energy we named ‘libido’. It was in

relation to them that we sought to clarify our ideas of what an instinct

is and what is to be attributed to it. Here we have the libido theory.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4702

 

   An instinct, then, is distinguished from a stimulus by the fact that it

arises from sources of stimulation within the body, that it operates as a

constant  force  and  that  the  subject  cannot  avoid  it  by  flight,  as  is

possible  with  an  external  stimulus.  We  can  distinguish  an  instinct’s

source, object and aim. Its source is a state of excitation in the body,

its aim is the removal of that excitation; on its path from its source to

its aim the instinct becomes operative psychically. We picture it as a

certain quota of energy which presses in a particular direction. It is

from this pressing that it derives its name of ‘Trieb’. People speak of

‘active’ and ‘passive’ instincts, but it would be more correct to speak of

instincts with active and passive aims: for an expenditure of activity is

needed to achieve a passive aim as well. The aim can be achieved in

the subject’s own body; as a rule an external object is brought in, in

regard to which the instinct achieves its external aim; its internal aiminvariably remains the bodily change which is felt as satisfaction. It

has not become clear to us whether the relation of the instinct to its

somatic source gives it a specific quality and if so what. The evidence

of  analytic  experience  shows  that  it  is  an  undoubted  fact  that

instinctual impulses from one source attach themselves to those from

other sources and share their further vicissitudes and that in general

one instinctual satisfaction can be replaced by another. But it must be

admitted that we do not understand this very well. The relations of an

instinct to its aim and object are also open to alterations; both can be

exchanged  for  other  ones,  though  its  relation  to  its  object  is

nevertheless the more easily loosened. A certain kind of modification

of the aim and change of the object, in which our social valuation is

taken into account, is described by us as ‘sublimation’. Besides this,

we  have  grounds  for  distinguishing  instincts  which  are  ‘inhibited  in

their aim’ - instinctual impulses from sources well known to us with an

unambiguous  aim,  but  which  come  to  a  stop  on  their  way  to

satisfaction,  so  that  a  lasting  object-cathexis  comes  about  and  a

permanent  trend.  Such,  for  instance,  is  the  relation  of  tenderness,

which  undoubtedly  originates  from  the  sources  of  sexual  need  and

invariably renounces its satisfaction.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4703

 

   You see how many of the characteristics and vicissitudes of the

instincts still escape our comprehension. A further distinction should

be mentioned here which is exhibited between the sexual and self-

preservative instincts and which would be of the greatest theoretical

importance if it applied to the groups as a whole. The sexual instincts

are noticeable to us for their plasticity, their capacity for altering their

aims, their replaceability, which admits of one instinctual satisfaction

being replaced by another, and their readiness for being deferred, of

which  we  have  just  given  a  good  example  in  the  aim-inhibited

instincts. We should be glad to deny these characteristics to the self-

preservative instincts, and to say of them that they are inflexible, admit

of no delay, are imperative in a very different sense and have a quiteother relation to repression and to anxiety. But a little reflection tells us

that this exceptional position applies, not to all the ego-instincts, but

only  to  hunger  and  thirst,  and  is  evidently  based  on  a  peculiar

character  of  the  sources  of  those  instincts.  A  good  part  of  the

confusing  impression  made  by  all  this  is  that  we  have  not  given

separate  consideration  to  the  alterations  which  the  influence  of  the

organized  ego  makes  in  the  instinctual  impulses  that  belonged

originally to the id.

   We find ourselves on firmer ground when we investigate the manner

in which the life of the instincts serves the sexual function. Here we

have  acquired  quite  definite  knowledge,  with  which  you  too  are

already familiar. It is not the case, then, that we recognize a sexual

instinct which is from the first the vehicle of an urge towards the aim of

the sexual function - the union of the two sex-cells. What we see is a

great number of component instincts arising from different areas and

regions of the body, which strive for satisfaction fairly independently of

one another and find that satisfaction in something that we may call

‘organ-pleasure’.  The  genitals  are  the  latest  of  these  ‘erotogenic

zones’  and  the  name  of  ‘sexual’  pleasure  cannot  be  withheld  from

their organ-pleasure. These impulses which strive for pleasure are not

all taken up into the final organization of the sexual function. A number

of them are set aside as unserviceable, by repression or some other

means; a few of them are diverted from their aim in the remarkable

manner I have mentioned and used to strengthen other impulses; yet

others  persist  in  minor  roles,  and  serve  for  the  performance  of

introductory acts, for the production of fore-pleasure. You have heard

how in the course of this long-drawn-out development several phases

of  preliminary  organization  can  be  recognized  and  also  how  this

history of the sexual function explains its aberrations and atrophies.

The first of these ‘pregenital’ phases is known to us as the oral one

because,  in  conformity  with  the  way  in  which  an  infant  in  arms  is

nourished, the erotogenic zone of the mouth dominates what may be

called the sexual activity of that period of life. At a second level the

sadistic  and anal  impulses  come  to  the  fore,  undoubtedly  in

connection with the appearance of the teeth, the strengthening of the

muscular  apparatus  and  the  control  of  the  sphincter  functions.  We

have  learnt  a  number  of  interesting  details  about  this  remarkablestage of development in particular. Thirdly comes the phallic phase in

which in both sexes the male organ (and what corresponds to it in

girls) attains an importance which can no longer be overlooked. We

have  reserved  the  name  of genital  phase  for  the  definitive  sexual

organization  which  is  established  after  puberty  and  in  which  the

female genital organ for the first time meets with the recognition which

the male one acquired long before.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4704

 

   So far all this is trite repetition. And you must not suppose that the

many things I have not mentioned this time no longer hold good. This

repetition was necessary so that I might use it as the starting-point for

a report on the advances in our knowledge. We can boast of having

learnt much that is new, particularly about the early organizations of

the libido, and of having obtained a clearer grasp of the significance of

what is old; and I will give you at least a few examples to demonstrate

this. Abraham showed in 1924 that two stages can be distinguished in

the  sadistic-anal  phase.  The  earlier  of  these  is  dominated  by  the

destructive trends of destroying and losing, the later one by trends

friendly towards objects - those of keeping and possessing. It is in the

middle of this phase, therefore, that consideration for the object makes

its first appearance as a precursor of a later erotic cathexis. We are

equally justified in making a similar subdivision in the first, oral phase.

In  the  first  sub-stage  what  is  in  question  is  only  oral  incorporation,

there  is  no  ambivalence  at  all  in  the  relation  to  the  object  -  the

mother’s breast. The second stage, characterized by the emergence

of the biting activity, may be described as the ‘oral-sadistic’ one; it

exhibits  for  the  first  time  the  phenomena  of  ambivalence,  which

become  so  much  clearer  afterwards,  in  the  following  sadistic-anal

phase. The value of these new distinctions is to be seen especially if

we look for the dispositional points in the development of the libido in

the  case  of  particular  neuroses,  such  as  obsessional  neurosis  or

melancholia. You must here recall to mind what we have learnt about

the  connection  between  fixation  of  the  libido,  disposition  andregression.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4705

 

   Our attitude to the phases of the organization of the libido has in

general shifted a little. Whereas earlier we chiefly emphasized the way

in which each of them passed away before the next, our attention now

is directed to the facts that show us how much of each earlier phase

persists alongside of and behind the later configurations and obtains a

permanent representation in the libidinal economy and character of

the  subject.  Still  more  significant  have  studies  become  which  have

taught us how frequently under pathological conditions regressions to

earlier phases occur and that particular regressions are characteristic

of particular forms of illness. But I cannot go into that here, it forms

part of the specialized psychology of the neuroses.

   We have been able to study transformations of instinct and similar

processes particularly in anal erotism, the excitations arising from the

sources of the erotogenic anal zone, and we were surprised at the

multiplicity of uses to which these instinctual impulses are put. It may

not be easy, perhaps, to get free from the contempt into which this

particular zone has fallen in the course of evolution. Let us therefore

allow ourselves to be reminded by Abraham that embryologically the

anus corresponds to the primitive mouth, which has migrated down to

the end of the bowel. We have learnt, then, that after a person’s own

faeces,  his  excrement,  has  lost  its  value  for  him,  this  instinctual

interest derived from the anal source passes over on to objects that

can be presented as gifts. And this is rightly so, for faeces were the

first gift that an infant could make, something he could part with out of

love  for  whoever  was  looking  after  him.  After  this,  corresponding

exactly  to  analogous  changes  of  meaning  that  occur  in  linguistic

development,  this  ancient  interest  in  faeces  is  transformed  into  the

high valuation of gold and money but also makes a contribution to the

affective cathexis of baby and penis. It is a universal conviction among

children, who long retain the cloaca theory, that babies are born from

the bowel like a piece of faeces: defaecation is the model of the act ofbirth. But the penis too has its fore-runner in the column of faeces

which fills and stimulates the mucous membrane of the bowel. When a

child,  unwillingly  enough,  comes  to  realize  that  there  are  human

creatures who do not possess a penis, that organ appears to him as

something  detachable  from  the  body  and  becomes  unmistakably

analogous  to  the  excrement,  which  was  the  first  piece  of  bodily

material that had to be renounced. A great part of anal erotism is thus

carried over into a cathexis of the penis. But the interest in that part of

the body has, in addition to its anal-erotic root, an oral one which is

perhaps more powerful still: for when sucking has come to an end, the

penis also becomes heir of the mother’s nipple.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4706

 

   If one is not aware of these profound connections, it is impossible to

find  one’s  way  about  in  the  phantasies  of  human  beings,  in  their

associations, influenced as they are by the unconscious, and in their

symptomatic  language.  Faeces  -  money  -  gift  -  baby  -  penis  are

treated  there  as  though  they  meant  the  same  thing,  and  they  are

represented too by the same symbols. Nor must you forget that I have

only  been  able  to  give  you  very  incomplete  information.  I  may

hurriedly  add,  perhaps,  that  interest  in  the  vagina,  which  awakens

later,  is  also  essentially  of  anal-erotic  origin.  This  is  not  to  be

wondered at, for the vagina itself, to borrow an apt phrase from Lou

Andreas-Salomé,  is  ‘taken  on  lease’  from  the  rectum:  in  the  life  of

homosexuals,  who  have  failed  to  accomplish  some  part  of  normal

sexual development, the vagina is once more represented by it. In

dreams a locality often appears which was earlier a simple room but is

now divided into two by a wall, or the other way round. This always

means the relation of the vagina to the bowel. It is also easy to follow

the  way  in  which  in  girls  what  is  an  entirely  unfeminine  wish  to

possess a penis is normally transformed into a wish for a baby, and

then for a man as the bearer of the penis and giver of the baby; so

that here we can see too how a portion of what was originally anal-

erotic interest obtains admission into the later genital organization.   During our studies of the pregenital phases of the libido we have

also gained a few fresh insights into the formation of character. We

noticed a triad of character-traits which are found together with fair

regularity:  orderliness,  parsimoniousness  and  obstinacy;  and  we

inferred from the analysis of people exhibiting these traits that they

have arisen from their anal erotism becoming absorbed and employed

in a different way. We therefore speak of an ‘anal character’ in which

we find this remarkable combination and we draw a contrast to some

extent between the anal character and unmodified anal erotism. We

also discovered a similar but perhaps still firmer link between ambition

and  urethral  erotism.  A  striking  allusion  to  this  connection  is  to  be

seen in the legend that Alexander the Great was born during the same

night in which a certain Herostratus set fire to the celebrated temple of

Artemis at Ephesus out of a sheer desire for fame. So the ancients

would seem not to have been unaware of the connection. You know,

of course, how much urination has to do with fire and extinguishing

fire. We naturally expect that other character traits as well will turn out

similarly to be precipitates or reaction-formations related to particular

pregenital libidinal structures; but we have not yet been able to show

this.

 

   It is now time, however, for me to go back both in history and in my

subject-matter and once more to take up the most general problems of

instinctual life. To begin with, the opposition between the ego-instincts

and the sexual instincts lay at the base of our libido theory. When later

on we began to study the ego itself more closely and arrived at the

conception of narcissism, this distinction itself lost its foundation. In

rare cases one can observe that the ego has taken itself as an object

and is behaving as though it were in love with itself. Hence the term

‘narcissism’,  borrowed  from  the  Greek  myth.  But  that  is  only  an

extreme  exaggeration  of  a  normal  state  of  affairs.  We  came  to

understand that the ego is always the main reservoir of libido, from

which libidinal cathexes of objects go out and into which they return

again, while the major part of this libido remains permanently in the

ego. Thus ego-libido is being constantly changed into object-libido and

object-libido into ego-libido. But in that case they could not be different

in their nature and it could have no sense to distinguish the energy ofthe one from the energy of the other; we could either drop the term

‘libido’ or use it as synonymous with psychical energy in general.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4707

 

   We did not maintain this position for long. Our feeling of their being a

contrariety  in  instinctual  life  soon  found  another  and  sharper

expression. It is not my wish, however, to put before you the origin of

this novelty in the theory of the instincts; it too is based essentially on

biological  considerations.  I  shall  offer  it  to  you  as  a  ready-made

product.  Our  hypothesis  is  that  there  are  two  essentially  different

classes  of  instincts:  the  sexual  instincts,  understood  in  the  widest

sense - Eros, if you prefer that name - and the aggressive instincts,

whose  aim  is  destruction.  When  it  is  put  to  you  like  this,  you  will

scarcely regard it as a novelty. It looks like an attempt at a theoretical

transfiguration  of  the  commonplace  opposition  between  loving  and

hating, which coincides, perhaps, with the other polarity, of attraction

and repulsion, which physics assumes in the inorganic world. But it is

a remarkable thing that this hypothesis is nevertheless felt by many

people as an innovation and, indeed, as a most undesirable one which

should be got rid of as quickly as possible. I presume that a strong

affective factor is coming into effect in this rejection. Why have we

ourselves needed such a long time before we decided to recognize an

aggressive instinct? Why did we hesitate to make use, on behalf of

our theory, of facts which were obvious and familiar to everyone? We

should probably have met with little resistance if we had wanted to

ascribe an instinct with such an aim to animals. But to include it in the

human  constitution  appears  sacrilegious;  it  contradicts  too  many

religious  presumptions  and  social  conventions.  No,  man  must  be

naturally  good  or  at  least  good-natured.  If  he  occasionally  shows

himself brutal, violent or cruel, these are only passing disturbances of

his  emotional  life,  for  the  most  part  provoked,  or  perhaps  only

consequences  of  the  inexpedient  social  regulations  which  he  has

hitherto imposed on himself.

                 New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4708

 

      Unfortunately  what  history  tells  us  and  what  we  ourselves  have

experienced  does  not  speak  in  this  sense  but  rather  justifies  a

judgement  that  belief  in  the  ‘goodness’  of  human  nature  is  one  of

those evil illusions by which mankind expect their lives to be beautified

and made easier while in reality they only cause damage. We need

not continue this controversy, since we have argued in favour of a

special aggressive and destructive instinct in men not on account of

the teachings of history or of our experience in life but on the basis of

general  considerations  to  which  we  were  led  by  examining  the

phenomena of sadism and masochism. As you know, we call it sadism

when  sexual  satisfaction  is  linked  to  the  condition  of  the  sexual

object’s suffering pain, ill-treatment and humiliation, and masochism

when the need is felt of being the ill-treated object oneself. As you

know too, a certain admixture of these two trends is included in normal

sexual relations, and we speak of perversions when they push the

other sexual aims into the background and replace them by their own

aims. And you will scarcely have failed to notice that sadism has a

more intimate relation with masculinity and masochism with femininity,

as though there were a secret kinship present; though I must add that

we have made no progress along that path. Both phenomena, sadism

and masochism alike, but masochism quite especially, present a truly

puzzling problem to the libido theory; and it is only proper if what was

a stumbling-block for the one theory should become the cornerstone

of the theory replacing it.

   It is our opinion, then, that in sadism and in masochism we have

before us two excellent examples of a mixture of the two classes of

instinct,  of  Eros  and  aggressiveness;  and  we  proceed  to  the

hypothesis  that  this  relation  is  a  model  one  -  that  every  instinctual

impulse that we can examine consists of similar fusions or alloys of

the two classes of instinct. These fusions, of course, would be in the

most  varied  ratios.  Thus  the  erotic  instincts  would  introduce  the

multiplicity of their sexual aims into the fusion, while the others would

only admit of mitigations or gradations in their monotonous trend. This

hypothesis opens a prospect to us of investigations which may someday  be  of  great  importance  for  the  understanding  of  pathological

processes. For fusions may also come apart, and we may expect that

functioning will be most gravely affected by defusions of such a kind.

But these conceptions are still too new; no one has yet tried to apply

them in our work.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4709

 

      Let  us  go  back  to  the  special  problem  presented  to  us  by

masochism. If for a moment we leave its erotic components on one

side, it affords us a guarantee of the existence of a trend that has self-

destruction as its aim. If it is true of the destructive instinct as well that

the ego - but what we have in mind here is rather the id, the whole

person - originally includes all the instinctual impulses, we are led to

the view that masochism is older than sadism, and that sadism is the

destructive instinct directed outwards, thus acquiring the characteristic

of aggressiveness. A certain amount of the original destructive instinct

may still remain in the interior. It seems that we can only perceive it

under  two  conditions:  if  it  is  combined  with  erotic  instincts  into

masochism or if - with a greater or lesser erotic addition - it is directed

against the external world as aggressiveness. And now we are struck

by the significance of the possibility that the aggressiveness may not

be able to find satisfaction in the external world because it comes up

against  real  obstacles.  If  this  happens,  it  will  perhaps  retreat  and

increase  the  amount  of  self-destructiveness  holding  sway  in  the

interior.  We  shall  hear  how  this  is  in  fact  what  occurs  and  how

important a process this is. Impeded aggressiveness seems to involve

a  grave  injury.  It  really  seems  as  though  it  is  necessary  for  us  to

destroy some other thing or person in order not to destroy ourselves,

in  order  to  guard  against  the  impulsion  to  self-destruction.  A  sad

disclosure indeed for the moralist!

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4710

    But the moralist will console himself for a long time to come with the

improbability of our speculations. A queer instinct indeed, directed to

the destruction of its own organic home! Poets, it is true, talk of such

things; but poets are irresponsible people and enjoy the privilege of

poetic  licence.  Incidentally,  such  ideas  are  not  foreign  even  to

physiology:  consider  the  notion,  for  instance,  of  the  mucous

membrane  of  the  stomach  digesting  itself.  It  must  be  admitted,

however, that our self-destructive instinct calls for support on a wider

basis. One cannot, after all, venture on a hypothesis of such a wide

range  merely  because  a  few  poor  fools  have  linked  their  sexual

satisfaction  to  a  peculiar  condition.  A  more  profound  study  of  the

instincts will, I believe, give us what we need. The instincts rule not

only mental but also vegetative life, and these organic instincts exhibit

a characteristic which deserves our deepest interest. (We shall not be

able  to  judge  until  later  whether  it  is  a  general  characteristic  of

instincts.) For they reveal an effort to restore an earlier state of things.

We may suppose that from the moment at which a state of things that

has once been attained is upset, an instinct arises to create it afresh

and brings about phenomena which we can describe as a ‘compulsion

to  repeat’.  Thus  the  whole  of  embryology  is  an  example  of  the

compulsion to repeat. A power of regenerating lost organs extends far

up into the animal kingdom, and the instinct for recovery to which,

alongside of therapeutic assistance, our cures are due must be the

residue of this capacity which is so enormously developed in the lower

animals. The spawning migrations of fishes, the migratory flights of

birds, and possibly all that we describe as manifestations of instinct in

animals,  take  place  under  the  orders  of  the  compulsion  to  repeat,

which expresses the conservative nature of the instincts. Nor have we

far to look in the mental field for its manifestations. We have been

struck  by  the  fact  that  the  forgotten  and  repressed  experiences  of

childhood are reproduced during the work of analysis in dreams and

reactions, particularly in those occurring in the transference, although

their revival runs counter to the interest of the pleasure principle; and

we have explained this by supposing that in these cases a compulsion

to repeat is overcoming even the pleasure principle. Outside analysis,

too, something similar can be observed. There are people in whose

lives the same reactions are perpetually being repeated uncorrected,to  their  own  detriment,  or  others  who  seem  to  be  pursued  by  a

relentless fate, though closer investigation teaches us that they are

unwittingly bringing this fate on themselves. In such cases we attribute

a ‘daemonic’ character to the compulsion to repeat.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4711

 

   But how can this conservative characteristic of instincts help us to

understand our self-destructiveness? What earlier state of things does

an instinct such as this want to restore? Well, the answer is not far to

seek  and  opens  wide  perspectives.  If  it  is  true  that  -  at  some

immeasurably remote time and in a manner we cannot conceive - life

once  proceeded  out  of  inorganic  matter,  then,  according  to  our

presumption, an instinct must have arisen which sought to do away

with  life  once  more  and  to  re-establish  the  inorganic  state.  If  we

recognize in this instinct the self-destructiveness of our hypothesis, we

may  regard  the  self-destructiveness  as  an  expression  of  a  ‘death

instinct’ which cannot fail to be present in every vital process. And now

the instincts that we believe in divide themselves into two groups - the

erotic  instincts,  which  seek  to  combine  more  and  more  living

substance  into  ever  greater  unities,  and  the  death  instincts,  which

oppose this effort and lead what is living back into an inorganic state.

From the concurrent and opposing action of these two proceed the

phenomena of life which are brought to an end by death.

   You may perhaps shrug your shoulders and say: ‘That isn’t natural

science, it’s Schopenhauer’s philosophy!’ But, Ladies and Gentlemen,

why  should  not  a  bold  thinker  have  guessed  something  that  is

afterwards  confirmed  by  sober  and  painstaking  detailed  research?

Moreover, there is nothing that has not been said already, and similar

things  had  been  said  by  many  people  before  Schopenhauer.

Furthermore, what we are saying is not even genuine Schopenhauer.

We are not asserting that death is the only aim of life; we are not

overlooking the fact that there is life as well as death. We recognize

two basic instincts and give each of them its own aim. How the two of

them are mingled in the process of living, how the death instinct ismade  to  serve  the  purposes  of  Eros,  especially  by  being  turned

outwards as aggressiveness - these are tasks which are left to future

investigation.  We  have  not  gone  beyond  the  point  at  which  this

prospect  lies  open  before  us.  The  question,  too,  of  whether  the

conservative  character  may  not  belong  to  all  instincts  without

exception, whether the erotic instincts as well may not be seeking to

bring back an earlier state of things when they strive to bring about a

synthesis of living things into greater unities - this question, too, we

must leave unanswered.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4712

 

 

   We have travelled somewhat far from our basis. I will tell you in

retrospect the starting-point of these reflections on the theory of the

instincts. It was the same as that which led us to revise the relation

between the ego and the unconscious - the impression derived from

the work of analysis that the patient who puts up a resistance is so

often unaware of that resistance. Not only the fact of the resistance is

unconscious to him, however, but its motives as well. We were obliged

to search out these motives or motive, and to our surprise we found

them in a powerful need for punishment which we could only class

with masochistic wishes. The practical significance of this discovery is

not less than its theoretical one, for the need for punishment is the

worst enemy of our therapeutic efforts. It is satisfied by the suffering

which is linked to the neurosis, and for that reason holds fast to being

ill. It seems that this factor, an unconscious need for punishment, has

a share in every neurotic illness. And here those cases in which the

neurotic  suffering  can  be  replaced  by  suffering  of  another  kind  are

wholly convincing. I will report an experience of this kind.

   I once succeeded in freeing an unmarried woman, no longer young,

from the complex of symptoms which had condemned her for some

fifteen years to an existence of torment and had excluded her from

any participation in life. She now felt she was well, and she plunged

into eager activity, in order to develop her by no means small talentand to snatch a little recognition, enjoyment, and success, late though

the  moment  was.  But  every  one  of  her  attempts  ended  either  with

people letting her know or with herself recognizing that she was too

old to accomplish anything in that field. After each outcome of this kind

a relapse into illness would have been the obvious thing, but she was

no longer able to bring that about. Instead, she met each time with an

accident  which  put  her  out  of  action  for  a  time  and  caused  her

suffering. She fell down and sprained her ankle or hurt her knee, or

she  injured  her  hand  in  something  she  was  doing.  When  she  was

made aware of how great her own share might be in these apparent

accidents,  she,  so  to  say,  changed  her  technique.  Instead  of

accidents,  indispositions  appeared  on  the  same  provocations  -

catarrhs, sore throats, influenzal conditions, rheumatic swellings - till

at last she made up her mind to resign her attempts and the whole

agitation came to an end.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4713

 

   There is, as we think, no doubt about the origin of this unconscious

need  for  punishment.  It  behaves  like  a  piece  of  conscience,  like  a

prolongation of our conscience into the unconscious; and it must have

the same origin as conscience and correspond, therefore, to a piece

of aggressiveness that has been internalized and taken over by the

super-ego.  If  only  the  words  went  together  better,  we  should  be

justified for all practical purposes in calling it an ‘unconscious sense of

guilt’. Theoretically we are in fact in doubt whether we should suppose

that all the aggressiveness that has returned from the external world is

bound by the super-ego and accordingly turned against the ego, or

that a part of it is carrying on its mute and uncanny activity as a free

destructive instinct in the ego and the id. A distribution of the latter

kind is the more probable; but we know nothing more about it. There is

no doubt that, when the super-ego was first instituted, in equipping

that agency use was made of the piece of the child’s aggressiveness

towards  his  parents  for  which  he  was  unable  to  effect  a  discharge

outwards  on  account  of  his  erotic  fixation  as  well  as  of  externaldifficulties; and for that reason the severity of the super-ego need not

simply  correspond  to  the  strictness  of  the  upbringing.  It  is  very

possible  that,  when  there  are  later  occasions  for  suppressing

aggressiveness, the instinct may take the same path that was opened

to it at that decisive point of time.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4714

 

      People  in  whom  this  unconscious  sense  of  guilt  is  excessively

strong  betray  themselves  in  analytic  treatment  by  the  negative

therapeutic  reaction  which  is  so  disagreeable  from  the  prognostic

point of view. When one has given them the solution of a symptom,

which  should  normally  be  followed  by  at  least  its  temporary

disappearance,  what  they  produce  instead  is  a  momentary

exacerbation of the symptom and of the illness. It is often enough to

praise them for their behaviour in the treatment or to say a few hopeful

words about the progress of the analysis in order to bring about an

unmistakable worsening of their condition. A non-analyst would say

that the ‘will to recovery’ was absent. If you follow the analytic way of

thinking,  you  will  see  in  this  behaviour  a  manifestation  of  the

unconscious sense of guilt, for which being ill, with its sufferings and

impediments,  is  just  what  is  wanted.  The  problems  which  the

unconscious  sense  of  guilt  has  opened  up,  its  connections  with

morality,  education,  crime  and  delinquency,  are  at  present  the

preferred field of work for psycho-analysts.

      And  here,  at  an  unexpected  point,  we  have  emerged  from  the

psychical underworld into the open market-place. I cannot lead you

any further, but before I take leave of you for to-day I must detain you

with one more train of thought. It has become our habit to say that our

civilization has been built up at the cost of sexual trends which, being

inhibited by society, are partly, it is true, repressed but have partly

been made usable for other aims. We have admitted, too, that, in spite

of all our pride in our cultural attainments, it is not easy for us to fulfil

the requirements of this civilization or to feel comfortable in it, because

the instinctual restrictions imposed on us constitute a heavy psychicalburden. Well, what we have come to see about the sexual instincts,

applies  equally  and  perhaps  still  more  to  the  other  ones,  the

aggressive instincts. It is they above all that make human communal

life  difficult  and  threaten  its  survival.  Restriction  of  the  individual’s

aggressiveness is the first and perhaps the severest sacrifice which

society requires of him. We have learnt the ingenious way in which the

taming of this unruly thing has been achieved. The institution of the

super-ego  which  takes  over  the  dangerous  aggressive  impulses,

introduces  a  garrison,  as  it  were,  into  regions  that  are  inclined  to

rebellion. But on the other hand, if we look at it purely psychologically,

we must recognize that the ego does not feel happy in being thus

sacrificed  to  the  needs  of  society,  in  having  to  submit  to  the

destructive trends of aggressiveness which it would have been glad to

employ  itself  against  others.  It  is  like  a  prolongation  in  the  mental

sphere  of  the  dilemma  of  ‘eat  or  be  eaten’  which  dominates  the

organic  animate  world.  Luckily  the  aggressive  instincts  are  never

alone but always alloyed with the erotic ones. These latter have much

to mitigate and much to avert under the conditions of the civilization

which mankind has created.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4715

 

                                  LECTURE XXXIII

 

                                      FEMININITY

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - All the while I am preparing to talk to you I am

struggling with an internal difficulty. I feel uncertain, so to speak, of the

extent of my licence. It is true that in the course of fifteen years of

work psycho-analysis has changed and grown richer; but, in spite of

that, an introduction to psycho-analysis might have been left without

alteration or supplement. It is constantly in my mind that these lectures

are  without  a raison d’etre.  For  analysts  I  am  saying  too  little  and

nothing at all that is new; but for you I am saying too much and saying

things which you are not equipped to understand and which are not inyour province. I have looked around for excuses and I have tried to

justify each separate lecture on different grounds. The first one, on the

theory of dreams, was supposed to put you back again at one blow

into the analytic atmosphere and to show you how durable our views

have turned out to be. I was led on to the second one, which followed

the paths from dreams to what is called occultism, by the opportunity

of speaking my mind without constraint on a department of work in

which prejudiced expectations are fighting to-day against passionate

resistances,  and  I  could  hope  that  your  judgement,  educated  to

tolerance  on  the  example  of  psycho-analysis,  would  not  refuse  to

accompany me on the excursion. The third lecture, on the dissection

of the personality, certainly made the hardest demands upon you with

its unfamiliar subject-matter; but it was impossible for me to keep this

first beginning of an ego-psychology back from you, and if we had

possessed it fifteen years ago I should have had to mention it to you

then. My last lecture, finally, which you were probably able to follow

only by great exertions, brought forward necessary corrections - fresh

attempts  at  solving  the  most  important  conundrums;  and  my

introduction would have been leading you astray if I had been silent

about them. As you see, when one starts making excuses it turns out

in the end that it was all inevitable, all the work of destiny. I submit to

it, and I beg you to do the same.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4716

 

   To-day’s lecture, too, should have no place in an introduction; but it

may serve to give you an example of a detailed piece of analytic work,

and I can say two things to recommend it. It brings forward nothing but

observed facts, almost without any speculative additions, and it deals

with a subject which has a claim on your interest second almost to no

other. Throughout history people have knocked their heads against

the riddle of the nature of femininity -

 

                                                Häupter in Hieroglyphenmützen,
                                                Häupter in Turban und schwarzem Barett,
                                                Perückenhäupter und tausend andre                                                Arme, schwitzende Menschenhäupter. . . .¹

 

   Nor will you have escaped worrying over this problem - those of you

who are men; to those of you who are women this will not apply - you

are yourselves the problem. When you meet a human being, the first

distinction you make is ‘male or female?’ and you are accustomed to

make the distinction with unhesitating certainty. Anatomical science

shares your certainty at one point and not much further. The male

sexual product, the spermatozoon, and its vehicle are male; the ovum

and the organism that harbours it are female. In both sexes organs

have been formed which serve exclusively for the sexual functions;

they  were  probably  developed  from  the  same  disposition  into  two

different forms. Besides this, in both sexes the other organs, the bodily

shapes and tissues, show the influence of the individual’s sex, but this

is inconstant and its amount variable; these are what are known as the

secondary sexual characters. Science next tells you something that

runs  counter  to  your  expectations  and  is  probably  calculated  to

confuse your feelings. It draws your attention to the fact that portions

of the male sexual apparatus also appear in women’s bodies, though

in an atrophied state, and vice versa in the alternative case. It regards

their occurrence as indications of bisexuality, as though an individual

is not a man or a woman but always both - merely a certain amount

more  the  one  than  the  other.  You  will  then  be  asked  to  make

yourselves  familiar  with  the  idea  that  the  proportion  in  which

masculine and feminine are mixed in an individual is subject to quite

considerable fluctuations. Since, however, apart from the very rarest

cases,  only  one  kind  of  sexual  product  -  ova  or  semen  -  is

nevertheless present in one person, you are bound to have doubts as

to the decisive significance of those elements and must conclude that

what constitutes masculinity or femininity is an unknown characteristic

which anatomy cannot lay hold of.

 

   ¹ Heads in hieroglyphic bonnets,

      Heads in turbans and black birettas,
      Heads in wigs and thousand other
      Wretched, sweating heads of humans....
                   (Heine, Nordsee.)

                 New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4717

 

 

   Can psychology do so perhaps? We are accustomed to employ

‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ as mental qualities as well, and have in the

same way transferred the notion of bisexuality to mental life. Thus we

speak  of  a  person,  whether  male  or  female,  as  behaving  in  a

masculine way in one connection and in a feminine way in another.

But you will soon perceive that this is only giving way to anatomy or to

convention.  You  cannot  give  the  concepts  of  ‘masculine’  and

‘feminine’ any new connotation. The distinction is not a psychological

one; when you say ‘masculine’, you usually mean ‘active’, and when

you say ‘feminine’, you usually mean ‘passive’. Now it is true that a

relation of the kind exists. The male sex-cell is actively mobile and

searches out the female one, and the latter, the ovum, is immobile and

waits passively. This behaviour of the elementary sexual organisms is

indeed  a  model  for  the  conduct  of  sexual  individuals  during

intercourse. The male pursues the female for the purpose of sexual

union, seizes hold of her and penetrates into her. But by this you have

precisely  reduced  the  characteristic  of  masculinity  to  the  factor  of

aggressiveness  so  far  as  psychology  is  concerned.  You  may  well

doubt whether you have gained any real advantage from this when

you  reflect  that  in  some  classes  of  animals  the  females  are  the

stronger and more aggressive and the male is active only in the single

act of sexual union. This is so, for instance, with the spiders. Even the

functions  of  rearing  and  caring  for  the  young,  which  strike  us  as

feminine par excellence, are not invariably attached to the female sex

in animals. In quite high species we find that the sexes share the task

of caring for the young between them or even that the male alone

devotes himself to it. Even in the sphere of human sexual life you

soon see how inadequate it is to make masculine behaviour coincide

with activity and feminine with passivity. A mother is active in every

sense  towards  her  child;  the  act  of  lactation  itself  may  equally  be

described as the mother suckling the baby or as her being sucked by

it. The further you go from the narrow sexual sphere the more obvious

will the ‘error of superimposition’ become. Women can display greatactivity in various directions, men are not able to live in company with

their  own  kind  unless  they  develop  a  large  amount  of  passive

adaptability. If you now tell me that these facts go to prove precisely

that both men and women are bisexual in the psychological sense, I

shall  conclude  that  you  have  decided  in  your  own  minds  to  make

‘active’ coincide with ‘masculine’ and ‘passive’ with ‘feminine’. But I

advise you against it. It seems to me to serve no useful purpose and

adds nothing to our knowledge.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4718

 

      One  might  consider  characterizing  femininity  psychologically  as

giving preference to passive aims. This is not, of course, the same

thing  as  passivity;  to  achieve  a  passive  aim  may  call  for  a  large

amount of activity. It is perhaps the case that in a woman, on the basis

of her share in the sexual function, a preference for passive behaviour

and passive aims is carried over into her life to a greater or lesser

extent,  in  proportion  to  the  limits,  restricted  or  far-reaching,  within

which her sexual life thus serves as a model. But we must beware in

this of underestimating the influence of social customs, which similarly

force  women  into  passive  situations.  All  this  is  still  far  from  being

cleared  up.  There  is  one  particularly  constant  relation  between

femininity and instinctual life which we do not want to overlook. The

suppression of women’s aggressiveness which is prescribed for them

constitutionally  and  imposed  on  them  socially  favours  the

development of powerful masochistic impulses, which succeed, as we

know,  in  binding  erotically  the  destructive  trends  which  have  been

diverted inwards. Thus masochism, as people say, is truly feminine.

But if, as happens so often, you meet with masochism in men, what is

left to you but to say that these men exhibit very plain feminine traits?

   And now you are already prepared to hear that psychology too is

unable to solve the riddle of femininity. The explanation must no doubt

come  from  elsewhere,  and  cannot  come  till  we  have  learnt  how  in

general  the  differentiation  of  living  organisms  into  two  sexes  came

about. We know nothing about it, yet the existence of two sexes is amost striking characteristic of organic life which distinguishes it sharply

from  inanimate  nature.  However,  we  find  enough  to  study  in  those

human individuals who, through the possession of female genitals, are

characterized as manifestly or predominantly feminine. In conformity

with its peculiar nature, psycho-analysis does not try to describe what

a woman is - that would be a task it could scarcely perform - but sets

about enquiring how she comes into being, how a woman develops

out  of  a  child  with  a  bisexual  disposition.  In  recent  times  we  have

begun  to  learn  a  little  about  this,  thanks  to  the  circumstance  that

several of our excellent women colleagues in analysis have begun to

work  at  the  question.  The  discussion  of  this  has  gained  special

attractiveness from the distinction between the sexes. For the ladies,

whenever some comparison seemed to turn out unfavourable to their

sex, were able to utter a suspicion that we, the male analysts, had

been  unable  to  overcome  certain  deeply-rooted  prejudices  against

what was feminine, and that this was being paid for in the partiality of

our researches. We, on the other hand, standing on the ground of

bisexuality, had no difficulty in avoiding impoliteness. We had only to

say: ‘This doesn’t apply to you. You’re the exception; on this point

you’re more masculine than feminine.’

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4719

 

 

   We approach the investigation of the sexual development of women

with two expectations. The first is that here once more the constitution

will not adapt itself to its function without a struggle. The second is that

the  decisive  turning-points  will  already  have  been  prepared  for  or

completed before puberty. Both expectations are promptly confirmed.

Furthermore, a comparison with what happens with boys tells us that

the development of a little girl into a normal woman is more difficult

and more complicated, since it includes two extra tasks, to which there

is nothing corresponding in the development of a man. Let us follow

the  parallel  lines  from  their  beginning.  Undoubtedly  the  material  is

different to start with in boys and girls: it did not need psycho-analysisto  establish  that.  The  difference  in  the  structure  of  the  genitals  is

accompanied by other bodily differences which are too well known to

call for mention. Differences emerge too in the instinctual disposition

which give a glimpse of the later nature of women. A little girl is as a

rule less aggressive, defiant and self-sufficient; she seems to have a

greater need for being shown affection and on that account to be more

dependent and pliant. It is probably only as a result of this pliancy that

she can be taught more easily and quicker to control her excretions:

urine and faeces are the first gifts that children make to those who

look after them, and controlling them is the first concession to which

the instinctual life of children can be induced. One gets an impression,

too, that little girls are more intelligent and livelier than boys of the

same age; they go out more to meet the external world and at the

same time form stronger object-cathexes. I cannot say whether this

lead in development has been confirmed by exact observations, but in

any  case  there  is  no  question  that  girls  cannot  be  described  as

intellectually backward. These sexual differences are not, however, of

great consequence: they can be outweighed by individual variations.

For our immediate purposes they can be disregarded.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4720

 

      Both  sexes  seem  to  pass  through  the  early  phases  of  libidinal

development in the same manner. It might have been expected that in

girls there would already have been some lag in aggressiveness in the

sadistic-anal phase, but such is not the case. Analysis of children’s

play has shown our women analysts that the aggressive impulses of

little girls leave nothing to be desired in the way of abundance and

violence.  With  their  entry  into  the  phallic  phase  the  differences

between the sexes are completely eclipsed by their agreements. We

are now obliged to recognize that the little girl is a little man. In boys,

as we know, this phase is marked by the fact that they have learnt

how  to  derive  pleasurable  sensations  from  their  small  penis  and

connect its excited state with their ideas of sexual intercourse. Little

girls do the same thing with their still smaller clitoris. It seems that withthem  all  their  masturbatory  acts  are  carried  out  on  this  penis-

equivalent, and that the truly feminine vagina is still undiscovered by

both  sexes.  It  is  true  that  there  are  a  few  isolated  reports  of  early

vaginal  sensations  as  well,  but  it  could  not  be  easy  to  distinguish

these  from  sensations  in  the  anus  or  vestibulum;  in  any  case  they

cannot play a great part. We are entitled to keep to our view that in the

phallic phase of girls the clitoris is the leading erotogenic zone. But it

is not, of course, going to remain so. With the change to femininity the

clitoris should wholly or in part hand over its sensitivity, and at the

same time its importance, to the vagina. This would be one of the two

tasks  which  a  woman  has  to  perform  in  the  course  of  her

development, whereas the more fortunate man has only to continue at

the  time  of  his  sexual  maturity  the  activity  that  he  has  previously

carried out at the period of the early efflorescence of his sexuality.

   We shall return to the part played by the clitoris; let us now turn to

the second task with which a girl’s development is burdened. A boy’s

mother is the first object of his love, and she remains so too during the

formation of his Oedipus complex and, in essence, all through his life.

For a girl too her first object must be her mother (and the figures of

wet-nurses and foster-mothers that merge into her). The first object-

cathexes  occur  in  attachment  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  major  and

simple vital needs, and the circumstances of the care of children are

the same for both sexes. But in the Oedipus situation the girl’s father

has become her love-object, and we expect that in the normal course

of development she will find her way from this paternal object to her

final choice of an object. In the course of time, therefore, a girl has to

change  her  erotogenic  zone  and  her  object  -  both  of  which  a  boy

retains. The question then arises of how this happens: in particular,

how does a girl pass from her mother to an attachment to her father?

or, in other words, how does she pass from her masculine phase to

the feminine one to which she is biologically destined?

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4721

 

   It would be a solution of ideal simplicity if we could suppose thatfrom a particular age onwards the elementary influence of the mutual

attraction between the sexes makes itself felt and impels the small

woman towards men, while the same law allows the boy to continue

with his mother. We might suppose in addition that in this the children

are following the pointer given them by the sexual preference of their

parents. But we are not going to find things so easy; we scarcely know

whether we are to believe seriously in the power of which poets talk so

much and with such enthusiasm but which cannot be further dissected

analytically. We have found an answer of quite another sort by means

of laborious investigations, the material for which at least was easy to

arrive at. For you must know that the number of women who remain till

a late age tenderly dependent on a paternal object, or indeed on their

real father, is very great. We have established some surprising facts

about these women with an intense attachment of long duration to

their father. We knew, of course, that there had been a preliminary

stage of attachment to the mother, but we did not know that it could be

so rich in content and so long-lasting, and could leave behind so many

opportunities for fixations and dispositions. During this time the girl’s

father is only a troublesome rival; in some cases the attachment to her

mother lasts beyond the fourth year of life. Almost everything that we

find later in her relation to her father was already present in this earlier

attachment and has been transferred subsequently on to her father. In

short, we get an impression that we cannot understand women unless

we  appreciate  this  phase  of  their  pre-Oedipus  attachment  to  their

mother.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4722

 

   We shall be glad, then, to know the nature of the girl’s libidinal

relations  to  her  mother.  The  answer  is  that  they  are  of  very  many

different kinds. Since they persist through all three phases of infantile

sexuality, they also take on the characteristics of the different phases

and  express  themselves  by  oral,  sadistic-anal  and  phallic  wishes.

These  wishes  represent  active  as  well  as  passive  impulses;  if  we

relate them to the differentiation of the sexes which is to appear later -though we should avoid doing so as far as possible - we may call

them  masculine  and  feminine.  Besides  this,  they  are  completely

ambivalent, both affectionate and of a hostile and aggressive nature.

The latter often only come to light after being changed into anxiety

ideas. It is not always easy to point to a formulation of these early

sexual wishes; what is most clearly expressed is a wish to get the

mother with child and the corresponding wish to bear her a child - both

belonging  to  the  phallic  period  and  sufficiently  surprising,  but

established beyond doubt by analytic observation. The attractiveness

of  these  investigations  lies  in  the  surprising  detailed  findings  which

they  bring  us.  Thus,  for  instance,  we  discover  the  fear  of  being

murdered or poisoned, which may later form the core of a paranoic

illness, already present in this pre-Oedipus period, in relation to the

mother. Or another case: you will recall an interesting episode in the

history of analytic research which caused me many distressing hours.

In the period in which the main interest was directed to discovering

infantile sexual traumas, almost all my women patients told me that

they had been seduced by their father. I was driven to recognize in the

end that these reports were untrue and so came to understand that

hysterical symptoms are derived from phantasies and not from real

occurrences.  It  was  only  later  that  I  was  able  to  recognize  in  this

phantasy of being seduced by the father the expression of the typical

Oedipus  complex  in  women.  And  now  we  find  the  phantasy  of

seduction once more in the pre-Oedipus prehistory of girls; but the

seducer is regularly the mother. Here, however, the phantasy touches

the ground of reality, for it was really the mother who by her activities

over the child’s bodily hygiene inevitably stimulated, and perhaps even

roused for the first time, pleasurable sensations in her genitals.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4723

 

   I have no doubt you are ready to suspect that this portrayal of the

abundance  and  strength  of  a  little  girl’s  sexual  relations  with  her

mother  is  very  much  overdrawn.  After  all,  one  has  opportunities  of

seeing little girls and notices nothing of the sort. But the objection isnot to the point. Enough can be seen in the children if one knows how

to  look.  And  besides,  you  should  consider  how  little  of  its  sexual

wishes a child can bring to preconscious expression or communicate

at  all.  Accordingly  we  are  only  within  our  rights  if  we  study  the

residues and consequences of this emotional world in retrospect, in

people  in  whom  these  processes  of  development  had  attained  a

specially clear and even excessive degree of expansion. Pathology

has always done us the service of making discernible by isolation and

exaggeration conditions which would remain concealed in a normal

state. And since our investigations have been carried out on people

who were by no means seriously abnormal, I think we should regard

their outcome as deserving belief.

   We will now turn our interest on to the single question of what it is

that brings this powerful attachment of the girl to her mother to an end.

This, as we know, is its usual fate: it is destined to make room for an

attachment to her father. Here we come upon a fact which is a pointer

to our further advance. This step in development does not involve only

a  simple  change  of  object.  The  turning  away  from  the  mother  is

accompanied by hostility; the attachment to the mother ends in hate. A

hate of that kind may become very striking and last all through life; it

may be carefully overcompensated later on; as a rule one part of it is

overcome while another part persists. Events of later years naturally

influence this greatly. We will restrict ourselves, however, to studying it

at the time at which the girl turns to her father and to enquiring into the

motives  for  it.  We  are  then  given  a  long  list  of  accusations  and

grievances  against  the  mother  which  are  supposed  to  justify  the

child’s hostile feelings; they are of varying validity which we shall not

fail to examine. A number of them are obvious rationalizations and the

true  sources  of  enmity  remain  to  be  found.  I  hope  you  will  be

interested if on this occasion I take you through all the details of a

psycho-analytic investigation.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4724

 

   The reproach against the mother which goes back furthest is thatshe gave the child too little milk - which is construed against her as

lack of love. Now there is some justification for this reproach in our

families.  Mothers  often  have  insufficient  nourishment  to  give  their

children and are content to suckle them for a few months, for half or

three-quarters of a year. Among primitive peoples children are fed at

their mother’s breast for two or three years. The figure of the wet-

nurse who suckles the child is as a rule merged into the mother; when

this has not happened, the reproach is turned into another one - that

the nurse, who fed the child so willingly, was sent away by the mother

too early. But whatever the true state of affairs may have been, it is

impossible that the child’s reproach can be justified as often as it is

met  with.  It  seems,  rather,  that  the  child’s  avidity  for  its  earliest

nourishment is altogether insatiable, that it never gets over the pain of

losing its mother’s breast. I should not be surprised if the analysis of a

primitive child, who could still suck at its mother’s breast when it was

already able to run about and talk, were to bring the same reproach to

light. The fear of being poisoned is also probably connected with the

withdrawal of the breast. Poison is nourishment that makes one ill.

Perhaps children trace back their early illnesses too to this frustration.

A fair amount of intellectual education is a prerequisite for believing in

chance; primitive people and uneducated ones, and no doubt children

as  well,  are  able  to  assign  a  ground  for  everything  that  happens.

Perhaps originally it was a reason on animistic lines. Even to-day in

some  strata  of  our  population  no  one  can  die  without  having  been

killed  by  someone  else  -  preferably  by  the  doctor.  And  the  regular

reaction of a neurotic to the death of someone closely connected with

him is to put the blame on himself for having caused the death.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4725

 

   The next accusation against the child’s mother flares up when the

next baby appears in the nursery. If possible the connection with oral

frustration is preserved: the mother could not or would not give the

child any more milk because she needed the nourishment for the new

arrival. In cases in which the two children are so close in age thatlactation  is  prejudiced  by  the  second  pregnancy,  this  reproach

acquires a real basis, and it is a remarkable fact that a child, even with

an age difference of only 11 months, is not too young to take notice of

what is happening. But what the child grudges the unwanted intruder

and rival is not only the suckling but all the other signs of maternal

care. It feels that it has been dethroned, despoiled, prejudiced in its

rights; it casts a jealous hatred upon the new baby and develops a

grievance against the faithless mother which often finds expression in

a  disagreeable  change  in  its  behaviour.  It  becomes  ‘naughty’,

perhaps, irritable and disobedient and goes back on the advances it

has made towards controlling its excretions. All of this has been very

long  familiar  and  is  accepted  as  self-evident;  but  we  rarely  form  a

correct idea of the strength of these jealous impulses, of the tenacity

with which they persist and of the magnitude of their influence on later

development. Especially as this jealousy is constantly receiving fresh

nourishment in the later years of childhood and the whole shock is

repeated with the birth of each new brother or sister. Nor does it make

much difference if the child happens to remain the mother’s preferred

favourite.  A  child’s  demands  for  love  are  immoderate,  they  make

exclusive claims and tolerate no sharing.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4726

 

   An abundant source of a child’s hostility to its mother is provided by

its multifarious sexual wishes, which alter according to the phase of

the  libido  and  which  cannot  for  the  most  part  be  satisfied.  The

strongest of these frustrations occur at the phallic period, if the mother

forbids pleasurable activity with the genitals - often with severe threats

and every sign of displeasure - activity to which, after all, she herself

had introduced the child. One would think these were reasons enough

to account for a girl’s turning away from her mother. One would judge,

if  so,  that  the  estrangement  follows  inevitably  from  the  nature  of

children’s sexuality, from the immoderate character of their demand

for love and the impossibility of fulfilling their sexual wishes. It might

be thought indeed that this first love-relation of the child’s is doomedto dissolution for the very reason that it is the first, for these early

object-cathexes are regularly ambivalent to a high degree. A powerful

tendency to aggressiveness is always present beside a powerful love,

and the more passionately a child loves its object the more sensitive

does it become to disappointments and frustrations from that object;

and in the end the love must succumb to the accumulated hostility. Or

the idea that there is an original ambivalence such as this in erotic

cathexes  may  be  rejected,  and  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  it  is  the

special  nature  of  the  mother-child  relation  that  leads,  with  equal

inevitability, to the destruction of the child’s love; for even the mildest

upbringing cannot avoid using compulsion and introducing restrictions,

and  any  such  intervention  in  the  child’s  liberty  must  provoke  as  a

reaction  an  inclination  to  rebelliousness  and  aggressiveness.  A

discussion of these possibilities might, I think, be most interesting; but

an objection suddenly emerges which forces our interest in another

direction. All these factors - the slights, the disappointments in love,

the jealousy, the seduction followed by prohibition - are, after all, also

in operation in the relation of a boy to his mother and are yet unable to

alienate him from the maternal object. Unless we can find something

that is specific for girls and is not present or not in the same way

present in boys, we shall not have explained the termination of the

attachment of girls to their mother.

   I believe we have found this specific factor, and indeed where we

expected  to  find  it,  even  though  in  a  surprising  form.  Where  we

expected to find it, I say, for it lies in the castration complex. After all,

the  anatomical  distinction  must  express  itself  in  psychical

consequences. It was, however, a surprise to learn from analyses that

girls hold their mother responsible for their lack of a penis and do not

forgive her for their being thus put at a disadvantage.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4727

 

   As you hear, then, we ascribe a castration complex to women as

well. And for good reasons, though its content cannot be the same as

with boys. In the latter the castration complex arises after they havelearnt from the sight of the female genitals that the organ which they

value so highly need not necessarily accompany the body. At this the

boy recalls to mind the threats he brought on himself by his doings

with that organ, he begins to give credence to them and falls under the

influence of fear of castration, which will be the most powerful motive

force in his subsequent development. The castration complex of girls

is also started by the sight of the genitals of the other sex. They at

once notice the difference and, it must be admitted, its significance

too. They feel seriously wronged, often declare that they want to ‘have

something like it too’, and fall a victim to ‘envy for the penis’, which will

leave ineradicable traces on their development and the formation of

their character and which will not be surmounted in even the most

favourable cases without a severe expenditure of psychical energy.

The girl’s recognition of the fact of her being without a penis does not

by  any  means  imply  that  she  submits  to  the  fact  easily.  On  the

contrary, she continues to hold on for a long time to the wish to get

something  like  it  herself  and  she  believes  in  that  possibility  for

improbably long years; and analysis can show that, at a period when

knowledge of reality has long since rejected the fulfilment of the wish

as  unattainable,  it  persists  in  the  unconscious  and  retains  a

considerable cathexis of energy. The wish to get the longed-for penis

eventually in spite of everything may contribute to the motives that

drive  a  mature  woman  to  analysis,  and  what  she  may  reasonably

expect  from  analysis  -  a  capacity,  for  instance,  to  carry  on  an

intellectual  profession  -  may  often  be  recognized  as  a  sublimated

modification of this repressed wish.

   One cannot very well doubt the importance of envy for the penis.

You may take it as an instance of male injustice if I assert that envy

and jealousy play an even greater part in the mental life of women

than of men. It is not that I think these characteristics are absent in

men or that I think they have no other roots in women than envy for

the penis; but I am inclined to attribute their greater amount in women

to  this  latter  influence.  Some  analysts,  however,  have  shown  an

inclination to depreciate the importance of this first instalment of penis-

envy in the phallic phase. They are of opinion that what we find of this

attitude  in  women  is  in  the  main  a  secondary  structure  which  has

come  about  on  the  occasion  of  later  conflicts  by  regression  to  thisearly infantile impulse. This, however, is a general problem of depth

psychology.  In  many  pathological  -  or  even  unusual  -  instinctual

attitudes (for instance, in all sexual perversions) the question arises of

how much of their strength is to be attributed to early infantile fixations

and  how  much  to  the  influence  of  later  experiences  and

developments.  In  such  cases  it  is  almost  always  a  matter  of

complemental series such as we put forward in our discussion of the

aetiology of the neuroses. Both factors play a part in varying amounts

in the causation; a less on the one side is balanced by a more on the

other. The infantile factor sets the pattern in all cases but does not

always determine the issue, though it often does. Precisely in the case

of penis-envy I should argue decidedly in favour of the preponderance

of the infantile factor.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4728

 

      The  discovery  that  she  is  castrated  is  a  turning-point  in  a  girl’s

growth. Three possible lines of development start from it: one leads to

sexual inhibition or to neurosis, the second to change of character in

the  sense  of  a  masculinity  complex,  the  third,  finally,  to  normal

femininity. We have learnt a fair amount, though not everything, about

all three.

      The  essential  content  of  the  first  is  as  follows:  the  little  girl  has

hitherto lived in a masculine way, has been able to get pleasure by the

excitation of her clitoris and has brought this activity into relation with

her sexual wishes directed towards her mother, which are often active

ones; now, owing to the influence of her penis-envy, she loses her

enjoyment  in  her  phallic  sexuality.  Her  self-love  is  mortified  by  the

comparison with the boy’s far superior equipment and in consequence

she  renounces  her  masturbatory  satisfaction  from  her  clitoris,

repudiates  her  love  for  her  mother  and  at  the  same  time  not

infrequently represses a good part of her sexual trends in general. No

doubt her turning away from her mother does not occur all at once, for

to  begin  with  the  girl  regards  her  castration  as  an  individual

misfortune, and only gradually extends it to other females and finallyto her mother as well. Her love was directed to her phallic mother; with

the discovery that her mother is castrated it becomes possible to drop

her as an object, so that the motives for hostility, which have long

been accumulating, gain the upper hand. This means, therefore, that

as  a  result  of  the  discovery  of  women’s  lack  of  a  penis  they  are

debased in value for girls just as they are for boys and later perhaps

for men.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4729

 

   You all know the immense aetiological importance attributed by our

neurotic patients to their masturbation. They make it responsible for all

their troubles and we have the greatest difficulty in persuading them

that they are mistaken. In fact, however, we ought to admit to them

that they are right, for masturbation is the executive agent of infantile

sexuality,  from  the  faulty  development  of  which  they  are  indeed

suffering. But what neurotics mostly blame is the masturbation of the

period  of  puberty;  they  have  mostly  forgotten  that  of  early  infancy,

which is what is really in question. I wish I might have an opportunity

some time of explaining to you at length how important all the factual

details of early masturbation become for the individual’s subsequent

neurosis  or  character:  whether  or  not  it  was  discovered,  how  the

parents struggled against it or permitted it, or whether he succeeded

in suppressing it himself. All of this leaves permanent traces on his

development. But I am on the whole glad that I need not do this. It

would be a hard and tedious task and at the end of it you would put

me in an embarrassing situation by quite certainly asking me to give

you some practical advice as to how a parent or educator should deal

with the masturbation of small children. From the development of girls,

which is what my present lecture is concerned with, I can give you the

example of a child herself trying to get free from masturbating. She

does not always succeed in this. If envy for the penis has provoked a

powerful impulse against clitoridal masturbation but this nevertheless

refuses to give way, a violent struggle for liberation ensues in which

the girl, as it were, herself takes over the role of her deposed motherand  gives  expression  to  her  entire  dissatisfaction  with  her  inferior

clitoris in her efforts against obtaining satisfaction from it. Many years

later, when her masturbatory activity has long since been suppressed,

an interest still persists which we must interpret as a defence against

a temptation that is still dreaded. It manifests itself in the emergence

of  sympathy  for  those  to  whom  similar  difficulties  are  attributed,  it

plays a part as a motive in contracting a marriage and, indeed, it may

determine the choice of a husband or lover. Disposing of early infantile

masturbation is truly no easy or indifferent business.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4730

 

      Along  with  the  abandonment  of  clitoridal  masturbation  a  certain

amount of activity is renounced. Passivity now has the upper hand,

and the girl’s turning to her father is accomplished principally with the

help  of  passive  instinctual  impulses.  You  can  see  that  a  wave  of

development like this, which clears the phallic activity out of the way,

smoothes  the  ground  for  femininity.  If  too  much  is  not  lost  in  the

course  of  it  through  repression,  this  femininity  may  turn  out  to  be

normal. The wish with which the girl turns to her father is no doubt

originally the wish for the penis which her mother has refused her and

which she now expects from her father. The feminine situation is only

established, however, if the wish for a penis is replaced by one for a

baby, if, that is, a baby takes the place of a penis in accordance with

an ancient symbolic equivalence. It has not escaped us that the girl

has wished for a baby earlier, in the undisturbed phallic phase: that, of

course, was the meaning of her playing with dolls. But that play was

not in fact an expression of her femininity; it served as an identification

with her mother with the intention of substituting activity for passivity.

She was playing the part of her mother and the doll was herself: now

she could do with the baby everything that her mother used to do with

her. Not until the emergence of the wish for a penis does the doll-baby

become a baby from the girl’s father, and thereafter the aim of the

most powerful feminine wish. Her happiness is great if later on this

wish for a baby finds fulfilment in reality, and quite especially so if thebaby is a little boy who brings the longed-for penis with him. Often

enough  in  her  combined  picture  of  ‘a  baby  from  her  father’  the

emphasis is laid on the baby and her father left unstressed. In this way

the ancient masculine wish for the possession of a penis is still faintly

visible  through  the  femininity  now  achieved.  But  perhaps  we  ought

rather to recognize this wish for a penis as being par excellence a

feminine one.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4731

 

   With the transference of the wish for a penis-baby on to her father,

the girl has entered the situation of the Oedipus complex. Her hostility

to her mother, which did not need to be freshly created, is now greatly

intensified,  for  she  becomes  the  girl’s  rival,  who  receives  from  her

father everything that she desires from him. For a long time the girl’s

Oedipus  complex  concealed  her  pre-Oedipus  attachment  to  her

mother  from  our  view,  though  it  is  nevertheless  so  important  and

leaves such lasting fixations behind it. For girls the Oedipus situation

is  the  outcome  of  a  long  and  difficult  development;  it  is  a  kind  of

preliminary solution, a position of rest which is not soon abandoned,

especially as the beginning of the latency period is not far distant. And

we are now struck by a difference between the two sexes, which is

probably momentous, in regard to the relation of the Oedipus complex

to the castration complex. In a boy the Oedipus complex, in which he

desires his mother and would like to get rid of his father as being a

rival, develops naturally from the phase of his phallic sexuality. The

threat  of  castration  compels  him,  however,  to  give  up  that  attitude.

Under the impression of the danger of losing his penis, the Oedipus

complex  is  abandoned,  repressed  and,  in  the  most  normal  cases,

entirely destroyed, and a severe super-ego is set up as its heir. What

happens with a girl is almost the opposite. The castration complex

prepares for the Oedipus complex instead of destroying it; the girl is

driven out of her attachment to her mother through the influence of her

envy for the penis and she enters the Oedipus situation as though into

a haven of refuge. In the absence of fear of castration the chief motiveis lacking which leads boys to surmount the Oedipus complex. Girls

remain in it for an indeterminate Iength of time; they demolish it late

and, even so, incompletely. In these circumstances the formation of

the  super-ego  must  suffer;  it  cannot  attain  the  strength  and

independence which give it its cultural significance, and feminists are

not pleased when we point out to them the effects of this factor upon

the average feminine character.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4732

 

   To go back a little. We mentioned as the second possible reaction to

the  discovery  of  female  castration  the  development  of  a  powerful

masculinity complex. By this we mean that the girl refuses, as it were,

to  recognize  the  unwelcome  fact  and,  defiantly  rebellious,  even

exaggerates her previous masculinity, clings to her clitoridal activity

and  takes  refuge  in  an  identification  with  her  phallic  mother  or  her

father. What can it be that decides in favour of this outcome? We can

only  suppose  that  it  is  a  constitutional  factor,  a  greater  amount  of

activity, such as is ordinarily characteristic of a male. However that

may  be,  the  essence  of  this  process  is  that  at  this  point  in

development the wave of passivity is avoided which opens the way to

the  turn  towards  femininity.  The  extreme  achievement  of  such  a

masculinity complex would appear to be the influencing of the choice

of  an  object  in  the  sense  of  manifest  homosexuality.  Analytic

experience  teaches  us,  to  be  sure,  that  female  homosexuality  is

seldom or never a direct continuation of infantile masculinity. Even for

a girl of this kind it seems necessary that she should take her father as

an  object  for  some  time  and  enter  the  Oedipus  situation.  But

afterwards,  as  a  result  of  her  inevitable  disappointments  from  her

father, she is driven to regress into her early masculinity complex. The

significance of these disappointments must not be exaggerated; a girl

who is destined to become feminine is not spared them, though they

do not have the same effect. The predominance of the constitutional

factor seems indisputable; but the two phases in the development of

female  homosexuality  are  well  mirrored  in  the  practices  ofhomosexuals, who play the parts of mother and baby with each other

as often and as clearly as those of husband and wife.

 

      What  I  have  been  telling  you  here  may  be  described  as  the

prehistory of women. It is a product of the very last few years and may

have been of interest to you as an example of detailed analytic work.

Since its subject is woman, I will venture on this occasion to mention

by name a few of the women who have made valuable contributions to

this investigation. Dr. Ruth Mack Brunswick was the first to describe a

case  of  neurosis  which  went  back  to  a  fixation  in  the  pre-Oedipus

stage and had never reached the Oedipus situation at all. The case

took the form of jealous paranoia and proved accessible to therapy.

Dr.  Jeanne  Lampl-de  Groot  has  established  the  incredible  phallic

activity of girls towards their mother by some assured observations,

and  Dr.  Helene  Deutsch  has  shown  that  the  erotic  actions  of

homosexual  women  reproduce  the  relations  between  mother  and

baby.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4733

 

   It is not my intention to pursue the further behaviour of femininity

through puberty to the period of maturity. Our knowledge, moreover,

would be insufficient for the purpose. But I will bring a few features

together in what follows. Taking its prehistory as a starting-point, I will

only  emphasize  here  that  the  development  of  femininity  remains

exposed  to  disturbance  by  the  residual  phenomena  of  the  early

masculine  period.  Regressions  to  the  fixations  of  the  pre-Oedipus

phases very frequently occur; in the course of some women’s lives

there is a repeated alternation between periods in which masculinity or

femininity gains the upper hand. Some portion of what we men call

‘the enigma of women’ may perhaps be derived from this expression

of bisexuality in women’s lives. But another question seems to have

become  ripe  for  judgement  in  the  course  of  these  researches.  We

have called the motive force of sexual life ‘the libido’. Sexual life is

dominated  by  the  polarity  of  masculine-feminine;  thus  the  notionsuggests itself of considering the relation of the libido to this antithesis.

It would not be surprising if it were to turn out that each sexuality had

its own special libido appropriated to it, so that one sort of libido would

pursue the aims of a masculine sexual life and another sort those of a

feminine one. But nothing of the kind is true. There is only one libido,

which serves both the masculine and the feminine sexual functions.

To it itself we cannot assign any sex; if, following the conventional

equation of activity and masculinity, we are inclined to describe it as

masculine, we must not forget that it also covers trends with a passive

aim.  Nevertheless  the  juxtaposition  ‘feminine  libido’  is  without  any

justification. Furthermore, it is our impression that more constraint has

been applied to the libido when it is pressed into the service of the

feminine function, and that - to speak teleologically - Nature takes less

careful account of its demands than in the case of masculinity. And

the reason for this may lie - thinking once again teleologically - in the

fact that the accomplishment of the aim of biology has been entrusted

to the aggressiveness of men and has been made to some extent

independent of women’s consent.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4734

 

   The sexual frigidity of women, the frequency of which appears to

confirm  this  disregard,  is  a  phenomenon  that  is  still  insufficiently

understood. Sometimes it is psychogenic and in that case accessible

to influence; but in other cases it suggests the hypothesis of its being

constitutionally  determined  and  even  of  there  being  a  contributory

anatomical factor.

   I have promised to tell you of a few more psychical peculiarities of

mature femininity, as we come across them in analytic observation.

We  do  not  lay  claim  to  more  than  an  average  validity  for  these

assertions;  nor  is  it  always  easy  to  distinguish  what  should  be

ascribed  to  the  influence  of  the  sexual  function  and  what  to  social

breeding.  Thus,  we  attribute  a  larger  amount  of  narcissism  to

femininity, which also affects women’s choice of object, so that to be

loved is a stronger need for them than to love. The effect of penis-envy has a share, further, in the physical vanity of women, since they

are bound to value their charms more highly as a late compensation

for their original sexual inferiority. Shame, which is considered to be a

feminine  characteristic par  excellence  but  is  far  more  a  matter  of

convention than might be supposed, has as its purpose, we believe,

concealment of genital deficiency. We are not forgetting that at a later

time shame takes on other functions. It seems that women have made

few contributions to the discoveries and inventions in the history of

civilization;  there  is,  however,  one  technique  which  they  may  have

invented - that of plaiting and weaving. If that is so, we should be

tempted to guess the unconscious motive for the achievement. Nature

herself would seem to have given the model which this achievement

imitates  by  causing  the  growth  at  maturity  of  the  pubic  hair  that

conceals  the  genitals.  The  step  that  remained  to  be  taken  lay  in

making the threads adhere to one another, while on the body they

stick into the skin and are only matted together. If you reject this idea

as fantastic and regard my belief in the influence of lack of a penis on

the  configuration  of  femininity  as  an idée  fixe,  I  am  of  course

defenceless.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4735

 

   The determinants of women’s choice of an object are often made

unrecognizable by social conditions. Where the choice is able to show

itself freely, it is often made in accordance with the narcissistic ideal of

the man whom the girl had wished to become. If the girl has remained

in her attachment to her father - that is, in the Oedipus complex - her

choice is made according to the paternal type. Since, when she turned

from her mother to her father, the hostility of her ambivalent relation

remained with her mother, a choice of this kind should guarantee a

happy marriage. But very often the outcome is of a kind that presents

a  general  threat  to  such  a  settlement  of  the  conflict  due  to

ambivalence. The hostility that has been left behind follows in the train

of the positive attachment and spreads over on to the new object. The

woman’s  husband,  who  to  begin  with  inherited  from  her  father,becomes  after  a  time  her  mother’s  heir  as  well.  So  it  may  easily

happen that the second half of a woman’s life may be filled by the

struggle against her husband, just as the shorter first half was filled by

her rebellion against her mother. When this reaction has been lived

through,  a  second  marriage  may  easily  turn  out  very  much  more

satisfying. Another alteration in a woman’s nature, for which lovers are

unprepared, may occur in a marriage after the first child is born. Under

the  influence  of  a  woman’s  becoming  a  mother  herself,  an

identification with her own mother may be revived, against which she

had striven up till the time of her marriage, and this may attract all the

available libido to itself, so that the compulsion to repeat reproduces

an  unhappy  marriage  between  her  parents.  The  difference  in  a

mother’s reaction to the birth of a son or a daughter shows that the old

factor of lack of a penis has even now not lost its strength. A mother is

only  brought  unlimited  satisfaction  by  her  relation  to  a  son;  this  is

altogether  the  most  perfect,  the  most  free  from  ambivalence  of  all

human relationships. A mother can transfer to her son the ambition

which  she  has  been  obliged  to  suppress  in  herself,  and  she  can

expect from him the satisfaction of all that has been left over in her of

her masculinity complex. Even a marriage is not made secure until the

wife has succeeded in making her husband her child as well and in

acting as a mother to him.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4736

 

   A woman’s identification with her mother allows us to distinguish two

strata:  the  pre-Oedipus  one  which  rests  on  her  affectionate

attachment to her mother and takes her as a model, and the later one

from the Oedipus complex which seeks to get rid of her mother and

take her place with her father. We are no doubt justified in saying that

much of both of them is left over for the future and that neither of them

is  adequately  surmounted  in  the  course  of  development.  But  the

phase of the affectionate pre-Oedipus attachment is the decisive one

for  a  woman’s  future:  during  it  preparations  are  made  for  the

acquisition of the characteristics with which she will later fulfil her rolein the sexual function and perform her invaluable social tasks. It is in

this identification too that she acquires her attractiveness to a man,

whose Oedipus attachment to his mother it kindles into passion. How

often it happens, however, that it is only his son who obtains what he

himself aspired to! One gets an impression that a man’s love and a

woman’s are a phase apart psychologically.

   The fact that women must be regarded as having little sense of

justice is no doubt related to the predominance of envy in their mental

life; for the demand for justice is a modification of envy and lays down

the condition subject to which one can put envy aside. We also regard

women as weaker in their social interests and as having less capacity

for  sublimating  their  instincts  than  men.  The  former  is  no  doubt

derived from the dissocial quality which unquestionably characterizes

all sexual relations. Lovers find sufficiency in each other, and families

too resist inclusion in more comprehensive associations. The aptitude

for sublimation is subject to the greatest individual variations. On the

other  hand  I  cannot  help  mentioning  an  impression  that  we  are

constantly  receiving  during  analytic  practice.  A  man  of  about  thirty

strikes  us  as  a  youthful,  somewhat  unformed  individual,  whom  we

expect  to  make  powerful  use  of  the  possibilities  for  development

opened up to him by analysis. A woman of the same age, however,

often frightens us by her psychical rigidity and unchangeability. Her

libido has taken up final positions and seems incapable of exchanging

them for others. There are no paths open to further development; it is

as though the whole process had already run its course and remains

thenceforward  insusceptible  to  influence  -  as  though,  indeed,  the

difficult development to femininity had exhausted the possibilities of

the person concerned. As therapists we lament this state of things,

even if we succeed in putting an end to our patient’s ailment by doing

away with her neurotic conflict.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4737

 

 

      That  is  all  I  had  to  say  to  you  about  femininity.  It  is  certainlyincomplete and fragmentary and does not always sound friendly. But

do not forget that I have only been describing women in so far as their

nature  is  determined  by  their  sexual  function.  It  is  true  that  that

influence extends very far; but we do not overlook the fact that an

individual woman may be a human being in other respects as well. If

you  want  to  know  more  about  femininity,  enquire  from  your  own

experiences of life, or turn to the poets, or wait until science can give

you deeper and more coherent information.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4738

 

                                  LECTURE XXXIV

 

        EXPLANATIONS, APPLICATIONS AND ORIENTATIONS

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - Perhaps you will allow me for once, as a relief

from the dry tone of these lectures, to talk to you about some things

which have very little theoretical significance but which concern you

closely in so far as you are friendlily disposed to psycho-analysis. Let

us  imagine,  for  instance,  that  in  your  leisure  hours  you  take  up  a

German, English or American novel, in which you expect to find an

account of contemporary people and society. After a few pages you

come upon a first comment on psycho-analysis and soon afterwards

upon others, even though the context does not seem to call for them.

You  must  not  imagine  that  it  is  a  question  of  applying  depth-

psychology to a better understanding of the characters in the book or

of their actions - though, incidentally, there are other and more serious

works in which an attempt of that kind is in fact made. No, these are

for the most part facetious remarks intended by the author to display

his wide reading and intellectual superiority. Nor will you always form

an impression that he really knows what he is talking about. Again,

you may go as a recreation to a social gathering - and this need not

necessarily  happen  in  Vienna.  After  a  short  time  the  conversation

turns upon psycho-analysis and you will hear the greatest variety of

people passing their judgement on it, mostly in voices of unwaveringcertainty. It is quite usual for the judgement to be contemptuous or

often  slanderous  or  at  least,  once  again,  facetious.  If  you  are  so

imprudent as to betray the fact that you know something about the

subject, they fall upon you with one accord, ask for information and

explanations and soon convince you that all these severe judgements

had been arrived at without any basis of knowledge, that scarcely any

of these critics had ever opened an analytic book or, if they had, had

gone beyond the first resistance aroused by their contact with this new

material.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4739

 

   You may perhaps expect an introduction to psycho-analysis to give

you instructions, too, on what arguments you should use to correct

these  obvious  errors  about  analysis,  what  books  you  should

recommend  to  give  more  accurate  information,  or  even  what

examples you should bring up in the discussion from your reading or

experience in order to alter the company’s attitude. I must beg you to

do none of this. It would be useless. The best plan would be for you to

conceal  your  superior  knowledge  altogether.  If  that  is  no  longer

possible, limit yourself to saying that, so far as you can make out,

psycho-analysis  is  a  special  branch  of  knowledge,  very  hard  to

understand and to form an opinion on, which is concerned with very

serious things, so that a few jokes will not bring one to close quarters

with it - and that it would be better to find some other plaything for

social  entertainment.  Nor,  of  course,  will  you  join  in  attempts  at

interpretation, if unwary people repeat their dreams; and you will resist

the temptation to curry favour for analysis by retailing reports of its

cures.

   But you may raise the question of why these people - both the ones

who write books and the conversationalists - behave so badly; and

you may incline to the view that the responsibility for this lies not only

on them but also on psycho-analysis. I think so too. What you come

upon  as  prejudice  in  literature  and  society  is  an  after-effect  of  an

earlier judgement - the judgement, namely, that was formed upon theyoung  psycho-analysis  by  the  representatives  of  official  science.  I

once complained of this in a historical account I wrote, and I shall not

do so again - perhaps that once was too often - but it is a fact that

there was no violation of logic, and no violation of propriety and good

taste, to which the scientific opponents of psycho-analysis did not give

way  at  that  time.  The  situation  recalled  what  was  actually  put  in

practice in the Middle Ages when an evil-doer, or even a mere political

opponent, was put in the pillory and given over to maltreatment by the

mob. You may not realize clearly, perhaps, how far upwards in our

society mob-characteristics extend, and what misconduct people will

be guilty of when they feel themselves part of a crowd and relieved of

personal responsibility. At the beginning of that time I was more or

less alone and I soon saw that there was no future in polemics but that

it was equally senseless to lament and to invoke the help of kindlier

spirits,  for  there  were  not  courts  to  which  such  appeals  could  be

made. So I took another road. I made a first application of psycho-

analysis by explaining to myself that this behaviour of the crowd was a

manifestation of the same resistance which I had to struggle against in

individual patients. I refrained from polemics myself and influenced my

adherents, when little by little they appeared, in the same direction.

This  procedure  was  the  right  one.  The  interdict  which  lay  upon

psycho-analysis in those days has been lifted since then. But, just as

an abandoned faith survives as a superstition, just as a theory which

has been given up by science continues to exist as a popular belief,

so  the  original  outlawing  of  psycho-analysis  by  scientific  circles

persists  to-day  in  the  facetious  contempt  of  the  laymen  who  write

books or make conversation. So this will no longer surprise you.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4740

 

   But you must not expect to hear the glad tidings that the struggle

about analysis is over and has ended in its recognition as a science

and its admission as a subject for instruction at universities. There is

no  question  of  that.  The  struggle  continues,  though  in  more  polite

forms. What is also new is that a sort of buffer-layer has formed inscientific society between analysis and its opponents. This consists of

people who allow the validity of some portions of analysis and admit

as much, subject to the most entertaining qualifications, but who on

the  other  hand  reject  other  portions  of  it,  a  fact  which  they  cannot

proclaim  too  loudly.  It  is  not  easy  to  divine  what  determines  their

choice  in  this.  It  seems  to  depend  on  personal  sympathies.  One

person  will  take  objection  to  sexuality,  another  to  the  unconscious;

what seems particularly unpopular is the fact of symbolism. Though

the  structure  of  psycho-analysis  is  unfinished,  it  nevertheless

presents, even to-day, a unity from which elements cannot be broken

off at the caprice of whoever comes along: but these eclectics seem to

disregard  this.  I  have  never  had  the  impression  that  these  half-  or

quarter-adherents based their rejection on an examination of the facts.

Some distinguished men, too, are included in this category. They, to

be  sure,  are  excused  by  the  fact  that  their  time  and  their  interest

belong to other things - to those things, namely, in mastering which

they have achieved so much. But in that case would they not do better

to suspend their judgement instead of taking sides so decisively? With

one  of  these  great  men  I  once  succeeded  in  effecting  a  rapid

conversion.  He  was  a  world-famous  critic,  who  had  followed  the

spiritual  currents  of  the  time  with  benevolent  understanding  and

prophetic penetration. I only came to know him when he was past his

eightieth year; but he was still enchanting in his talk. You will easily

guess  whom  I  mean.  Nor  was  it  I  who  introduced  the  subject  of

psycho-analysis. It was he who did so, by comparing himself with me

in the most modest fashion. ‘I am only a literary man,’ he said, ‘but you

are a natural scientist and discoverer. However, there is one thing I

must say to you: I have never had sexual feelings towards my mother.’

‘But there is no need at all for you to have known them,’ was my reply;

‘to grown-up people those are unconscious feelings.’ ‘Oh! so that’s

what you think!’ he said with relief, and pressed my hand. We went on

talking together on the best of terms for another few hours. I heard

later  that  in  the  few  remaining  years  of  his  life  he  often  spoke  of

analysis in a friendly way and was pleased at being able to use a word

that was new to him - ‘repression’.

                 New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4741

 

 

   There is a common saying that we should learn from our enemies. I

confess  I  have  never  succeeded  in  doing  so;  but  I  thought  all  the

same that it might be instructive for you if I undertook a review of all

the  reproaches  and  objections  which  the  opponents  of  psycho-

analysis  have  raised  against  it,  and  if  I  went  on  to  point  out  the

injustices and offences against logic which could so easily be revealed

in them. But ‘on second thoughts’ I told myself that it would not be at

all interesting but would become tedious and distressing and would be

precisely what I have been so carefully avoiding all these years. So

you must forgive me if I pursue this path no further and if I spare you

the  judgements  of  our  so-called  scientific  opponents.  After  all  it  is

nearly  always  a  question  of  people  whose  one  qualification  is  the

impartiality which they have preserved by keeping at a distance from

the experiences of psycho-analysis. But I know there are other cases

in which you will not let me off so lightly. ‘Nevertheless’, you will tell

me, ‘there are such a number of people to whom your last remark

does not apply. They have not evaded analytic experience, they have

analysed patients and have perhaps been analysed themselves; for a

time they have even been your collaborators. Yet they have arrived at

other views and theories on the basis of which they have seceded

from you and founded independent schools of psycho-analysis. You

ought to throw some light for us on the possibility and significance of

these secessionist movements which have been so frequent in the

history of analysis.’

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4742

 

   Well, I will try to do so; but only in brief, since they contribute less to

an understanding of analysis than you might expect. I feel sure you

will  be  thinking  in  the  first  place  of  Adler’s  ‘Individual  Psychology’,

which,  in  America  for  instance,  is  regarded  as  a  line  of  thought

collateral with our psycho-analysis and on a par with it and which isregularly  mentioned  alongside  of  it.  Actually,  Individual  Psychology

has very little to do with psycho-analysis but, as a result of certain

historical  circumstances,  leads  a  kind  of  parasitic  existence  at  its

expense. The determinants which we have attributed to this group of

opponents apply to the founders of Individual Psychology only to a

limited extent. Its very name is inappropriate and seems to have been

the product of embarrassment. We cannot allow the legitimate use of

the term as an antithesis to ‘group psychology’ to be interfered with;

moreover, our own activity is concerned for the most part and primarily

with the psychology of human individuals. I shall not enter to-day upon

an  objective  criticism  of  Adler’s  Individual  Psychology;  there  is  no

place for it in the plan of these introductory lectures. Besides, I have

already attempted it once, and feel no temptation to change anything

in what I said then. I will, however, illustrate the impression his views

produce by a small episode dating from the years before analysis.

   In the neighbourhood of the little Moravian town in which I was born,

and which I left when I was a three-year-old child, there is a modest

health-resort, prettily situated in the woods. During my schooldays I

went there several times in the holidays. Some twenty years later the

illness of a near relative was the occasion for my visiting the place

again. In the course of a conversation with the physician attached to

the spa, who had attended my relative, I enquired among other things

about  his  relations  with  the  peasants  -  Slovaks,  I  believe  -  who

constituted his whole clientèle during the winter. He told me that his

medical  practice  proceeded  as  follows.  In  his  consulting  hours  the

patients came into his room and stood in a row. One after another

stepped  forward  and  described  his  complaint:  he  had  backache  or

pains in his stomach or had tired legs, and so on. The doctor then

examined him and, after satisfying himself as to what was the matter,

called  out  the  diagnosis,  which  was  the  same  in  every  case.  He

translated the word to me; it meant approximately ‘bewitched’. I asked

in astonishment whether the peasants made no objection to his verdict

being the same with every patient. ‘Oh, no!’ he replied, ‘they are very

pleased with it: it is what they expected. Each of them, as he went

back to his place in the row, showed the others by looks and gestures

that I was a fellow who understood things.’ Little did I guess at the

time  in  what  circumstances  I  should  come  across  an  analogoussituation once again.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4743

 

   For, whether a man is a homosexual or a necrophilic, a hysteric

suffering from anxiety, an obsessional neurotic cut off from society, or

a raving lunatic, the ‘Individual Psychologist’ of the Adlerian school will

declare that the impelling motive of his condition is that he wishes to

assert himself, to overcompensate for his inferiority, to remain ‘on top’,

to pass from the feminine to the masculine line. In my young student

days  we  used  to  hear  something  very  much  the  same  in  the  out-

patients’  department  when  a  case  of  hysteria  was  introduced:

hysterical  patients,  we  were  told,  produce  their  symptoms  to  make

themselves  interesting,  to  draw  attention  to  themselves.  It  is  a

remarkable  thing  how  these  ancient  pieces  of  wisdom  keep  on

cropping up. But even at that time this fragment of psychology did not

seem to cover the riddle of hysteria. It left unexplained, for instance,

why the patients used no other methods for attaining their purpose.

There  must,  of  course,  be something  correct  in  this  theory  of  the

‘Individual Psychologists’: a small particle is taken for the whole. The

self-preservative instinct will try to profit by every situation; the ego will

seek to turn even illness to its advantage. In psycho-analysis this is

known as the ‘secondary gain from illness’. Though, indeed, when we

think  of  the  facts  of  masochism,  of  the  unconscious  need  for

punishment  and  of  neurotic  self-injury,  which  make  plausible  the

hypothesis of there being instinctual impulses that run contrary to self-

preservation, we even feel shaken in our belief in the general validity

of  the  commonplace  truth  on  which  the  theoretical  structure  of

Individual Psychology is erected. But a theory such as this is bound to

be  very  welcome  to  the  great  mass  of  the  people,  a  theory  which

recognizes no complications, which introduces no new concepts that

are  hard  to  grasp,  which  knows  nothing  of  the  unconscious,  which

gets  rid  at  a  single  blow  of  the  universally  oppressive  problem  of

sexuality and which restricts itself to the discovery of the artifices by

which  people  seek  to  make  life  easy.  For  the  mass  of  the  peoplethemselves  take  things  easily:  they  call  for  no  more  than  a  single

reason  by  way  of  explanation,  they  do  not  thank  science  for  its

diffuseness,  they  want  to  have  simple  solutions  and  to  know  that

problems  are  solved.  When  we  consider  how  very  far  Individual

Psychology goes in meeting these demands, we cannot suppress the

recollection of a sentence in Wallenstein:

 

                                                Wär’ der Gedank’ nicht so verwünscht gescheidt,
                                                Man wär’ versucht, ihn herzlich dumm zu nennen.
 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4744

 

      Criticism  from  specialist  circles,  which  is  so  relentless  against

psycho-analysis,  has  in  general  handled  Individual  Psychology  with

kid gloves. It is true that in America one of the most highly respected

psychiatrists published a paper against Adler under the title ‘Enough’,

in  which  he  gave  energetic  expression  to  his  boredom  at  the

‘compulsion to repeat’ of Individual Psychology. If others have treated

it far more amiably, no doubt their antagonism to analysis has had

much to do with it.

   I need not say much about other schools which have branched off

from our psycho-analysis. The fact that they have done so cannot be

used either for or against the validity of psycho-analytic theories. You

have only to think of the strong emotional factors that make it hard for

many  people  to  fit  themselves  in  with  others  or  to  subordinate

themselves, and of the still greater difficulty justly insisted on by the

dictum ‘Quot capita tot sensus’. When the differences of opinion had

gone beyond a certain point, the most sensible thing was to part and

thereafter to proceed along our different ways - especially when the

theoretical  divergence  involved  a  change  in  practical  procedure.

Suppose,  for  instance,  that  an  analyst  attaches  little  value  to  the

influence of the patient’s personal past and looks for the causation of

neuroses  exclusively  in  present-day  motives  and  in  expectations  of

the future. In that case he will also neglect the analysis of childhood;

he will have to adopt an entirely different technique and will have to

make up for the omission of the events from the analysis of childhoodby increasing his didactic influence and by directly indicating certain

particular aims in life. We for our part will then say: ‘This may be a

school of wisdom; but it is no longer analysis.’ Or someone else may

arrive at the view that the experience of anxiety at birth sows the seed

of  all  later  neurotic  disturbances.  It  may  thereupon  seem  to  him

legitimate  to  restrict  analysis  to  the  consequences  of  this  single

impression  and  to  promise  therapeutic  success  from  a  treatment

lasting from three to four months. As you will observe, I have chosen

two examples which start from diametrically opposite premisses. It is

an almost universal characteristic of these ‘secessionist movements’

that  each  of  them  takes  hold  of  one  fragment  out  of  the  wealth  of

themes in psycho-analysis and makes itself independent on the basis

of  this  seizure  -  selecting  the  instinct  for  mastery,  for  instance,  or

ethical conflict, or the mother, or genitality, and so on. If it appears to

you that secessions of this sort are already more numerous to-day in

the history of psycho-analysis than in other intellectual movements, I

am  not  sure  that  I  should  agree  with  you.  If  it  is  the  case,  the

responsibility  must  be  laid  on  the  intimate  relations  which  exist  in

psycho-analysis between theoretical views and therapeutic treatment.

Mere differences of opinion would be tolerable for far longer. People

like  accusing  us  psycho-analysts  of  intolerance.  The  only

manifestation of this ugly characteristic has been precisely our parting

from  those  who  think  differently  from  us.  No  other  harm  has  been

done to them. On the contrary, they have fallen on their feet, and are

better off than they were before. For by their separation they have

usually freed themselves of one of the burdens which weigh us down -

the odium of infantile sexuality, perhaps, or the absurdity of symbolism

-  and  are  regarded  by  their  environment  as  passably  respectable,

which is still not true of those of us who are left behind. Moreover,

apart  from  one  notable  exception,  it  was  they  who  excluded

themselves.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4745

 

   What further claims do you make in the name of tolerance? Thatwhen someone has uttered an opinion which we regard as completely

false we should say to him: ‘Thank you very much for having given

voice to this contradiction. You are guarding us against the danger of

complacency  and  are  giving  us  an  opportunity  of  showing  the

Americans that we are really as "broad-minded" as they always wish.

To be sure, we do not believe a word of what you are saying, but that

makes no difference. Probably you are just as right as we are. After

all, who can possibly know who is right? In spite of our antagonism,

pray allow us to represent your point of view in our publications. We

hope that you will be kind enough in exchange to find a place for our

views which you deny.’ In the future, when the misuse of Einstein’s

relativity has been entirely achieved, this will obviously become the

regular custom in scientific affairs. For the moment, it is true, we have

not  gone  quite  so  far.  We  restrict  ourselves,  in  the  old  fashion,  to

putting forward only our own convictions, we expose ourselves to the

risk of error because it cannot be guarded against, and we reject what

is  in  contradiction  to  us.  We  have  made  plentiful  use  in  psycho-

analysis of the right to change our opinions if we think we have found

something better.

 

   One of the first applications of psycho-analysis was to teach us to

understand  the  opposition  offered  to  us  by  our  contemporaries

because  we  practised  psycho-analysis.  Other  applications,  of  an

objective nature, may claim a more general interest. Our first purpose,

of  course,  was  to  understand  the  disorders  of  the  human  mind,

because a remarkable experience had shown that here understanding

and cure almost coincide, that a traversable road leads from the one

to  the  other.  And  for  a  long  time  it  was  our  only  purpose.  Then,

however, we perceived the close relations, the internal identity indeed,

between pathological processes and what are known as normal ones.

Psycho-analysis became a depth-psychology; and, since nothing that

men  make  or  do  is  understandable  without  the  co-operation  of

psychology, the applications of psycho-analysis to numerous fields of

knowledge, in particular to those of the mental sciences, came about

of  their  own  accord,  pushed  their  way  to  the  front  and  called  for

ventilation. These tasks unluckily came up against obstacles which,

rooted  as  they  were  in  the  circumstances,  have  not  yet  beenovercome  even  to-day.  An  application  of  this  kind  presupposes

specialized  knowledge  which  an  analyst  does  not  possess,  while

those who possess it, the specialists, know nothing of analysis and

perhaps want to know nothing. The result has been that analysts, as

amateurs with an equipment of greater or less adequacy, often hastily

scraped together, have made excursions into such fields of knowledge

as  mythology,  the  history  of  civilization,  ethnology,  the  science  of

religion and so on. They were no better treated by the experts resident

in those fields than are trespassers in general: their methods and their

findings, in so far as they attracted attention, were in the first instance

rejected. But these conditions are constantly improving, and in every

region there is a growing number of people who study psycho-analysis

in order to make use of it in their special subject, and in order, as

colonists, to replace the pioneers. Here we may expect a rich harvest

of new discoveries. Applications of analysis are always confirmations

of it as well. There, too, where scientific work is further removed from

practical  activity,  the  inevitable  differences  of  opinion  will  no  doubt

take a less embittered form.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4746

 

   I feel a strong temptation to conduct you through all the applications

of  psycho-analysis  to  the  mental  sciences.  They  are  things  worth

knowing by anyone with intellectual interests; and not to hear about

abnormality and illness for a time would be a well-deserved relaxation.

But I must renounce the idea: it would once more carry us outside the

framework of these lectures and, I must honestly admit, I should not

be equal to the task. It is true that in a few of these regions I myself

took the first step; but to-day I no longer embrace the whole field, and

I should have to do a great deal of studying in order to master what

has  been  accomplished  since  my  beginnings.  Any  of  you  who  are

disappointed by my refusal may make up for it in the pages of our

periodical Imago,  which  is  designed  to  cover  the  non-medical

applications of analysis.

    But there is one topic which I cannot pass over so easily - not,

however,  because  I  understand  particularly  much  about  it  or  have

contributed  very  much  to  it.  Quite  the  contrary:  I  have  scarcely

concerned  myself  with  it  at  all.  I  must  mention  it  because  it  is  so

exceedingly  important,  so  rich  in  hopes  for  the  future,  perhaps  the

most important of all the activities of analysis. What I am thinking of is

the application of psycho-analysis to education, to the upbringing of

the next generation. I am glad that I am at least able to say that my

daughter, Anna Freud, has made this study her life-work and has in

that way compensated for my neglect.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4747

 

   The road that led to this application is easily traced. When in the

treatment of an adult neurotic we followed up the determinants of his

symptoms,  we  were  regularly  led  back  to  his  early  childhood.  A

knowledge of the later aetiological factors was not sufficient either for

understanding the case or for producing a therapeutic effect. We were

therefore compelled to make ourselves acquainted with the psychical

peculiarities of childhood; we learnt a quantity of things which could

not have been learnt except through analysis, and we were able to put

right  many  opinions  that  were  generally  held  about  childhood.  We

recognized  that  particular  importance  attached  to  the  first  years  of

childhood - up to the age of five, perhaps - for several reasons. Firstly,

because those years include the early efflorescence of sexuality which

leaves  behind  it  decisive  instigating  factors  for  the  sexual  life  of

maturity. Secondly, because the impressions of this period impinge

upon an immature and feeble ego, and act upon it like traumas. The

ego cannot fend off the emotional storms which they provoke in any

way except by repression and in this manner acquires in childhood all

its  dispositions  to  later  illnesses  and  functional  disturbances.  We

realized that the difficulty of childhood lies in the fact that in a short

span  of  time  a  child  has  to  appropriate  the  results  of  a  cultural

evolution  which  stretches  over  thousands  of  years,  including  the

acquisition of control over his instincts and adaptation to society - or atleast the first beginnings of these two. He can only achieve a part of

this  modification  through  his  own  development;  much  must  be

imposed on him by education. We are not surprised that children often

carry out this task very imperfectly. During these early times many of

them pass through states that may be put on a par with neuroses -

and this is certainly so in the case of all those who produce manifest

illnesses later on. In some children the neurotic illness does not wait

till maturity but breaks out already in childhood and gives parents and

doctors plenty of trouble.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4748

 

   We had no misgivings over applying analytic treatment to children

who either exhibited unambiguous neurotic symptoms or who were on

the  road  to  an  unfavourable  development  of  character.  The

apprehension expressed by opponents of analysis that the child would

be  injured  by  it  proved  unfounded.  What  we  gained  from  these

undertakings was that we were able to confirm on the living subject

what we had inferred (from historical documents, as it were) in the

case of adults. But the gain for the children was also very satisfactory.

It  turned  out  that  a  child  is  a  very  favourable  subject  for  analytic

therapy;  the  results  are  thorough  and  lasting.  The  technique  of

treatment worked out for adults must, of course, be largely altered for

children. A child is psychologically a different object from an adult. As

yet he possesses no super-ego, the method of free association does

not carry far with him, transference (since the real parents are still on

the spot) plays a different part. The internal resistances against which

we  struggle  in  adults  are  replaced  for  the  most  part  in  children  by

external  difficulties.  If  the  parents  make  themselves  vehicles  of  the

resistance, the aim of the analysis - and even the analysis itself - is

often imperilled. Hence it is often necessary to combine with a child’s

analysis a certain amount of analytic influencing of his parents. On the

other  hand,  the  inevitable  deviations  of  analyses  of  children  from

those of adults are diminished by the circumstance that some of our

patients  have  retained  so  many  infantile  character  traits  that  theanalyst  (once  again  adapting  himself  to  his  subject)  cannot  avoid

making use with them of certain of the techniques of child-analysis. It

has  automatically  happened  that  child-analysis  has  become  the

domain of women analysts, and no doubt this will remain true.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4749

 

   The recognition that most of our children pass through a neurotic

phase in the course of their development carries with it the germ of a

hygienic challenge. The question may be raised whether it would not

be expedient to come to a child’s help with an analysis even if he

shows no signs of a disturbance, as a measure for safeguarding his

health, just as to-day we inoculate healthy children against diphtheria

without waiting to see if they fall ill of it. The discussion of this question

has  only  an  academic  interest  at  present,  but  I  may  venture  to

consider it here. The mere suggestion would seem to the great bulk of

our  contemporaries  to  be  a  monstrous  outrage,  and  in  view  of  the

attitude towards analysis of most people in a parental position any

hope of putting through such an idea must be abandoned for the time

being. Prophylaxis such as this against neurotic illness, which would

probably be very effective, also presupposes a quite other constitution

of  society.  The  watchword  for  the  application  of  psycho-analysis  to

education  is  to  be  found  to-day  elsewhere.  Let  us  make  ourselves

clear as to what the first task of education is. The child must learn to

control his instincts. It is impossible to give him liberty to carry out all

his impulses without restriction. To do so would be a very instructive

experiment for child-psychologists; but life would be impossible for the

parents  and  the  children  themselves  would  suffer  grave  damage,

which  would  show  itself  partly  at  once  and  partly  in  later  years.

Accordingly, education must inhibit, forbid and suppress, and this it

has abundantly seen to in all periods of history. But we have learnt

from analysis that precisely this suppression of instincts involves the

risk of neurotic illness. As you will remember, we have examined in

detail how this occurs. Thus education has to find its way between the

Scylla of non-interference and the Charybdis of frustration. Unless thisproblem is entirely insoluble, an optimum must be discovered which

will enable education to achieve the most and damage the least. It will

therefore be a matter of deciding how much to forbid, at what times

and by what means. And in addition we have to take into account the

fact that the objects of our educational influence have very different

innate constitutional dispositions, so that it is quite impossible that the

same educational procedure can be equally good for all children. A

moment’s reflection tells us that hitherto education has fulfilled its task

very badly and has done children great damage. If it discovers the

optimum and carries out its task ideally, it can hope to wipe out one of

the factors in the aetiology of falling ill - the influence of the accidental

traumas of childhood. It cannot in any case get rid of the other factor -

the  power  of  an  insubordinate  instinctual  constitution.  If  now  we

consider the difficult problems that confront the educator - how he has

to recognize the child’s constitutional individuality, to infer from small

indications what is going on in his immature mind, to give him the right

amount of love and yet to maintain an effective degree of authority -

we shall tell ourselves that the only appropriate preparation for the

profession of educator is a thorough psycho-analytic training. It would

be best that he should have been analysed himself, for, when all is

said  and  done,  it  is  impossible  to  assimilate  analysis  without

experiencing  it  personally.  The  analysis  of  teachers  and  educators

seems  to  be  a  more  efficacious  prophylactic  measure  than  the

analysis of children themselves, and there are less difficulties in the

way of putting it into practice.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4750

 

   We may mention, though only as an incidental consideration, an

indirect  way  in  which  the  upbringing  of  children  may  be  helped  by

analysis and which may with time acquire a greater influence. Parents

who have themselves experienced an analysis and owe much to it,

including an insight into the faults of their own upbringing, will treat

their children with better understanding and will spare them much of

what they themselves were not spared.   Parallel with the efforts of analysts to influence education, other

investigations  are  being  made  into  the  origin  and  prevention  of

delinquency and crime. Here again I am only opening the door for you

and  showing  you  the  rooms  that  lie  beyond  it,  without  leading  you

inside. I am certain that if you remain loyal to your interest in psycho-

analysis you will be able to learn much that is new and valuable on

these  subjects.  I  must  not,  however,  leave  the  topic  of  education

without referring to one particular aspect of it. It has been said - and

no  doubt  justly  -  that  every  education  has  a  partisan  aim,  that  it

endeavours to bring the child into line with the established order of

society,  without  considering  how  valuable  or  how  stable  that  order

may be in itself. If one is convinced of the defects in our present social

arrangements,  education  with  a  psycho-analytic  alignment  cannot

justifiably be put at their service as well: it must be given another and

higher aim, liberated from the prevailing demands of society. In my

opinion, however, this argument is out of place here. Such a demand

goes beyond the legitimate function of analysis. In the same way, it is

not  the  business  of  a  doctor  who  is  called  in  to  treat  a  case  of

pneumonia to concern himself with whether the patient is an honest

man or a suicide or a criminal, whether he deserves to remain alive or

whether one ought to wish him to. This other aim which it is desired to

give to education will also be a partisan one, and it is not the affair of

an analyst to decide between the parties. I am leaving entirely on one

side the fact that psycho-analysis would be refused any influence on

education if it admitted to intentions inconsistent with the established

social  order.  Psycho-analytic  education  will  be  taking  an  uninvited

responsibility on itself if it proposes to mould its pupils into rebels. It

will have played its part if it sends them away as healthy and efficient

as possible. It itself contains enough revolutionary factors to ensure

that no one educated by it will in later life take the side of reaction and

suppression. It is even my opinion that revolutionary children are not

desirable from any point of view.

 

   I propose further, Ladies and Gentlemen, to say a few words to you

about psycho-analysis as a form of therapy. I discussed the theoretical

side of this question fifteen years ago and I cannot formulate it in any

other manner to-day; I have now to tell you of our experience duringthis interval. As you know, psycho-analysis originated as a method of

treatment; it has far outgrown this, but it has not abandoned its home-

ground and it is still linked to its contact with patients for increasing its

depth and for its further development. The accumulated impressions

from which we derive our theories could be arrived at in no other way.

The failures we meet with as therapists are constantly setting us new

tasks and the demands of real life are an effective guard against an

overgrowth of the speculation which we cannot after all do without in

our  work.  I  have  already  discussed  long  ago  the  means  used  by

psycho-analysis in helping patients, when it does help them, and the

method  by  which  it  does  so;  to-day  I  shall  enquire  how  much  it

achieves.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4751

 

      You  are  perhaps  aware  that  I  have  never  been  a  therapeutic

enthusiast; there is no danger of my misusing this lecture by indulging

in  eulogies.  I  would  rather  say  too  little  than  too  much.  During  the

period at which I was the only analyst, people who were ostensibly

friendly to my ideas used to say to me: ‘That’s all very nice and clever;

but show me a case that you have cured by analysis.’ This was one of

the many formulas which in the course of time have succeeded one

another  in  performing  the  function  of  pushing  the  uncomfortable

novelty aside. To-day it is as out of date as many others: the analyst,

too, has a heap of letters in his files from grateful patients who have

been cured. The analogy does not stop at that. Psycho-analysis is

really a method of treatment like others. It has its triumphs and its

defeats,  its  difficulties,  its  limitations,  its  indications.  At  one  time  a

complaint  was  made  against  analysis  that  it  was  not  to  be  taken

seriously as a treatment since it did not dare to issue any statistics of

its  successes.  Since  then,  the  Psycho-Analytic  Institute  in  Berlin,

which was founded by Dr. Max Eitingon, has published a statement of

its  results  during  its  first  ten  years.  Its  therapeutic  successes  give

grounds neither for boasting nor for being ashamed. But statistics of

that kind are in general uninstructive; the material worked upon is soheterogeneous that only very large numbers would show anything. It

is wiser to examine one’s individual experiences. And here I should

like to add that I do not think our cures can compete with those of

Lourdes. There are so many more people who believe in the miracles

of the Blessed Virgin than in the existence of the unconscious. If we

turn  to  mundane  competitors,  we  must  compare  psycho-analytic

treatment with other kinds of psychotherapy. To-day organic physical

methods  of  treating  neurotic  states  need  scarcely  be  mentioned.

Analysis  as  a  psycho-therapeutic  procedure  does  not  stand  in

opposition  to  other  methods  used  in  this  specialized  branch  of

medicine; it does not diminish their value nor exclude them. There is

no  theoretical  inconsistency  in  a  doctor  who  likes  to  call  himself  a

psychotherapist using analysis on his patients alongside of any other

method of treatment according to the peculiarities of the case and the

favourable  or  unfavourable  external  circumstances.  It  is  in  fact

technique  that  necessitates  the  specialization  in  medical  practice.

Thus  in  the  same  way  surgery  and  orthopaedics  were  obliged  to

separate. Psycho-analytic activity is arduous and exacting; it cannot

well be handled like a pair of glasses that one puts on for reading and

takes  off  when  one  goes  for  a  walk.  As  a  rule  psycho-analysis

possesses  a  doctor  either  entirely  or  not  at  all.  Those

psychotherapists  who  make  use  of  analysis  among  other  methods,

occasionally, do not to my knowledge stand on firm analytic ground;

they  have  not  accepted  the  whole  of  analysis  but  have  watered  it

down  -  have  drawn  its  fangs,  perhaps;  they  cannot  be  counted  as

analysts. This is, I think, to be regretted. But co-operation in medical

practice  between  an  analyst  and  a  psychotherapist  who  restricts

himself to other techniques would serve quite a useful purpose.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4752

 

      Compared  with  the  other  psychotherapeutic  procedures  psycho-

analysis is beyond any doubt the most powerful. It is just and fair, too,

that  this  should  be  so  for  it  is  also  the  most  laborious  and  time-

consuming; it would not be used on slight cases. In suitable cases it ispossible  by  its  means  to  get  rid  of  disturbances  and  bring  about

changes for which in pre-analytic times one would not have ventured

to hope. But it has its very appreciable limits. The therapeutic ambition

of some of my adherents has made the greatest efforts to overcome

these  obstacles  so  that  every  sort  of  neurotic  disorder  might  be

curable by psycho-analysis. They have endeavoured to compress the

work of analysis into a shorter duration, to intensify transference so

that it may be able to overcome any resistance, to unite other forms of

influence with it so as to compel a cure. These efforts are certainly

praiseworthy, but, in my opinion, they are vain. They bring with them,

too, a danger of being oneself forced away from analysis and drawn

into  a  boundless  course  of  experimentation.  The  expectation  that

every neurotic phenomenon can be cured may, I suspect, be derived

from  the  layman’s  belief  that  the  neuroses  are  something  quite

unnecessary which have no right whatever to exist. Whereas in fact

they are severe, constitutionally fixed illnesses, which rarely restrict

themselves  to  only  a  few  attacks  but  persist  as  a  rule  over  long

periods or throughout life. Our analytic experience that they can be

extensively  influenced,  if  the  historical  precipitating  causes  and

accidental auxiliary factors of the illness can be dealt with, has led us

to neglect the constitutional factor in our therapeutic practice, and in

any case we can do nothing about it; but in theory we ought always to

bear it in mind. The radical inaccessibility of the psychoses to analytic

treatment should, in view of their close relationship to the neuroses,

restrict  our  pretensions  in  regard  to  these  latter.  The  therapeutic

effectiveness  of  psycho-analysis  remains  cramped  by  a  number  of

weighty and scarcely assailable factors. In the case of children, where

one  might  count  on  the  greatest  successes,  the  difficulties  are  the

external  ones  connected  with  their  relation  to  their  parents,  though

these difficulties are after all a necessary part of being a child. In the

case  of  adults  the  difficulties  arise  in  the  first  instance  from  two

factors: the amount of psychical rigidity present and the form of the

illness with all that that covers in the way of deeper determinants.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4753 

   The first of these factors is often unjustly overlooked. However great

may be the plasticity of mental life and the possibility of reviving old

conditions, not everything can be brought to life again. Some changes

seem to be definitive and correspond to scars formed when a process

has run its course. On other occasions one has an impression of a

general stiffening of mental life; the psychical processes, to which one

could very well indicate other paths, seem incapable of abandoning

the old ones. But perhaps this is the same thing as what I mentioned

just now, only looked at differently. All too often one seems to see that

it  is  only  the  treatment’s  lack  of  the  necessary  motive  force  that

prevents  one  from  bringing  the  change  about.  One  particular

dependent relation, one special instinctual component, is too powerful

in comparison with the opposing forces that we are able to mobilize.

This is quite generally true with the psychoses. We understand them

well enough to know the point at which the levers should be applied,

but they would not be able to move the weight. It is here, indeed, that

hope  for  the  future  lies:  the  possibility  that  our  knowledge  of  the

operation of the hormones (you know what they are) may give us the

means  of  successfully  combating  the  quantitative  factors  of  the

illnesses: but we are far from that to-day. I realize that the uncertainty

in  all  these  matters  is  a  constant  instigation  towards  perfecting

analysis  and  in  particular  the  transference.  Beginners  in  analysis

especially are left in doubt in case of a failure whether they should

blame the peculiarities of the case or their own clumsy handling of the

therapeutic procedure. But, as I have said already, I do not think much

can be achieved by efforts in this direction.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4754

 

   The second limitation upon analytic successes is given by the form

of the illness. You know already that the field of application of analytic

therapy  lies  in  the  transference  neuroses  -  phobias,  hysteria,

obsessional neurosis - and further, abnormalities of character which

have been developed in place of these illnesses. Everything differingfrom these, narcissistic and psychotic conditions, is unsuitable to a

greater or less extent. It would be entirely legitimate to guard against

failures by carefully excluding such cases. This precaution would lead

to a great improvement in the statistics of analysis. There is, however,

a pitfall here. Our diagnoses are very often made only after the event.

They resemble the Scottish King’s test for identifying witches that I

read  about  in  Victor  Hugo.  This  king  declared  that  he  was  in

possession of an infallible method of recognizing a witch. He had the

women  stewed  in  a  cauldron  of  boiling  water  and  then  tasted  the

broth. Afterwards he was able to say: ‘That was a witch’, or ‘No, that

was not one.’ It is the same with us, except that we are the sufferers.

We cannot judge the patient who comes for treatment (or, in the same

way, the candidate who comes for training) till we have studied him

analytically for a few weeks or months. We are in fact buying a pig in a

poke. The patient brings along indefinite general ailments which do

not admit of a conclusive diagnosis. After this period of testing it may

turn out that the case is an unsuitable one. If so we send him away if

he is a candidate, or continue the trial a little longer if he is a patient

on the chance that we may yet see things in a more favourable light.

The patient has his revenge by adding to our list of failures, and the

rejected candidate does so perhaps, if he is paranoid, by writing books

on psycho-analysis himself. As you see, our precautions have been of

no avail.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4755

 

   I am afraid these detailed discussions are exhausting your interest.

But I should be still more sorry if you were to think it is my intention to

lower your opinion of psycho-analysis as a therapy. Perhaps I really

made a clumsy start. For I wanted to do the opposite: to excuse the

therapeutic  limitations  of  analysis  by  pointing  out  their  inevitability.

With the same aim in view I turn to another point: the reproach against

analytic treatment that it takes a disproportionately long time. On this it

must be said that psychical changes do in fact only take place slowly;

if they occur rapidly, suddenly, that is a bad sign. It is true that thetreatment of a fairly severe neurosis may easily extend over several

years; but consider, in case of success, how long the illness would

have  lasted.  A  decade,  probably,  for  every  year  of  treatment:  the

illness, that is to say (as we see so often in untreated cases), would

not have ended at all. In some cases we have reasons for resuming

an  analysis  many  years  afterwards.  Life  had  developed  fresh

pathological  reactions  to  fresh  precipitating  causes;  but  in  the

meantime our patient had been well. The first analysis had not in fact

brought to light all his pathological dispositions, and it was natural for

the  analysis  to  have  been  stopped  when  success  was  achieved.

There  are  also  severely  handicapped  people  who  are  kept  under

analytic  supervision  all  through  their  lives  and  are  taken  back  into

analysis from time to time. But these people would otherwise have

been  altogether  incapable  of  existence  and  we  must  feel  glad  that

they  can  be  kept  on  their  feet  by  this  piecemeal  and  recurrent

treatment.  The  analysis  of  character  disorders  also  calls  for  long

periods of treatment; but it is often successful; and do you know of any

other  therapy  with  which  such  a  task  could  even  be  approached?

Therapeutic  ambition  may  feel  unsatisfied  by  such  results;  but  we

have learnt from the example of tuberculosis and lupus that success

can only be obtained when the treatment has been adapted to the

characteristics of the illness.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4756

 

 

      I  have  told  you  that  psycho-analysis  began  as  a  method  of

treatment;  but  I  did  not  want  to  commend  it  to  your  interest  as  a

method  of  treatment  but  on  account  of  the  truths  it  contains,  on

account  of  the  information  it  gives  us  about  what  concerns  human

beings  most  of  all  -  their  own  nature  -  and  on  account  of  the

connections it discloses between the most different of their activities.

As a method of treatment it is one among many, though, to be sure,

primus inter pares. If it was without therapeutic value it would not have

been discovered, as it was, in connection with sick people and wouldnot have gone on developing for more than thirty years.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4757

 

                                  LECTURE XXXV

 

              THE QUESTION OF A WELTANSCHAUUNG

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - At our last meeting we were occupied

with little everyday concerns - putting our own modest house in order,

as it were. I propose that we should now take a bold leap and venture

upon answering a question which is constantly being asked in other

quarters: does psycho-analysis lead to a particular Weltanschauung

and, if so, to which?

   ‘Weltanschauung’ is, I am afraid, a specifically German concept, the

translation of which into foreign languages might well raise difficulties.

If I try to give you a definition of it, it is bound to seem clumsy to you.

In my opinion, then, a Weltanschauung is an intellectual construction

which solves all the problems of our existence uniformly on the basis

of one overriding hypothesis, which, accordingly, leaves no question

unanswered and in which everything that interests us finds its fixed

place.  It  will  easily  be  understood  that  the  possession  of  a

Weltanschauung  of  this  kind  is  among  the  ideal  wishes  of  human

beings. Believing in it one can feel secure in life, one can know what

to  strive  for,  and  how  one  can  deal  most  expediently  with  one’s

emotions and interests.

   If that is the nature of a Weltanschauung, the answer as regards

psycho-analysis is made easy. As a specialist science, a branch of

psychology - a depth-psychology or psychology of the unconscious - it

is quite unfit to construct a Weltanschauung of its own: it must accept

the scientific one. But the Weltanschauung of science already departs

noticeably  from  our  definition.  It  is  true  that  it  too  assumes  the

uniformity of the explanation of the universe; but it does so only as a

programme, the fulfilment of which is relegated to the future. Apart

from this it is marked by negative characteristics, by its limitation towhat is at the moment knowable and by its sharp rejection of certain

elements that are alien to it. It asserts that there are no sources of

knowledge of the universe other than the intellectual working-over of

carefully  scrutinized  observations  -  in  other  words,  what  we  call

research - and alongside of it no knowledge derived from revelation,

intuition or divination. It seems as though this view came very near to

being generally recognized in the course of the last few centuries that

have  passed;  and  it  has  been  left  to our  century  to  discover  the

presumptuous objection that a Weltanschauung like this is alike paltry

and cheerless, that it overlooks the claims of the human intellect and

the needs of the human mind.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4758

 

   This objection cannot be too energetically repudiated. It is quite

without  a  basis,  since  the  intellect  and  the  mind  are  objects  for

scientific research in exactly the same way as any non-human things.

Psycho-analysis  has  a  special  right  to  speak  for  the  scientific

Weltanschauung  at  this  point,  since  it  cannot  be  reproached  with

having  neglected  what  is  mental  in  the  picture  of  the  universe.  Its

contribution to science lies precisely in having extended research to

the mental field. And, incidentally, without such a psychology science

would  be  very  incomplete.  If,  however,  the  investigation  of  the

intellectual  and  emotional  functions  of  men  (and  of  animals)  is

included in science, then it will be seen that nothing is altered in the

attitude of science as a whole, that no new sources of knowledge or

methods of research have come into being. Intuition and divination

would be such, if they existed; but they may safely be reckoned as

illusions, the fulfilments of wishful impulses. It is easy to see, too, that

these demands upon a Weltanschauung are only based on emotion.

Science takes notice of the fact that the human mind produces these

demands and is ready to examine their sources; but it has not the

slightest reason to regard them as justified. On the contrary it sees

this as a warning carefully to separate from knowledge everything that

is illusion and an outcome of emotional demands like these.   This does not in the least mean that these wishes are to be pushed

contemptuously  on  one  side  or  their  value  for  human  life  under-

estimated. We are ready to trace out the fulfilments of them which

they have created for themselves in the products of art and in the

systems  of  religion  and  philosophy;  but  we  cannot  nevertheless

overlook the fact that it would be illegitimate and highly inexpedient to

allow these demands to be transferred to the sphere of knowledge.

For  this  would  be  to  lay  open  the  paths  which  lead  to  psychosis,

whether to individual or group psychosis, and would withdraw valuable

amounts of energy from endeavours which are directed towards reality

in order, so far as possible, to find satisfaction in it for wishes and

needs.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4759

 

   From the standpoint of science one cannot avoid exercising one’s

critical faculty here and proceeding with rejections and dismissals. It is

not permissible to declare that science is one field of human mental

activity and that religion and philosophy are others, at least its equal in

value, and that science has no business to interfere with the other two:

that they all have an equal claim to be true and that everyone is at

liberty to choose from which he will draw his convictions and in which

he will place his belief. A view of this kind is regarded as particularly

superior,  tolerant,  broad-minded  and  free  from  illiberal  prejudices.

Unfortunately it is not tenable and shares all the pernicious features of

an entirely unscientific Weltanschauung and is equivalent to one in

practice. It is simply a fact that the truth cannot be tolerant, that it

admits of no compromises or limitations, that research regards every

sphere  of  human  activity  as  belonging  to  it  and  that  it  must  be

relentlessly critical if any other power tries to take over any part of it.

 

   Of the three powers which may dispute the basic position of science,

religion  alone  is  to  be  taken  seriously  as  an  enemy.  Art  is  almost

always harmless and beneficent; it does not seek to be anything but

an  illusion.  Except  for  a  few  people  who  are  spoken  of  as  being‘possessed’ by art, it makes no attempt at invading the realm of reality.

Philosophy is not opposed to science, it behaves like a science and

works in part by the same methods; it departs from it, however, by

clinging to the illusion of being able to present a picture of the universe

which is without gaps and is coherent, though one which is bound to

collapse with every fresh advance in our knowledge. It goes astray in

its method by over-estimating the epistemological value of our logical

operations  and  by  accepting  other  sources  of  knowledge  such  as

intuition. And it often seems that the poet’s derisive comment is not

unjustified when he says of the philosopher:

 

                                                Mit seinen Nachtmützen und Schlafrockfetzen

                                                Stopft er die Lücken des Weltenbaus.¹

 

   ¹ Heine.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4760

 

      But  philosophy  has  no  direct  influence  on  the  great  mass  of

mankind; it is of interest to only a small number even of the top layer

of intellectuals and is scarcely intelligible to anyone else. On the other

hand, religion is an immense power which has the strongest emotions

of human beings at its service. It is well known that at an earlier date it

comprised everything that played an intellectual part in men’s lives,

that it took the place of science when there was scarcely yet such a

thing as science, and that it constructed a Weltanschauung, consistent

and self-contained to an unparalleled degree, which, although it has

been profoundly shaken, persists to this day.

   If we are to give an account of the grandiose nature of religion, we

must bear in mind what it undertakes to do for human beings. It gives

them information about the origin and coming into existence of the

universe, it assures them of its protection and of ultimate happiness in

the ups and downs of life and it directs their thoughts and actions by

precepts which it lays down with its whole authority. Thus it fulfils three

functions.  With  the  first  of  them  it  satisfies  the  human  thirst  for

knowledge; it does the same thing that science attempts to do with itsmeans, and at that point enters into rivalry with it. It is to its second

function  that  it  no  doubt  owes  the  greatest  part  of  its  influence.

Science can be no match for it when it soothes the fear that men feel

of  the  dangers  and  vicissitudes  of  life,  when  it  assures  them  of  a

happy ending and offers them comfort in unhappiness. It is true that

science can teach us how to avoid certain dangers and that there are

some sufferings which it can successfully combat; it would be most

unjust to deny that it is a powerful helper to men; but there are many

situations in which it must leave a man to his suffering and can only

advise  him  to  submit  to  it.  In  its  third  function,  in  which  it  issues

precepts  and  lays  down  prohibitions  and  restrictions,  religion  is

furthest away from science. For science is content to investigate and

to establish facts, though it is true that from its application rules and

advice are derived on the conduct of life. In some circumstances these

are the same as those offered by religion, but, when this is so, the

reasons for them are different.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4761

 

   The convergence between these three aspects of religion is not

entirely clear. What has an explanation of the origin of the universe to

do  with  the  inculcation  of  certain  particular  ethical  precepts?  The

assurances  of  protection  and  happiness  are  more  intimately  linked

with the ethical requirements. They are the reward for fulfilling these

commands;  only  those  who  obey  them  may  count  upon  these

benefits, punishment awaits the disobedient. Incidentally, something

similar is true of science. Those who disregard its lessons, so it tells

us, expose themselves to injury.

   The remarkable combination in religion of instruction, consolation

and requirements can only be understood if it is subjected to a genetic

analysis. This may be approached from the most striking point of the

aggregate, from its instruction on the origin of the universe; for why,

we may ask, should a cosmogony be a regular component of religious

systems? The doctrine is, then, that the universe was created by a

being resembling a man, but magnified in every respect, in power,wisdom, and the strength of his passions - an idealized super-man.

Animals as creators of the universe point to the influence of totemism,

upon which we shall have a few words at least to say presently. It is

an interesting fact that this creator is always only a single being, even

when there are believed to be many gods. It is interesting, too, that the

creator  is  usually  a  man,  though  there  is  far  from  being  a  lack  of

indications of female deities; and some mythologies actually make the

creation begin with a male god getting rid of a female deity, who is

degraded into being a monster. Here the most interesting problems of

detail open out; but we must hurry on. Our further path is made easy

to  recognize,  for  this  god-creator  is  undisguisedly  called  ‘father’.

Psycho-analysis  infers  that  he  really  is  the  father,  with  all  the

magnificence in which he once appeared to the small child. A religious

man pictures the creation of the universe just as he pictures his own

origin.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4762

 

      This  being  so,  it  is  easy  to  explain  how  it  is  that  consoling

assurances  and  strict  ethical  demands  are  combined  with  a

cosmogony.  For  the  same  person  to  whom  the  child  owed  his

existence, the father (or more correctly, no doubt, the parental agency

compounded of the father and mother), also protected and watched

over him in his feeble and helpless state, exposed as he was to all the

dangers lying in wait in the external world; under his father’s protection

he felt safe. When a human being has himself grown up, he knows, to

be sure, that he is in possession of greater strength, but his insight

into the perils of life has also grown greater, and he rightly concludes

that fundamentally he still remains just as helpless and unprotected as

he was in his childhood, that faced by the world he is still a child. Even

now, therefore, he cannot do without the protection which he enjoyed

as a child. But he has long since recognized, too, that his father is a

being  of  narrowly  restricted  power,  and  not  equipped  with  every

excellence. He therefore harks back to the mnemic image of the father

whom in his childhood he so greatly overvalued. He exalts the imageinto a deity and makes it into something contemporary and real. The

effective  strength  of  this  mnemic  image  and  the  persistence  of  his

need for protection jointly sustain his belief in God.

   The third main item in the religious programme, the ethical demand,

also fits into this childhood situation with ease. I may remind you of

Kant’s famous pronouncement in which he names, in a single breath,

the starry heavens and the moral law within us. However strange this

juxtaposition may sound - for what have the heavenly bodies to do

with the question of whether one human creature loves another or kills

him?  -  it  nevertheless  touches  on  a  great  psychological  truth.  The

same  father  (or  parental  agency)  which  gave  the  child  life  and

guarded him against its perils, taught him as well what he might do

and what he must leave undone, instructed him that he must adapt

himself to certain restrictions on his instinctual wishes, and made him

understand what regard he was expected to have for his parents and

brothers and sisters, if he wanted to become a tolerated and welcome

member of the family circle and later on of larger associations. The

child is brought up to a knowledge of his social duties by a system of

loving rewards and punishments, he is taught that his security in life

depends on his parents (and afterwards other people) loving him and

on their being able to believe that he loves them. All these relations

are afterwards introduced by men unaltered into their religion. Their

parents’  prohibitions  and  demands  persist  within  them  as  a  moral

conscience.  With  the  help  of  this  same  system  of  rewards  and

punishments, God rules the world of men. The amount of protection

and  happy  satisfaction  assigned  to  an  individual  depends  on  his

fulfilment  of  the  ethical  demands;  his  love  of  God  and  his

consciousness  of  being  loved  by  God  are  the  foundations  of  the

security with which he is armed against the dangers of the external

world and of his human environment. Finally, in prayer he has assured

himself a direct influence on the divine will and with it a share in the

divine omnipotence.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4763

  

   I feel sure that while you have been listening to me you have been

bothered by a number of questions which you would be glad to hear

answered.  I  cannot  undertake  to  do  so  here  and  now,  but  I  feel

confident that none of these detailed enquiries would upset our thesis

that the religious Weltanschauung is determined by the situation of our

childhood. That being so, it is all the more remarkable that, in spite of

its infantile nature, it nevertheless had a precursor. There is no doubt

that there was a time without religion, without gods. This is known as

the stage of animism. At that time, too, the world was peopled with

spiritual beings resembling men - we call them demons. All the objects

in the external world were their habitation, or perhaps were identical

with them; but there was no superior power which had created them

all  and  afterwards  ruled  them  and  to  which  one  could  turn  for

protection and help. The demons of animism were for the most part

hostile in their attitude to human beings, but it appears that human

beings  had  more  self-confidence  then  than  later  on.  They  were

certainly in a constant state of the most acute fear of these evil spirits;

but  they  defended  themselves  against  them  by  certain  actions  to

which they ascribed the power to drive them away. Nor apart from this

did they regard themselves as defenceless. If they desired something

from Nature - if they wished for rain, for instance - they did not direct a

prayer to the weather-god, but they performed a magical act which

they  expected  to  influence  Nature  directly:  they  themselves  did

something which resembled rain. In their struggle against the powers

of the world around them their first weapon was magic, the earliest

fore-runner of the technology of to-day. Their reliance on magic was,

as  we  suppose,  derived  from  their  overvaluation  of  their  own

intellectual  operations,  from  their  belief  in  the  ‘omnipotence  of

thoughts’, which, incidentally, we come upon again in our obsessional

neurotic patients. We may suppose that human beings at that period

were particularly proud of their acquisitions in the way of language,

which must have been accompanied by a great facilitation of thinking.

They attributed magical power to words. This feature was later taken

over by religion. ‘And God said "Let there be light!" and there was

light.’ Moreover the fact of their magical actions shows that animistic

men did not simply rely on the power of their wishes. They expectedresults, rather, from the performance of an action which would induce

Nature to imitate it. If they wanted rain, they themselves poured out

water;  if  they  wanted  to  encourage  the  earth  to  be  fruitful,  they

demonstrated a dramatic performance of sexual intercourse to it in the

fields.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4764

 

   You know how hard it is for anything to die away when once it has

achieved psychical expression. So you will not be surprised to hear

that many of the utterances of animism have persisted to this day, for

the most part as what we call superstition, alongside of and behind

religion.  But  more  than  this,  you  will  scarcely  be  able  to  reject  a

judgement that the philosophy of today has retained some essential

features of the animistic mode of thought - the overvaluation of the

magic of words and the belief that the real events in the world take the

course which our thinking seeks to impose on them. It would seem, it

is true, to be an animism without magical actions. On the other hand,

we may suppose that even in those days there were ethics of some

sort, precepts upon the mutual relations of men; but nothing suggests

that they had any intimate connection with animistic beliefs. They were

probably the direct expression of men’s relative powers and of their

practical needs.

   It would be well worth knowing what brought about the transition

from animism to religion, but you may imagine the obscurity which to-

day  still  veils  these  primaeval  ages  of  the  evolution  of  the  human

spirit. It appears to be a fact that the first form assumed by religion

was the remarkable phenomenon of totemism, the worship of animals,

in whose train the first ethical commandments, the taboos, made their

appearance. In a volume called Totem and Taboo, I once elaborated a

notion  which  traced  this  transformation  back  to  a  revolution  in  the

circumstances of the human family. The main achievement of religion

as compared with animism lies in the psychical binding of the fear of

demons. Nevertheless a vestige of this primaeval age, the Evil Spirit,

has kept a place in the religious system. 

   This being the prehistory of the religious Weltanschauung let us turn

now to what has happened since then and to what is still going on

before our eyes. The scientific spirit, strengthened by the observation

of natural processes, has begun, in the course of time, to treat religion

as a human affair and to submit it to a critical examination. Religion

was not able to stand up to this. What first gave rise to suspicion and

scepticism were its tales of miracles, for they contradicted everything

that had been taught by sober observation and betrayed too clearly

the influence of the activity of the human imagination. After this its

doctrines explaining the origin of the universe met with rejection, for

they gave evidence of an ignorance which bore the stamp of ancient

times and to which, thanks to their increased familiarity with the laws

of nature, people knew they were superior. The idea that the universe

came into existence through acts of copulation or creation analogous

to the origin of individual people had ceased to be the most obvious

and  self-evident  hypothesis  since  the  distinction  between  animate

creatures with a mind and an inanimate Nature had impressed itself

on human thought - a distinction which made it impossible to retain

belief in the original animism. Nor must we overlook the influence of

the  comparative  study  of  different  religious  systems  and  the

impression of their mutual exclusiveness and intolerance.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4765

 

      Strengthened  by  these  preliminary  exercises,  the  scientific  spirit

gained enough courage at last to venture on an examination of the

most  important  and  emotionally  valuable  elements  of  the  religious

Weltanschauung. People may always have seen, though it was long

before  they  dared  to  say  so  openly,  that  the  pronouncements  of

religion promising men protection and happiness if they would only

fulfil  certain  ethical  requirements  had  also  shown  themselves

unworthy of belief. It seems not to be the case that there is a Power in

the  universe  which  watches  over  the  well-being  of  individuals  with

parental care and brings all their affairs to a happy ending. On thecontrary,  the  destinies  of  mankind  can  be  brought  into  harmony

neither with the hypothesis of a Universal Benevolence nor with the

partly  contradictory  one  of  a  Universal  Justice.  Earthquakes,  tidal

waves, conflagrations, make no distinction between the virtuous and

pious and the scoundrel or unbeliever. Even where what is in question

is not inanimate Nature but where an individual’s fate depends on his

relations  to  other  people,  it  is  by  no  means  the  rule  that  virtue  is

rewarded and that evil finds its punishment. Often enough the violent,

cunning or ruthless man seizes the envied good things of the world

and the pious man goes away empty. Obscure, unfeeling and unloving

powers determine men’s fate; the system of rewards and punishments

which religion ascribes to the government of the universe seems not

to exist. Here once again is a reason for dropping a portion of the

animistic theory which had been rescued from animism by religion.

   The last contribution to the criticism of the religious Weltanschauung

was effected by psycho-analysis, by showing how religion originated

from the helplessness of children and by tracing its contents to the

survival into maturity of the wishes and needs of childhood. This did

not precisely mean a contradiction of religion, but it was nevertheless

a  necessary  rounding-off  of  our  knowledge  about  it,  and  in  one

respect at least it was a contradiction, for religion itself lays claim to a

divine origin. And, to be sure, it is not wrong in this, provided that our

interpretation of God is accepted.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4766

 

   In summary, therefore, the judgement of science on the religious

Weltanschauung is this. While the different religions wrangle with one

another as to which of them is in possession of the truth, our view is

that the question of the truth of religious beliefs may be left altogether

on one side. Religion is an attempt to master the sensory world in

which we are situated by means of the wishful world which we have

developed  within  us  as  a  result  of  biological  and  psychological

necessities.  But  religion  cannot  achieve  this.  Its  doctrines  bear  the

imprint  of  the  times  in  which  they  arose,  the  ignorant  times  of  thechildhood of humanity. Its consolations deserve no trust. Experience

teaches us that the world is no nursery. The ethical demands on which

religion seeks to lay stress need, rather, to be given another basis; for

they are indispensable to human society and it is dangerous to link

obedience  to  them  with  religious  faith.  If  we  attempt  to  assign  the

place  of  religion  in  the  evolution  of  mankind,  it  appears  not  as  a

permanent  acquisition  but  as  a  counterpart  to  the  neurosis  which

individual  civilized  men  have  to  go  through  in  their  passage  from

childhood to maturity.

   You are of course free to criticize this description of mine; I will even

go half way to meet you on this. What I told you about the gradual

crumbling  away  of  the  religious Weltanschauung  was  certainly

incomplete  in  its  abbreviated  form.  The  order  of  the  different

processes was not given quite correctly; the co-operation of various

forces in the awakening of the scientific spirit was not followed out. I

also left out of account the alterations which took place in the religious

Weltanschauung itself during the period of its undisputed sway and

afterwards under the influence of growing criticism. Finally, I restricted

my remarks, strictly speaking, to one single form taken by religion, that

of  the  Western  peoples.  I  constructed  an  anatomical  model,  so  to

speak, for the purpose of a hurried demonstration which was to be as

impressive  as  possible.  Let  us  leave  on  one  side  the  question  of

whether my knowledge would in any case have been sufficient to do

the thing better and more completely. I am aware that you can find

everything I said to you said better elsewhere. Nothing in it is new. But

let me express a conviction that the most careful working-over of the

material of the problems of religion would not shake our conclusions.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4767

 

      The  struggle  of  the  scientific  spirit  against  the  religious

Weltanschauung is, as you know, not at an end: it is still going on to-

day under our eyes. Though as a rule psycho-analysis makes little use

of the weapon of controversy, I will not hold back from looking into this

dispute. In doing so I may perhaps throw some further light on ourattitude to Weltanschauungen. You will see how easily some of the

arguments  brought  forward  by  the  supporters  of  religion  can  be

answered, though it is true that others may evade refutation.

      The  first  objection  we  meet  with  is  to  the  effect  that  it  is  an

impertinence on the part of science to make religion a subject for its

investigations,  for  religion  is  something  sublime,  superior  to  any

operation  of  the  human  intellect,  something  which  may  not  be

approached with hair-splitting criticisms. In other words, science is not

qualified  to  judge  religion:  it  is  quite  serviceable  and  estimable

otherwise, so long as it keeps to its own sphere. But religion is not its

sphere, and it has no business there. If we do not let ourselves be put

off by this brusque repulse and enquire further what is the basis of this

claim to a position exceptional among all human concerns, the reply

we  receive  (if  we  are  thought  worthy  of  any  reply)  is  that  religion

cannot be measured by human measurements, for it is of divine origin

and was given us as a revelation by a Spirit which the human spirit

cannot comprehend. One would have thought that there was nothing

earlier than the refutation of this argument: it is a clear case of petitio

principii,  of  ‘begging  the  question’  -  I  know  of  no  good  German

equivalent expression. The actual question raised is whether there is a

divine  spirit  and  a  revelation  by  it;  and  the  matter  is  certainly  not

decided by saying that this question cannot be asked, since the deity

may not be put in question. The position here is what it occasionally is

during the work of analysis. If a usually sensible patient rejects some

particular  suggestion  on  specially  foolish  grounds,  this  logical

weakness is evidence of the existence of a specially strong motive for

the  denial  -  a  motive  which  can  only  be  of  an  affective  nature,  an

emotional tie.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4768

 

   We may also be given another answer, in which a motive of this kind

is openly admitted: religion may not be critically examined because it

is the highest, most precious, and most sublime thing that the human

spirit  has  produced,  because  it  gives  expression  to  the  deepestfeelings and alone makes the world tolerable and life worthy of men.

We need not reply by disputing this estimate of religion but by drawing

attention to another matter. What we do is to emphasize the fact that

what is in question is not in the least an invasion of the field of religion

by the scientific spirit, but on the contrary an invasion by religion of the

sphere  of  scientific  thought.  Whatever  may  be  the  value  and

importance of religion, it has no right in any way to restrict thought - no

right, therefore, to exclude itself from having thought applied to it.

      Scientific  thinking  does  not  differ  in  its  nature  from  the  normal

activity of thought, which all of us, believers and unbelievers, employ

in looking after our affairs in ordinary life. It has only developed certain

features: it takes an interest in things even if they have no immediate,

tangible use; it is concerned carefully to avoid individual factors and

affective  influences;  it  examines  more  strictly  the  trustworthiness  of

the sense-perceptions on which it bases its conclusions; it provides

itself  with  new  perceptions  which  cannot  be  obtained  by  everyday

means and it isolates the determinants of these new experiences in

experiments which are deliberately varied. Its endeavour is to arrive at

correspondence with reality - that is to say, with what exists outside us

and independently of us and, as experience has taught us, is decisive

for  the  fulfilment  or  disappointment  of  our  wishes.  This

correspondence with the real external world we call ‘truth’. It remains

the aim of scientific work even if we leave the practical value of that

work out of account. When, therefore, religion asserts that it can take

the place of science, that, because it is beneficent and elevating, it

must also be true, that is in fact an invasion which must be repulsed in

the most general interest. It is asking a great deal of a person who has

learnt to conduct his ordinary affairs in accordance with the rules of

experience and with a regard to reality, to suggest that he shall hand

over the care of what are precisely his most intimate interests to an

agency  which  claims  as  its  privilege  freedom  from  the  precepts  of

rational  thinking.  And  as  regards  the  protection  which  religion

promises  its  believers,  I  think  none  of  us  would  be  so  much  as

prepared to enter a motor-car if its driver announced that he drove,

unperturbed by traffic regulations, in accordance with the impulses of

his soaring imagination.

                 New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4769

 

   The prohibition against thought issued by religion to assist in its self-

preservation  is  also  far  from  being  free  from  danger  either  for  the

individual or for human society. Analytic experience has taught us that

a prohibition like this, even if it is originally limited to a particular field,

tends  to  widen  out  and  thereafter  to  become  the  cause  of  severe

inhibitions in the subject’s conduct of life. This result may be observed,

too, in the female sex, following from their being forbidden to have

anything to do with their sexuality even in thought. Biography is able to

point to the damage done by the religious inhibition of thought in the

life stories of nearly all eminent individuals in the past. On the other

hand intellect - or let us call it by the name that is familiar to us, reason

-  is  among  the  powers  which  we  may  most  expect  to  exercise  a

unifying influence on men - on men who are held together with such

difficulty and whom it is therefore scarcely possible to rule. It may be

imagined how impossible human society would be, merely if everyone

had his own multiplication table and his own private units of length and

weight.  Our  best  hope  for  the  future  is  that  intellect  -  the  scientific

spirit, reason - may in process of time establish a dictatorship in the

mental  life  of  man.  The  nature  of  reason  is  a  guarantee  that

afterwards it will not fail to give man’s emotional impulses and what is

determined  by  them  the  position  they  deserve.  But  the  common

compulsion exercised by such a dominance of reason will prove to be

the strongest uniting bond among men and lead the way to further

unions. Whatever, like religion’s prohibition against thought, opposes

such a development, is a danger for the future of mankind.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4770

 

      It  may  then  be  asked  why  religion  does  not  put  an  end  to  this

dispute which is so hopeless for it by frankly declaring: ‘It is a fact that

I cannot give you what is commonly called "truth"; if you want that, you

must  keep  to  science.  But  what  I  have  to  offer  you  is  somethingincomparably more beautiful, more consoling and more uplifting than

anything you could get from science. And because of that, I say to you

that it is true in another, higher sense.’ It is easy to find the answer to

this. Religion cannot make this admission because it would involve its

forfeiting all its influence on the mass of mankind. The ordinary man

only knows one kind of truth, in the ordinary sense of the word. He

cannot imagine what a higher or a highest truth may be. Truth seems

to him no more capable of comparative degrees than death; and he

cannot join in the leap from the beautiful to the true. Perhaps you will

think as I do that he is right in this.

   So the struggle is not at an end. The supporters of the religious

Weltanschauung  act  upon  the  ancient  dictum:  the  best  defence  is

attack. ‘What’, they ask, ‘is this science which presumes to disparage

our religion - our religion which has brought salvation and consolation

to  millions  of  people  over  many  thousands  of  years?  What  has  it

accomplished so far? What can we expect from it in the future? On its

own admission it is incapable of bringing consolation and exaltation.

Let  us  leave  them  on  one  side  then,  though  that  is  no  light

renunciation.  But  what  about  its  theories?  Can  it  tell  us  how  the

universe came about and what fate lies before it? Can it even draw us

a coherent picture of the universe, or show us where we are to look for

the unexplained phenomena of life or how the forces of the mind are

able to act upon inert matter? If it could do this we should not refuse it

our  respect.  But  none  of  these,  no  problem  of  this  kind,  has  been

solved by it hitherto. It gives us fragments of alleged discovery, which

it cannot bring into harmony with one another; it collects observations

of uniformities in the course of events which it dignifies with the name

of laws and submits to its risky interpretations. And consider the small

degree  of  certainty  which  it  attaches  to  its  findings!  Everything  it

teaches is only provisionally true: what is praised to-day as the highest

wisdom will be rejected to-morrow and replaced by something else,

though once more only tentatively. The latest error is then described

as the truth. And for this truth we are to sacrifice our highest good!’

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4771 

   I expect, Ladies and Gentlemen, that, in so far as you yourselves

are supporters of the scientific Weltanschauung which is attacked in

these words, you will not be too profoundly shaken by this criticism.

And here I should like to recall to you a remark that once went the

rounds in Imperial Austria. The old gentleman once shouted at the

Committee of a parliamentary party that was troublesome to him: ‘This

isn’t ordinary opposition any more! It’s factious opposition!’ Similarly,

as you will recognize, the reproaches against science for not having

yet solved the problems of the universe are exaggerated in an unjust

and malicious manner; it has truly not had time enough yet for these

great achievements. Science is very young - a human activity which

developed late. Let us bear in mind, to select only a few dates, that

only some three hundred years have passed since Kepler discovered

the laws of planetary movement, that the life of Newton, who analysed

light  into  the  colours  of  the  spectrum  and  laid  down  the  theory  of

gravitation, ended in 1727 - that is to say, little more than two hundred

years ago - and that Lavoisier discovered oxygen shortly before the

French Revolution. The life of an individual is very short in comparison

with the duration of human evolution; I may be a very old man to-day,

but nevertheless I was already alive when Darwin published his book

on the origin of species. In the same year as that, 1859, Pierre Curie,

the discoverer of radium, was born. And if you go further back, to the

beginnings  of  exact  science  among  the  Greeks,  to  Archimedes,  to

Aristarchus of Samos (about 250 B.C.) who was the fore-runner of

Copernicus, or even to the first beginnings of astronomy among the

Babylonians, you will only have covered a small fraction of the length

of time which anthropologists require for the evolution of man from an

ape-like ancestral form, and which certainly comprises more than a

hundred thousand years. And we must not forget that the last century

has  brought  such  a  wealth  of  new  discoveries,  such  a  great

acceleration of scientific advance that we have every reason to view

the future of science with confidence.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4772 

      We  must  admit  to  some  extent  the  correctness  of  the  other

criticisms. The path of science is indeed slow, hesitating, laborious.

This fact cannot be denied or altered. No wonder the gentlemen in the

other camp are dissatisfied. They are spoilt: revelation gave them an

easier time. Progress in scientific work is just as it is in an analysis.

We bring expectations with us into the work, but they must be forcibly

held back. By observation, now at one point and now at another, we

come  upon  something  new;  but  to  begin  with  the  pieces  do  not  fit

together. We put forward conjectures, we construct hypotheses, which

we withdraw if they are not confirmed, we need much patience and

readiness for any eventuality, we renounce early convictions so as not

to be led by them into overlooking unexpected factors, and in the end

our whole expenditure of effort is rewarded, the scattered findings fit

themselves together, we get an insight into a whole section of mental

events, we have completed our task and now we are free for the next

one.  In  analysis,  however,  we  have  to  do  without  the  assistance

afforded to research by experiment.

   Moreover, there is a good deal of exaggeration in this criticism of

science. It is not true that it staggers blindly from one experiment to

another, that it replaces one error by another. It works as a rule like a

sculptor at his clay model, who tirelessly alters his rough sketch, adds

to it and takes away from it, till he has arrived at what he feels is a

satisfactory degree of resemblance to the object he sees or imagines.

Besides, at least in the older and more mature sciences, there is even

to-day a solid ground-work which is only modified and improved but no

longer demolished. Things are not looking so bad in the business of

science.

   And what, finally, is the aim of these passionate disparagements of

science? In spite of its present incompleteness and of the difficulties

attaching to it, it remains indispensable to us and nothing can take its

place.  It  is  capable  of  undreamt-of  improvements,  whereas  the

religious Weltanschauung  is  not.  This  is  complete  in  all  essential

respects;  if  it  was  a  mistake,  it  must  remain  one  for  ever.  No

belittlement  of  science  can  in  any  way  alter  the  fact  that  it  is

attempting to take account of our dependence on the real external

world, while religion is an illusion and it derives its strength from itsreadiness to fit in with our instinctual wishful impulses.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4773

 

 

      I  am  under  an  obligation  to  go  on  to  consider  other

Weltanschauungen which are in opposition to the scientific one; but I

do so unwillingly, for I know that I am not properly competent to judge

them.  So  you  must  bear  this  proviso  in  mind  in  listening  to  the

following remarks, and if your interest has been aroused you should

seek better instruction elsewhere.

   And here I must first mention the various systems of philosophy

which have ventured to draw a picture of the universe as it is reflected

in the mind of thinkers who were for the most part turned away from

the world. But I have already attempted to give a general account of

the characteristics of philosophy and I am probably as unqualified as

few  people  have  ever  been  to  form  an  estimate  of  the  different

systems. So I will invite you to join me in turning to a consideration of

two other phenomena which, particularly in our days, it is impossible

to disregard.

 

   The first of these Weltanschauungen is as it were a counterpart to

political  anarchism,  and  is  perhaps  a  derivative  of  it.  There  have

certainly been intellectual nihilists of this kind in the past, but just now

the relativity theory of modern physics seems to have gone to their

head. They start out from science, indeed, but they contrive to force it

into self-abrogation, into suicide; they set it the task of getting itself out

of the way by refuting its own claims. One often has an impression in

this connection that this nihilism is only a temporary attitude which is

to be retained until this task has been performed. Once science has

been disposed of, the space vacated may be filled by some kind of

mysticism or, indeed, by the old religious Weltanschauung. According

to the anarchist theory there is no such thing as truth, no assured

knowledge of the external world. What we give out as being scientific

truth is only the product of our own needs as they are bound to findutterance  under  changing  external  conditions:  once  again,  they  are

illusion. Fundamentally, we find only what we need and see only what

we want to see. We have no other possibility. Since the criterion of

truth - correspondence with the external world - is absent, it is entirely

a  matter  of  indifference  what  opinions  we  adopt.  All  of  them  are

equally  true  and  equally  false.  And  no  one  has  a  right  to  accuse

anyone else of error.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4774

 

   A person of an epistemological bent might find it tempting to follow

the  paths-  the  sophistries  -  by  which  the  anarchists  succeed  in

enticing such conclusions from science. No doubt we should come

upon situations similar to those derived from the familiar paradox of

the Cretan who says that all Cretans are liars. But I have neither the

desire nor the capacity for going into this more deeply. All I can say is

that  the  anarchist  theory  sounds  wonderfully  superior  so  long  as  it

relates to opinions about abstract things: it breaks down with its first

step into practical life. Now the actions of men are governed by their

opinions,  their  knowledge;  and  it  is  the  same  scientific  spirit  that

speculates about the structure of atoms or the origin of man and that

plans the construction of a bridge capable of bearing a load. If what

we believe were really a matter of indifference, if there were no such

thing  as  knowledge  distinguished  among  our  opinions  by

corresponding  to  reality,  we  might  build  bridges  just  as  well  out  of

cardboard  as  out  of  stone,  we  might  inject  our  patients  with  a

decagram of morphine instead of a centigram, and might use tear-gas

as  a  narcotic  instead  of  ether.  But  even  the  intellectual  anarchists

would violently repudiate such practical applications of their theory.

 

   The other opposition has to be taken far more seriously, and in this

instance I feel the liveliest regret at the inadequacy of my information.

I suspect that you know more about this business than I do and that

you took up your position long ago in favour of Marxism or against it.

Karl Marx’s investigations into the economic structure of society andinto  the  influence  of  different  economic  systems  upon  every

department of human life have in our days acquired an undeniable

authority. How far his views in detail are correct or go astray, I cannot

of course tell. I understand that this is not an easy matter even for

others better instructed than I am. There are assertions contained in

Marx’s  theory  which  have  struck  me  as  strange:  such  as  that  the

development of forms of society is a process of natural history, or that

the  changes  in  social  stratification  arise  from  one  another  in  the

manner of a dialectical process. I am far from sure that I understand

these assertions aright; nor do they sound to me ‘materialistic’ but,

rather, like a precipitate of the obscure Hegelian philosophy in whose

school Marx graduated. I do not know how I can shake off my lay

opinion that the class structure of society goes back to the struggles

which,  from  the  beginning  of  history,  took  place  between  human

hordes only slightly differing from each other. Social distinctions, so I

thought, were originally distinctions between clans or races. Victory

was  decided  by  psychological  factors,  such  as  the  amount  of

constitutional  aggressiveness,  but  also  by  the  firmness  of  the

organization  within  the  horde,  and  by  material  factors,  such  as  the

possession of superior weapons. Living together in the same area, the

victors became the masters and the vanquished the slaves. There is

no sign to be seen in this of a natural law or of a conceptual evolution.

On the other hand the influence exercised upon the social relations of

mankind  by  progressive  control  over  the  forces  of  Nature  is

unmistakable. For men always put their newly acquired instruments of

power at the service of their aggressiveness and use them against

one another. The introduction of metals - bronze and iron - made an

end to whole epochs of civilization and their social institutions. I really

believe that it was gunpowder and fire-arms that abolished chivalry

and  aristocratic  rule,  and  that  the  Russian  despotism  was  already

doomed  before  it  lost  the  War,  because  no  amount  of  inbreeding

among the ruling families of Europe could have produced a race of

Tsars capable of withstanding the explosive force of dynamite.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4775 

   It is possible, indeed, that with our present economic crisis, following

after  the  Great  War,  we  are  only  paying  the  price  of  our  latest

tremendous victory over nature, the conquest of the air. That does not

sound  very  illuminating,  but  the  first  links  at  least  in  the  chain  are

clearly recognizable. English politics were based on the security which

was guaranteed by the seas that washed her coasts. In the moment at

which Blériot flew across the Channel in his aeroplane this protective

isolation was breached; and in the night during which (in peace-time

and on an exercise) a German Zeppelin cruised over London the war

against Germany was no doubt a foregone conclusion.¹ Nor must the

U-boat threat be forgotten in this connection.

      I  am  almost  ashamed  to  comment  to  you  on  a  subject  of  such

importance and complexity with these few inadequate remarks, and I

know too that I have told you nothing that is new to you. I merely want

to draw your attention to the fact that the relation of mankind to their

control over Nature, from which they derive their weapons for fighting

their  fellow-men,  must  necessarily  also  affect  their  economic

arrangements. We seem to have come a long way from the problem

of  a Weltanschauung,  but  we  shall  very  soon  be  back  to  it.  The

strength  of  Marxism  clearly  lies,  not  in  its  view  of  history  or  the

prophecies  of  the  future  that  are  based  on  it,  but  in  its  sagacious

indication of the decisive influence which the economic circumstances

of  men  have  upon  their  intellectual,  ethical  and  artistic  attitudes.  A

number of connections and implications were thus uncovered, which

had  previously  been  almost  totally  overlooked.  But  it  cannot  be

assumed that economic motives are the only ones that determine the

behaviour  of  human  beings  in  society.  The  undoubted  fact  that

different individuals, races and nations behave differently under the

same  economic  conditions  is  alone  enough  to  show  that  economic

motives  are  not  the  sole  dominating  factors.  It  is  altogether

incomprehensible how psychological factors can be overlooked where

what is in question are the reactions of living human beings; for not

only  were  these  reactions  concerned  in  establishing  the  economic

conditions, but even under the domination of those conditions men

can only bring their original instinctual impulses into play - their self-

preservative  instinct,  their  aggressiveness,  their  need  to  be  loved,their drive towards obtaining pleasure and avoiding unpleasure. In an

earlier enquiry I also pointed out the important claims made by the

super-ego, which represents tradition and the ideals of the past and

will for a time resist the incentives of a new economic situation. And

finally we must not forget that the mass of human beings who are

subjected  to  economic  necessities  also  undergo  the  process  of

cultural development - of civilization as other people may say - which,

though  no  doubt  influenced  by  all  the  other  factors,  is  certainly

independent  of  them  in  its  origin,  being  comparable  to  an  organic

process and very well able on its part to exercise an influence on the

other  factors.  It  displaces  instinctual  aims  and  brings  it  about  that

people  become  antagonistic  to  what  they  had  previously  tolerated.

Moreover, the progressive strengthening of the scientific spirit seems

to form an essential part of it. If anyone were in a position to show in

detail the way in which these different factors - the general inherited

human disposition, its racial variations and its cultural transformations

- inhibit and promote one another under the conditions of social rank,

profession and earning capacity - if anyone were able to do this, he

would have supplemented Marxism so that it was made into a genuine

social science. For sociology too, dealing as it does with the behaviour

of  people  in  society,  cannot  be  anything  but  applied  psychology.

Strictly speaking there are only two sciences: psychology, pure and

applied, and natural science.

 

   ¹ I was told of this from trustworthy sources during the first year of the war.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4776

 

      The  newly  achieved  discovery  of  the  far-reaching  importance  of

economic relations brought with it a temptation not to leave alterations

in them to the course of historical development but to put them into

effect oneself by revolutionary action. Theoretical Marxism, as realized

in  Russian  Bolshevism,  has  acquired  the  energy  and  the  self-

contained and exclusive character of a Weltanschauung, but at the

same time an uncanny likeness to what it is fighting against. Though

originally a portion of science and built up, in its implementation, uponscience and technology, it has created a prohibition of thought which

is  just  as  ruthless  as  was  that  of  religion  in  the  past.  Any  critical

examination of Marxist theory is forbidden, doubts of its correctness

are punished in the same way as heresy was once punished by the

Catholic  Church.  The  writings  of  Marx  have  taken  the  place  of  the

Bible  and  the  Koran  as  a  source  of  revelation,  though  they  would

seem  to  be  no  more  free  from  contradictions  and  obscurities  than

those older sacred books.

   And although practical Marxism has mercilessly cleared away all

idealistic systems and illusions, it has itself developed illusions which

are  no  less  questionable  and  unprovable  than  the  earlier  ones.  It

hopes in the course of a few generations so to alter human nature that

people  will  live  together  almost  without  friction  in  the  new  order  of

society, and that they will undertake the duties of work without any

compulsion. Meanwhile it shifts elsewhere the instinctual restrictions

which  are  essential  in  society;  it  diverts  the  aggressive  tendencies

which  threaten  all  human  communities  to  the  outside  and  finds

support in the hostility of the poor against the rich and of the hitherto

powerless against the former rulers. But a transformation of human

nature such as this is highly improbable. The enthusiasm with which

the mass of the people follow the Bolshevist instigation at present, so

long as the new order is incomplete and is threatened from outside,

gives no certainty for a future in which it would be fully built up and in

no  danger.  In  just  the  same  way  as  religion,  Bolshevism  too  must

compensate its believers for the sufferings and deprivations of their

present life by promises of a better future in which there will no longer

be any unsatisfied need. This Paradise, however, is to be in this life,

instituted on earth and thrown open within a foreseeable time. But we

must remember that the Jews as well, whose religion knows nothing

of an after-life, expected the arrival of a Messiah on earth, and that the

Christian Middle Ages at many times believed that the Kingdom of

God was at hand.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4777

    There is no doubt of how Bolshevism will reply to these objections. It

will say that so long as men’s nature has not yet been transformed it is

necessary to make use of the means which affect them to-day. It is

impossible  to  do  without  compulsion  in  their  education,  without  the

prohibition of thought and without the employment of force to the point

of bloodshed; and if the illusions were not awakened in them, they

could not be brought to acquiesce in this compulsion. And we should

be politely asked to say how things could be managed differently. This

would defeat us. I could think of no advice to give. I should admit that

the conditions of this experiment would have deterred me and those

like me from undertaking it; but we are not the only people concerned.

There are men of action, unshakable in their convictions, inaccessible

to doubt, without feeling for the sufferings of others if they stand in the

way of their intentions. We have to thank men of this kind for the fact

that the tremendous experiment of producing a new order of this kind

is now actually being carried out in Russia. At a time when the great

nations  announce  that  they  expect  salvation  only  from  the

maintenance of Christian piety, the revolution in Russia - in spite of all

its disagreeable details - seems nonetheless like the message of a

better future. Unluckily neither our scepticism nor the fanatical faith of

the other side gives a hint as to how the experiment will turn out. The

future  will  tell  us;  perhaps  it  will  show  that  the  experiment  was

undertaken prematurely, that a sweeping alteration of the social order

has little prospect of success until new discoveries have increased our

control over the forces of Nature and so made easier the satisfaction

of our needs. Only then perhaps may it become possible for a new

social order not only to put an end to the material need of the masses

but also to give a hearing to the cultural demands of the individual.

Even then, to be sure, we shall still have to struggle for an incalculable

time  with  the  difficulties  which  the  untameable  character  of  human

nature presents to every kind of social community.

 


                New Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      4778

 

    Ladies and Gentlemen, - Allow me in conclusion to sum up what I

had  to  say  of  the  relation  of  psycho-analysis  to  the  question  of  a

Weltanschauung.  Psycho-analysis,  in  my  opinion,  is  incapable  of

creating a Weltanschauung of its own. It does not need one; it is a part

of  science  and  can  adhere  to  the  scientific Weltanschauung.  This,

however, scarcely deserves such a grandiloquent title, for it is not all-

comprehensive, it is too incomplete and makes no claim to being self-

contained and to the construction of systems. Scientific thought is still

very young among human beings; there are too many of the great

problems which it has not yet been able to solve. A Weltanschauung

erected upon science has, apart from its emphasis on the real external

world,  mainly  negative  traits,  such  as  submission  to  the  truth  and

rejection of illusions. Any of our fellow-men who is dissatisfied with this

state  of  things,  who  calls  for  more  than  this  for  his  momentary

consolation, may look for it where he can find it. We shall not grudge it

him,  we  cannot  help  him,  but  nor  can  we  on  his  account  think

differently.

                                                                                       4779

 

                THE ACQUISITION AND CONTROL OF FIRE

                                        (1932)

 


                                                                                      4780

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4781

 

                THE ACQUISITION AND CONTROL OF FIRE

 

   In a footnote to my Civilization and its Discontents I mentioned -

though only incidentally - a conjecture which could be formed on the

basis  of  psycho-analytic  material,  about  primal  man’s  acquisition  of

control  over  fire.  I  am  led  to  take  up  this  theme  again  by  Albrecht

Schaeffer’s  contradiction  (1930)  and  by  Erlenmeyer’s  striking

reference in the preceding paper to the Mongolian law against ‘pissing

on ashes’.¹

   For I think my hypothesis - that, in order to gain control over fire,

men had to renounce the homosexually-tinged desire to put it out with

a stream of urine - can be confirmed by an interpretation of the Greek

myth  of  Prometheus,  provided  that  we  bear  in  mind  the  distortions

which must be expected to occur in the transition from facts to the

contents of a myth. These distortions are of the same sort as, and no

worse  than,  those  which  we  acknowledge  every  day,  when  we

reconstruct  from  patients’  dreams  the  repressed  but  extremely

important experiences of their childhood. The mechanisms employed

in  the  distortions  I  have  in  mind  are  symbolic  representation  and

turning  into  the  opposite.  I  should  not  venture  to  explain all  the

features of our myth in this fashion; apart from the original set of facts,

other and later occurrences may have contributed to its content. But

the elements which admit of analytic interpretation are, after all, the

most striking and important - viz. the manner in which Prometheustransported the fire, the character of his act (an outrage, a theft, a

defrauding of the gods) and the meaning of his punishment.

 

   ¹ This refers no doubt to hot ashes, from which fire can still be obtained, and not to ashes

which are quite extinct. - The objection raised by Lorenz (1931) is based on the assumption
that man’s subjugation of fire only began when he discovered that he could produce it at will
by some sort of manipulation. As against this, Dr. J. Hárnik refers me to a remark made by Dr.
Richard Lasch (in Georg Buschan’s compilation Illustrierte Völkerkunde, 1922, 1, 24), who
writes: ‘Presumably the art of conserving fire was understood long before that of kindling it; we
have evidence of this in the fact that, although the present-day pygmy-like aborigines of the
Andamans possess and conserve fire, they have no indigenous method of kindling it.’
 


                        The Acquisition And Control Of Fire

                                                                                      4782

 

   The myth tells us that Prometheus the Titan, a culture-hero who was

still a god¹ and who was perhaps originally himself a demiurge and a

creator of men, brought fire to men, having stolen it from the gods,

hidden in a hollow stick, a fennel-stalk. If we were interpreting a dream

we should be inclined to regard such an object as a penis symbol,

although  the  unusual  stress  laid  on  its  hollowness  might  make  us

hesitate. But how can we bring this penis-tube into connection with the

preservation of fire? There seems little chance of doing this, till we

remember the procedure of reversal, of turning into the opposite, of

inverting relationships, which is so common in dreams and which so

often conceals their meaning from us. What a man harbours in his

penis-tube is not fire. On the contrary, it is the means of quenching

fire; it is the water of his stream of urine. This relationship between fire

and water then connects up with a wealth of familiar analytic material.

   Secondly, the acquisition of fire was a crime; it was accomplished by

robbery or theft. This is a constant feature in all the legends about the

acquiring of control over fire. It is found among the most different and

widely  separated  peoples  and  not  merely  in  the  Greek  myth  of

Prometheus  the  Bringer  of  Fire.  Here,  then,  must  be  the  essential

content of mankind’s distorted recollection. But why is the acquisition

of fire inseparably connected with the idea of a crime? Who is it that

was injured or defrauded by it? The Promethean myth in Hesiod gives

us a straight answer; for, in another story, not itself directly connectedwith fire, Prometheus so arranged the sacrifices to the gods as to give

men  the  advantage  over  Zeus.  It  is  the  gods,  then,  who  were

defrauded.  We  know  that  in  myths  the  gods  are  granted  the

satisfaction  of  all  the  desires  which  human  creatures  have  to

renounce,  as  we  have  learnt  from  the  case  of  incest.  Speaking  in

analytic terms, we should say that instinctual life - the id - is the god

who  is  defrauded  when  the  quenching  of  fire  is  renounced:  in  the

legend, a human desire is transformed into a divine privilege. But in

the  legend  the  deity  possesses  nothing  of  the  characteristics  of  a

super-ego, he is still the representative of the paramount life of the

instincts.

 

   ¹ Heracles, at a later time, was a demi-god, and Theseus wholly human.

 


                        The Acquisition And Control Of Fire

                                                                                      4783

 

   Transformation into the opposite is most radically present in a third

feature  of  the  legend,  in  the  punishment  of  the  Bringer  of  Fire.

Prometheus was chained to a rock, and every day a vulture fed on his

liver. In the fire-legends of other peoples, too, a bird plays a part, and

it must have something to do with the matter; but for the moment I

shall not attempt an interpretation. On the other hand, we feel on firm

ground when it comes to explaining why the liver was selected as the

location of the punishment. In ancient times the liver was regarded as

the seat of all passions and desires; hence a punishment like that of

Prometheus was the right one for a criminal driven by instinct, who

had committed an offence at the prompting of evil desires. But the

exact opposite is true of the Bringer of Fire: he had renounced an

instinct and had shown how beneficent, and at the same time how

indispensable, such a renunciation was for the purposes of civilization.

And why should the legend treat a deed that was thus a benefit to

civilization as a crime deserving punishment? Well, if, through all its

distortions, it barely allows us to get a glimpse of the fact that the

acquisition of control over fire presupposes an instinctual renunciation,

at least it makes no secret of the resentment which the culture-hero

could not fail to arouse in men driven by their instincts. And this is inaccordance with what we know and expect. We know that a demand

for a renunciation of instinct, and the enforcement of that demand, call

out  hostility  and  aggressiveness,  which  is  only  transformed  into  a

sense of guilt in a later phase of psychical development.

 


                        The Acquisition And Control Of Fire

                                                                                      4784

 

   The obscurity of the Prometheus legend, as of other fire myths, is

increased by the fact that primitive man was bound to regard fire as

something analogous to the passion of love - or, as we should say, as

a symbol of the libido. The warmth that is radiated by fire calls up the

same sensation that accompanies a state of sexual excitation, and the

shape and movements of a flame suggest a phallus in activity. There

can  be  no  doubt  about  the  mythological  significance  of  flame  as  a

phallus; we have further evidence of it in the legend of the parentage

of Servius Tullius, the Roman king. When we ourselves speak of the

‘devouring  fire’  of  love  and  of  ‘licking’  flames  -  thus  comparing  the

flame to a tongue - we have not moved so very far away from the

mode  of  thinking  of  our  primitive  ancestors.  One  of  the

presuppositions on which we based our account of the myth of the

acquisition  of  fire  was,  indeed,  that  to  primal  man  the  attempt  to

quench  fire  with  his  own  water  had  the  meaning  of  a  pleasurable

struggle with another phallus.

   It may thus well be that, by way of this symbolic analogy, other

elements, of a purely imaginative sort, have made their may into the

myth and become interwoven with its historical elements. It is difficult

to  resist  the  notion  that,  if  the  liver  is  the  seat  of  passion,  its

significance, symbolically, is the same as that of fire itself; and that, if

this is so, its being daily consumed and renewed gives an apt picture

of the behaviour of the erotic desires, which, though daily satisfied, are

daily revived. The bird which sates itself on the liver would then have

the meaning of a penis - a meaning which is not strange to it in other

connections, as we know from legends, dreams, linguistic usage and

plastic representations in ancient times. A short step further brings us

to  the  phoenix,  the  bird  which,  as  often  as  it  is  consumed  by  fire,emerges  rejuvenated  once  more,  and  which  probably  bore  the

significance  of  a  penis  revivified  after  its  collapse  rather  than,  and

earlier  than,  that  of  the  sun  setting  in  the  glow  of  evening  and

afterwards rising once again.

 


                        The Acquisition And Control Of Fire

                                                                                      4785

 

      The  question  may  be  asked  whether  we  may  attribute  to  the

mythopoeic activity an attempt to give (in play, as it were) a disguised

representation  to  universally  familiar,  though  also  extremely

interesting,  mental  processes  that  are  accompanied  by  physical

manifestations,  with  no  motive  other  than  the  sheer  pleasure  of

representation.  We  can  certainly  give  no  decided  answer  to  this

question without having fully grasped the nature of myths; but in the

two instances before us, it is easy to recognize the same content and,

with  it,  a  definite  purpose.  Each  describes  the  revival  of  libidinal

desires after they have been quenched through being sated. That is to

say,  each  brings  out  the  indestructibility  of  those  desires;  and  this

emphasis  is  particularly  appropriate  as  a  consolation  where  the

historical core of the myth deals with a defeat of instinctual life, with a

renunciation of instinct that has become necessary. It is, as it were,

the second part of primal man’s understandable reaction when he has

suffered  a  blow  in  his  instinctual  life:  after  the  punishment  of  the

offender comes the assurance that after all at bottom he has done no

damage.

   A reversal into the opposite is unexpectedly found in another myth

which  in  appearance  has  very  little  to  do  with  the  fire  myth.  The

Lernaean hydra with its countless flickering serpent’s heads - one of

which  was  immortal  -  was,  as  its  name  tells  us,  a  water-dragon.

Heracles, the culture-hero, fought it by cutting off its heads; but they

always grew again, and it was only after he had burnt up the immortal

head with fire that he overcame the monster. A water-dragon subdued

by  fire  -  that  surely  makes  no  sense.  But,  as  in  so  many  dreams,

sense emerges if we reverse the manifest content. In that case the

hydra  is  a  brand  of  fire  and  the  flickering  serpent’s  heads  are  theflames; and these, in proof of their libidinal nature, once more display,

like Prometheus’s liver, the phenomenon of re-growth, of renewal after

attempted destruction. Heracles, then, extinguishes this brand of fire

with - water. (The immortal head is no doubt the phallus itself, and its

destruction signifies castration.) But Heracles was also the deliverer of

Prometheus and slew the bird which devoured his liver. Should we not

suspect a deeper connection between the two myths? It is as though

the deed of the one hero was made up for by the other. Prometheus

(like the Mongolian law) had forbidden the quenching of fire; Heracles

permitted it in the case in which the brand of fire threatened disaster.

The second myth seems to correspond to the reaction of a later epoch

of civilization to the events of the acquisition of power over fire. It looks

as though this line of approach might take us quite a distance into the

secrets  of  the  myth;  but  admittedly  we  should  carry  a  feeling  of

certainty with us only a short way.

 


                        The Acquisition And Control Of Fire

                                                                                      4786

 

   In the antithesis between fire and water, which dominates the entire

field of these myths, yet a third factor can be demonstrated in addition

to the historical factor and the factor of symbolic phantasy. This is a

physiological  fact,  which  the  poet  Heine  describes  in  the  following

lines:-

 

                                                                Was dem Menschen dient zum Seichen
                                                                Damit schafft er Seinesgleichen.

 

The sexual organ of the male has two functions; and there are those

to whom this association is an annoyance. It serves for the evacuation

of the bladder, and it carries out the act of love which sets the craving

of the genital libido at rest. The child still believes that he can unite the

two functions. According to a theory of his, babies are made by the

man  urinating  into  the  woman’s  body.  But  the  adult  knows  that  in

reality the acts are mutually incompatible - as incompatible as fire and

water.  When  the  penis  is  in  the  state  of  excitation  which  led  to  its

comparison  with  a  bird,  and  while  the  sensations  are  beingexperienced which suggest the warmth of fire, urination is impossible;

and  conversely,  when  the  organ  is  serving  to  evacuate  urine  (the

water of the body) all its connections with the genital function seem to

be quenched. The antithesis between the two functions might lead us

to say that man quenches his own fire with his own water. And primal

man, who had to understand the external world by the help of his own

bodily sensations and states, would surely not have failed to notice

and utilize the analogies pointed out to him by the behaviour of fire.

  4787

 

                                      WHY WAR?

                                        (1933)

 

                              (EINSTEIN AND FREUD)

 


                                                                                      4788

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4789

 

                                      WHY WAR?

 

                                          Caputh near Potsdam, 30th July, 1932

 

Dear Professor Freud,

   The proposal of the League of Nations and its International Institute

of Intellectual Co-operation at Paris that I should invite a person, to be

chosen by myself, to a frank exchange of views on any problem that I

might select affords me a very welcome opportunity of conferring with

you  upon  a  question  which,  as  things  now  are,  seems  the  most

insistent  of  all  the  problems  civilization  has  to  face.  This  is  the

problem: Is there any way of delivering mankind from the menace of

war?  It  is  common  knowledge  that,  with  the  advance  of  modern

science, this issue has come to mean a matter of life and death for

civilization  as  we  know  it;  nevertheless,  for  all  the  zeal  displayed,

every attempt at its solution has ended in a lamentable breakdown.

   I believe, moreover, that those whose duty it is to tackle the problem

professionally  and  practically  are  growing  only  too  aware  of  their

impotence to deal with it, and have now a very lively desire to learn

the views of men who, absorbed in the pursuit of science, can see

world-problems  in  the  perspective  distance  lends.  As  for  me,  thenormal objective of my thought affords no insight into the dark places

of human will and feeling. Thus, in the enquiry now proposed, I can do

little more than seek to clarify the question at issue and, clearing the

ground of the more obvious solutions, enable you to bring the light of

your far-reaching knowledge of man’s instinctive life to bear upon the

problem. There are certain psychological obstacles whose existence a

layman  in  the  mental  sciences  may  dimly  surmise,  but  whose

interrelations  and  vagaries  he  is  incompetent  to  fathom;  you,  I  am

convinced, will be able to suggest educative methods, lying more or

less outside the scope of politics, which will eliminate these obstacles.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4790

 

   As one immune from nationalist bias, I personally see a simple way

of  dealing  with  the  superficial  (i.e.  administrative)  aspect  of  the

problem: the setting up, by international consent, of a legislative and

judicial  body  to  settle  every  conflict  arising  between  nations.  Each

nation  would  undertake  to  abide  by  the  orders  issued  by  this

legislative body, to invoke its decision in every dispute, to accepts its

judgements unreservedly and to carry out every measure the tribunal

deems necessary for the execution of its decrees. But here, at the

outset, I come up against a difficulty; a tribunal is a human institution

which,  in  proportion  as  the  power  at  its  disposal  is  inadequate  to

enforce  its  verdicts,  is  all  the  more  prone  to  suffer  these  to  be

deflected by extrajudicial pressure. This is a fact with which we have

to  reckon;  law  and  might  inevitably  go  hand  in  hand,  and  juridical

decisions  approach  more  nearly  the  ideal  justice  demanded  by  the

community  (in  whose  name  and  interests  these  verdicts  are

pronounced) in so far as the community has effective power to compel

respect of its juridical ideal. But at present we are far from possessing

any  supranational  organization  competent  to  render  verdicts  of

incontestable  authority  and  enforce  absolute  submission  to  the

execution of its verdicts. Thus I am led to my first axiom: the quest of

international  security  involves  the  unconditional  surrender  by  every

nation, in a certain measure, of its liberty of action, its sovereignty thatis to say, and it is clear beyond all doubt that no other road can lead to

such security.

      The  ill-success,  despite  their  obvious  sincerity,  of  all  the  efforts

made during the last decade to reach this goal leaves us no room to

doubt that strong psychological factors are at work, which paralyse

these efforts. Some of these factors are not far to seek. The craving

for power which characterizes the governing class in every nation is

hostile  to  any  limitation  of  the  national  sovereignty.  This  political

power-hunger  is  wont  to  batten  on  the  activities  of  another  group,

whose aspirations are on purely mercenary, economic lines. I have

specially  in  mind  that  small  but  determined  group,  active  in  every

nation,  composed  of  individuals  who,  indifferent  to  social

considerations  and  restraints,  regard  warfare,  the  manufacture  and

sale  of  arms,  simply  as  an  occasion  to  advance  their  personal

interests and enlarge their personal authority.

   But recognition of this obvious fact is merely the first step towards

an appreciation of the actual state of affairs. Another question follows

hard upon it: How is it possible for this small clique to bend the will of

the majority, who stand to lose and suffer by a state of war, to the

service  of  their  ambitions?  (In  speaking  of  the  majority,  I  do  not

exclude  soldiers  of  every  rank  who  have  chosen  war  as  their

profession, in the belief that they are serving to defend the highest

interests  of  their  race,  and  that  attack  is  often  the  best  method  of

defence.) An obvious answer to this question would seem to be that

the minority, the ruling class at present, has the schools and press,

usually  the  Church  as  well,  under  its  thumb.  This  enables  it  to

organize and sway the emotions of the masses, and make its tool of

them.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4791

 

   Yet even this answer does not provide a complete solution. Another

question arises from it: How is it these devices succeed so well in

rousing men to such wild enthusiasm, even to sacrifice their lives?

Only one answer is possible. Because man has within him a lust forhatred and destruction. In normal times this passion exists in a latent

state,  it  emerges  only  in  unusual  circumstances;  but  it  is  a

comparatively easy task to call it into play and raise it to the power of

a collective psychosis. Here lies, perhaps, the crux of all the complex

of factors we are considering, an enigma that only the expert in the

lore of human instincts can resolve.

   And so we come to our last question. Is it possible to control man’s

mental evolution so as to make him proof against the psychoses of

hate and destructiveness? Here I am thinking by no means only of the

so-called uncultured masses. Experience proves that it is rather the

so-called ‘Intelligentzia’ that is most apt to yield to these disastrous

collective suggestions, since the intellectual has no direct contact with

life in the raw, but encounters it in its easiest synthetic form - upon the

printed page.

   To conclude: I have so far been speaking only of wars between

nations; what are known as international conflicts. But I am well aware

that the aggressive instinct operates under other forms and in other

circumstances. (I am thinking of civil wars, for instance, due in earlier

days to religious zeal, but nowadays to social factors; or, again, the

persecution of racial minorities.) But my insistence on what is the most

typical, most cruel and extravagant form of conflict between man and

man was deliberate, for here we have the best occasion of discovering

ways and means to render all armed conflicts impossible.

   I know that in your writings we may find answers, explicit or implied,

to all the issues of this urgent and absorbing problem. But it would be

of the greatest service to us all were you to present the problem of

world peace in the light of your most recent discoveries, for such a

presentation well might blaze the trail for new and fruitful modes of

action.

                                                                Yours very sincerely,

                                                                        A. EINSTEIN.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4792

 

                                                        Vienna, September, 1932. 

Dear Professor Einstein,

   When I heard that you intended to invite me to an exchange of views

on some subject that interested you and that seemed to deserve the

interest of others besides yourself, I readily agreed. I expected you to

choose  a  problem  on  the  frontiers  of  what  is  knowable  to-day,  a

problem to which each of us, a physicist and a psychologist, might

have our own particular angle of approach and where we might come

together from different directions upon the same ground. You have

taken me by surprise, however, by posing the question of what can be

done to protect mankind from the curse of war. I was scared at first by

the thought of my - I had almost written ‘our’ - incapacity for dealing

with what seemed to be a practical problem, a concern for statesmen.

But I then realized that you had raised the question not as a natural

scientist and physicist but as a philanthropist: you were following the

promptings of the League of Nations just as Fridtjof Nansen, the polar

explorer,  took  on  the  work  of  bringing  help  to  the  starving  and

homeless victims of the World War. I reflected, moreover, that I was

not being asked to make practical proposals but only to set out the

problem of avoiding war as it appears to a psychological observer.

Here again you yourself have said almost all there is to say on the

subject. But though you have taken the wind out of my sails I shall be

glad to follow in your wake and content myself with confirming all you

have said by amplifying it to the best of my knowledge - or conjecture.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4793

 

 

   You begin with the relation between Right and Might. There can be

no doubt that that is the correct starting-point for our investigation. But

may  I  replace  the  word  ‘might’  by  the  balder  and  harsher  word

‘violence’? To-day right and violence appear to us as antitheses. It can

easily  be  shown,  however,  that  the  one  has  developed  out  of  the

other; and, if we go back to the earliest beginnings and see how that

first came about, the problem is easily solved. You must forgive me ifin what follows I go over familiar and commonly accepted ground as

though it were new, but the thread of my argument requires it.

   It is a general principle, then, that conflicts of interest between men

are settled by the use of violence. This is true of the whole animal

kingdom, from which men have no business to exclude themselves. In

the case of men, no doubt, conflicts of opinion occur as well which

may reach the highest pitch of abstraction and which seem to demand

some other technique for their settlement. That, however, is a later

complication. To begin with, in a small human horde, it was superior

muscular  strength  which  decided  who  owned  things  or  whose  will

should  prevail.  Muscular  strength  was  soon  supplemented  and

replaced by the use of tools: the winner was the one who had the

better  weapons  or  who  used  them  the  more  skilfully.  From  the

moment  at  which  weapons  were  introduced,  intellectual  superiority

already  began  to  replace  brute  muscular  strength;  but  the  final

purpose of the fight remained the same - one side or the other was to

be compelled to abandon his claim or his objection by the damage

inflicted on him and by the crippling of his strength. That purpose was

most  completely  achieved  if  the  victor’s  violence  eliminated  his

opponent  permanently  -  that  is  to  say,  killed  him.  This  had  two

advantages: he could not renew his opposition and his fate deterred

others from following his example. In addition to this, killing an enemy

satisfied an instinctual inclination which I shall have to mention later.

The intention to kill might be countered by a reflection that the enemy

could be employed in performing useful services if he were left alive in

an intimidated condition. In that case the victor’s violence was content

with subjugating him instead of killing him. This was a first beginning

of the idea of sparing an enemy’s life, but thereafter the victor had to

reckon  with  his  defeated  opponent’s  lurking  thirst  for  revenge  and

sacrificed some of his own security.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4794

 

   Such, then, was the original state of things: domination by whoever

had the greater might - domination by brute violence or by violencesupported  by  intellect.  As  we  know,  this  régime  was  altered  in  the

course of evolution. There was a path that led from violence to right or

law. What was that path? It is my belief that there was only one: the

path which led by way of the fact that the superior strength of a single

individual could be rivalled by the union of several weak ones. ‘L’union

fait la force.’ Violence could be broken by union, and the power of

those who were united now represented law in contrast to the violence

of  the  single  individual.  Thus  we  see  that  right  is  the  might  of  a

community.  It  is  still  violence,  ready  to  be  directed  against  any

individual who resists it; it works by the same methods and follows the

same  purposes.  The  only  real  difference  lies  in  the  fact  that  what

prevails  is  no  longer  the  violence  of  an  individual  but  that  of  a

community. But in order that the transition from violence to this new

right or justice may be effected, one psychological condition must be

fulfilled. The union of the majority must be a stable and lasting one. If

it  were  only  brought  about  for  the  purpose  of  combating  a  single

dominant individual and were dissolved after his defeat, nothing would

have  been  accomplished.  The  next  person  who  thought  himself

superior in strength would once more seek to set up a dominion by

violence  and  the  game  would  be  repeated ad  infinitum.  The

community must be maintained permanently, must be organized, must

draw up regulations to anticipate the risk of rebellion and must institute

authorities to see that those regulations - the laws - are respected and

to superintend the execution of legal acts of violence. The recognition

of  a  community  of  interests  such  as  these  leads  to  the  growth  of

emotional ties between the members of a united group of people -

communal feelings which are the true source of its strength.

 

      Here,  I  believe,  we  already  have  all  the  essentials:  violence

overcome by the transference of power to a larger unity, which is held

together by emotional ties between its members. What remains to be

said is no more than an expansion and a repetition of this.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4795

    The situation is simple so long as the community consists only of a

number of equally strong individuals. The laws of such an association

will determine the extent to which, if the security of communal life is to

be guaranteed, each individual must surrender his personal liberty to

turn his strength to violent uses. But a state of rest of that kind is only

theoretically  conceivable.  In  actuality  the  position  is  complicated  by

the  fact  that  from  its  very  beginning  the  community  comprises

elements of unequal strength - men and women, parents and children

- and soon, as a result of war and conquest, it also comes to include

victors and vanquished, who turn into masters and slaves. The justice

of the community then becomes an expression of the unequal degrees

of power obtaining within it; the laws are made by and for the ruling

members and find little room for the rights of those in subjection. From

that time forward there are two factors at work in the community which

are sources of unrest over matters of law but tend at the same time to

a  further  growth  of  law.  First,  attempts  are  made  by  certain  of  the

rulers  to  set  themselves  above  the  prohibitions  which  apply  to

everyone - they seek, that is, to go back from a dominion of law to a

dominion of violence. Secondly, the oppressed members of the group

make constant efforts to obtain more power and to have any changes

that are brought about in that direction recognized in the laws - they

press forward, that is, from unequal justice to equal justice for all. This

second tendency becomes especially important if a real shift of power

occurs within a community, as may happen as a result of a number of

historical factors. In that case right may gradually adapt itself to the

new distribution of power; or, as is more frequent, the ruling class is

unwilling to recognize the change, and rebellion and civil war follow,

with a temporary suspension of law and new attempts at a solution by

violence, ending in the establishment of a fresh rule of law. There is

yet another source from which modifications of law may arise, and one

of which the expression is invariably peaceful: it lies in the cultural

transformation  of  the  members  of  the  community.  This,  however,

belongs properly in another connection and must be considered later.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4796 

   Thus we see that the violent solution of conflicts of interest is not

avoided even inside a community. But the everyday necessities and

common concerns that are inevitable where people live together in

one place tend to bring such struggles to a swift conclusion and under

such  conditions  there  is  an  increasing  probability  that  a  peaceful

solution will be found. Yet a glance at the history of the human race

reveals  an  endless  series  of  conflicts  between  one  community  and

another or several others, between larger and smaller units - between

cities, provinces, races, nations, empires - which have almost always

been  settled  by  force  of  arms.  Wars  of  this  kind  end  either  in  the

spoliation or in the complete overthrow and conquest of one of the

parties. It is impossible to make any sweeping judgement upon war of

conquest. Some, such as those waged by the Mongols and Turks,

have  brought  nothing  but  evil.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  have

contributed to the transformation of violence into law by establishing

larger units within which the use of violence was made impossible and

in which a fresh system of law led to the solution of conflicts. In this

way  the  conquests  of  the  Romans  gave  the  countries  round  the

Mediterranean the priceless pax Romana, and the greed of the French

kings  to  extend  their  dominions  created  a  peacefully  united  and

flourishing France. Paradoxical as it may sound, it must be admitted

that war might be a far from inappropriate means of establishing the

eagerly desired reign of ‘everlasting’ peace, since it is in a position to

create  the  large  units  within  which  a  powerful  central  government

makes further wars impossible. Nevertheless it fails in this purpose,

for the results of conquest are as a rule short-lived: the newly created

units  fall  apart  once  again,  usually  owing  to  a  lack  of  cohesion

between  the  portions  that  have  been  united  by  violence.  Hitherto,

moreover,  the  unifications  created  by  conquest,  though  of

considerable extent, have only been partial, and the conflicts between

these have called out more than ever for violent solution. Thus the

result of all these warlike efforts has only been that the human race

has exchanged numerous, and indeed unending, minor wars for wars

on a grand scale that are rare but all the more destructive.

                                         Why War?

                                                                                      4797

 

   If we turn to our own times, we arrive at the same conclusion which

you have reached by a shorter path. Wars will only be prevented with

certainty if mankind unites in setting up a central authority to which the

right of giving judgement upon all conflicts of interest shall be handed

over. There are clearly two separate requirements involved in this: the

creation of a supreme agency and its endowment with the necessary

power.  One  without  the  other  would  be  useless.  The  League  of

Nations  is  designed  as  an  agency  of  this  kind,  but  the  second

condition has not been fulfilled: the League of Nations has no power of

its own and can only acquire it if the members of the new union, the

separate  States,  are  ready  to  resign  it.  And  at  the  moment  there

seems  very  little  prospect  of  this.  The  institution  of  the  League  of

Nations would, however, be wholly unintelligible if one ignored the fact

that here was a bold attempt such as has seldom (perhaps, indeed,

never on such a scale) been made before. It is an attempt to base

upon an appeal to certain idealistic attitudes of mind the authority (that

is, the coercive influence) which otherwise rests on the possession of

power. We have seen that a community is held together by two things:

the compelling force of violence and the emotional ties (identifications

is the technical name) between its members. If one of the factors is

absent, the community may possibly be held together by the other.

The  ideas  that  are  appealed  to  can,  of  course,  only  have  any

significance if they give expression to important affinities between the

members, and the question arises of how much strength such ideas

can  exert.  History  teaches  us  that  they  have  been  to  some  extent

effective.  For  instance,  the  Panhellenic  idea,  the  sense  of  being

superior  to  the  surrounding  barbarians  -  an  idea  which  was  so

powerfully  expressed  in  the  Amphictyonic  Council,  the  Oracles  and

the Games - was sufficiently strong to mitigate the customs of war

among  Greeks,  though  evidently  not  sufficiently  strong  to  prevent

warlike disputes between the different sections of the Greek nation or

even to restrain a city or confederation of cities from allying itself with

the  Persian  foe  in  order  to  gain  an  advantage  over  a  rival.  The

community of feeling among Christians, powerful though it was, wasequally  unable  at  the  time  of  the  Renaissance  to  deter  Christian

States, whether large or small, from seeking the Sultan’s aid in their

wars with one another. Nor does any idea exist to-day which could be

expected to exert a unifying authority of the sort. Indeed it is all too

clear that the national ideals by which nations are at present swayed

operate in a contrary direction. Some people are inclined to prophesy

that it will not be possible to make an end of war until Communist

ways of thinking have found universal acceptance. But that aim is in

any  case  a  very  remote  one  to-day,  and  perhaps  it  could  only  be

reached after the most fearful civil wars. Thus the attempt to replace

actual force by the force of ideas seems at present to be doomed to

failure. We shall be making a false calculation if we disregard the fact

that law was originally brute violence and that even to-day it cannot do

without the support of violence.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4798

 

 

   I can now proceed to add a gloss to another of your remarks. You

express  astonishment  at  the  fact  that  it  is  so  easy  to  make  men

enthusiastic  about  a  war  and  add  your  suspicions  that  there  is

something at work in them - an instinct for hatred and destruction -

which  goes  halfway  to  meet  the  efforts  of  the  warmongers.  Once

again,  I  can  only  express  my  entire  agreement.  We  believe  in  the

existence of an instinct of that kind and have in fact been occupied

during the last few years in studying its manifestations. Will you allow

me to take this opportunity of putting before you a portion of the theory

of  the  instincts  which,  after  much  tentative  groping  and  many

fluctuations of opinion, has been reached by workers in the field of

psycho-analysis?

   According to our hypothesis human instincts are of only two kinds:

those which seek to preserve and unite - which we call ‘erotic’, exactly

in the sense in which Plato uses the word ‘Eros’ in his Symposium, or

‘sexual’,  with  a  deliberate  extension  of  the  popular  conception  of

‘sexuality’ - and those which seek to destroy and kill and which wegroup together as the aggressive or destructive instinct. As you see,

this is in fact no more than a theoretical clarification of the universally

familiar opposition between Love and Hate which may perhaps have

some fundamental relation to the polarity of attraction and repulsion

that plays a part in your own field of knowledge. But we must not be

too hasty in introducing ethical judgements of good and evil. Neither of

these instincts is any less essential than the other; the phenomena of

life arise from the concurrent or mutually opposing action of both. Now

it  seems  as  though  an  instinct  of  the  one  sort  can  scarcely  ever

operate in isolation; it is always accompanied - or, as we say, alloyed -

with a certain quota from the other side, which modifies its aim or is, in

some cases, what enables it to achieve that aim. Thus, for instance,

the instinct of self-preservation is certainly of an erotic kind, but it must

nevertheless  have  aggressiveness  at  its  disposal  if  it  is  to  fulfil  its

purpose. So, too, the instinct of love, when it is directed towards an

object,  stands  in  need  of  some  contribution  from  the  instinct  for

mastery if it is in any way to obtain possession of that object. The

difficulty  of  isolating  the  two  classes  of  instinct  in  their  actual

manifestations  is  indeed  what  has  so  long  prevented  us  from

recognizing them.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4799

 

   If you will follow me a little further, you will see that human actions

are subject to another complication of a different kind. It is very rarely

that an action is the work of a single instinctual impulse (which must in

itself be compounded of Eros and destructiveness). In order to make

an  action  possible  there  must  be  as  a  rule  a  combination  of  such

compounded motives. This was perceived long ago by a specialist in

your own subject, a Professor G. C. Lichtenberg who taught physics at

Göttingen  during  our  classical  age  -  though  perhaps  he  was  even

more remarkable as a psychologist than as a physicist. He invented a

Compass of Motives, for he wrote: ‘The motives that lead us to do

anything  might  be  arranged  like  the  thirty-two  winds  and  might  be

given  names  in  a  similar  way:  for  instance,  "bread-bread-fame"  or"fame-fame-bread".’ So that when human beings are incited to war

they may have a whole number of motives for assenting - some noble

and some base, some which are openly declared and others which

are never mentioned. There is no need to enumerate them all. A lust

for aggression and destruction is certainly among them: the countless

cruelties in history and in our everyday lives vouch for its existence

and its strength. The satisfaction of these destructive impulses is of

course  facilitated  by  their  admixture  with  others  of  an  erotic  and

idealistic kind. When we read of the atrocities of the past, it sometimes

seems as though the idealistic motives served only as an excuse for

the destructive appetites; and sometimes - in the case, for instance, of

the  cruelties  of  the  Inquisition  -  it  seems  as  though  the  idealistic

motives had pushed themselves forward in consciousness, while the

destructive ones lent them an unconscious reinforcement. Both may

be true.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4800

 

   I fear I may be abusing your interest, which is after all concerned

with the prevention of war and not with our theories. Nevertheless I

should like to linger for a moment over our destructive instinct, whose

popularity is by no means equal to its importance. As a result of a little

speculation, we have come to suppose that this instinct is at work in

every living creature and is striving to bring it to ruin and to reduce life

to  its  original  condition  of  inanimate  matter.  Thus  it  quite  seriously

deserves  to  be  called  a  death  instinct,  while  the  erotic  instincts

represent the effort to live. The death instinct turns into the destructive

instinct when, with the help of special organs, it is directed outwards,

on  to  objects.  The  organism  preserves  its  own  life,  so  to  say,  by

destroying  an  extraneous  one.  Some  portion  of  the  death  instinct,

however, remains operative within the organism, and we have sought

to trace quite a number of normal and pathological phenomena to this

internalization of the destructive instinct. We have even been guilty of

the  heresy  of  attributing  the  origin  of  conscience  to  this  diversion

inwards of aggressiveness. You will notice that it is by no means atrivial matter if this process is carried too far: it is positively unhealthy.

On  the  other  hand  if  these  forces  are  turned  to  destruction  in  the

external world, the organism will be relieved and the effect must be

beneficial. This would serve as a biological justification for all the ugly

and dangerous impulses against which we are struggling. It must be

admitted that they stand nearer to Nature than does our resistance to

them for which an explanation also needs to be found. It may perhaps

seem to you as though our theories are a kind of mythology and, in

the  present  case,  not  even  an  agreeable  one.  But  does  not  every

science come in the end to a kind of mythology like this? Cannot the

same be said to-day of your own Physics?

 

   For our immediate purpose then, this much follows from what has

been  said:  there  is  no  use  in  trying  to  get  rid  of  men’s  aggressive

inclinations. We are told that in certain happy regions of the earth,

where  nature  provides  in  abundance  everything  that  man  requires,

there  are  races  whose  life  is  passed  in  tranquillity  and  who  know

neither coercion nor aggression. I can scarcely believe it and I should

be  glad  to  hear  more  of  these  fortunate  beings.  The  Russian

Communists, too, hope to be able to cause human aggressiveness to

disappear by guaranteeing the satisfaction of all material needs and

by establishing equality in other respects among all the members of

the community. That, in my opinion, is an illusion. They themselves

are  armed  to-day  with  the  most  scrupulous  care  and  not  the  least

important of the methods by which they keep their supporters together

is  hatred  of  everyone  beyond  their  frontiers.  In  any  case,  as  you

yourself have remarked, there is no question of getting rid entirely of

human aggressive impulses; it is enough to try to divert them to such

an extent that they need not find expression in war.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4801

 

   Our mythological theory of instincts makes it easy for us to find a

formula  for indirect  methods  of  combating  war.  If  willingness  to

engage in war is an effect of the destructive instinct, the most obviousplan will be to bring Eros, its antagonist, into play against it. Anything

that  encourages  the  growth  of  emotional  ties  between  men  must

operate against war. These ties may be of two kinds. In the first place

they  may  be  relations  resembling  those  towards  a  loved  object,

though  without  having  a  sexual  aim.  There  is  no  need  for  psycho-

analysis to be ashamed to speak of love in this connection, for religion

itself uses the same words: ‘Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.’

This,  however,  is  more  easily  said  than  done.  The  second  kind  of

emotional  tie  is  by  means  of  identification.  Whatever  leads  men  to

share important interests produces this community of feeling, these

identifications. And the structure of human society is to a large extent

based on them.

   A complaint which you make about the abuse of authority brings me

to another suggestion for the indirect combating of the propensity to

war. One instance of the innate and ineradicable inequality of men is

their tendency to fall into the two classes of leaders and followers. The

latter constitute the vast majority; they stand in need of an authority

which will make decisions for them and to which they for the most part

offer an unqualified submission. This suggests that more care should

be  taken  than  hitherto  to  educate  an  upper  stratum  of  men  with

independent minds, not open to intimidation and eager in the pursuit

of truth, whose business it would be to give direction to the dependent

masses. It goes without saying that the encroachments made by the

executive power of the State and the prohibition laid by the Church

upon freedom of thought are far from propitious for the production of a

class of this kind. The ideal condition of things would of course be a

community of men who had subordinated their instinctual life to the

dictatorship of reason. Nothing else could unite men so completely

and  so  tenaciously,  even  if  there  were  no  emotional  ties  between

them. But in all probability that is a Utopian expectation. No doubt the

other indirect methods of preventing war are more practicable, though

they promise no rapid success. An unpleasant picture comes to one’s

mind of mills that grind so slowly that people may starve before they

get their flour.

 


                                        Why War?                                                                                      4802

 

 

      The  result,  as  you  see,  is  not  very  fruitful  when  an  unworldly

theoretician is called in to advise on an urgent practical problem. It is a

better plan to devote oneself in every particular case to meeting the

danger with whatever means lie to hand. I should like, however, to

discuss one more question, which you do not mention in your letter

but which specially interests me. Why do you and I and so many other

people rebel so violently against war? Why do we not accept it as

another of the many painful calamities of life? After all, it seems to be

quite a natural thing, to have a good biological basis and in practice to

be scarcely avoidable. There is no need to be shocked at my raising

this question. For the purpose of an investigation such as this, one

may perhaps be allowed to wear a mask of assumed detachment. The

answer to my question will be that we react to war in this way because

everyone  has  a  right  to  his  own  life,  because  war  puts  an  end  to

human lives that are full of hope, because it brings individual men into

humiliating situations, because it compels them against their will to

murder other men, and because it destroys precious material objects

which have been produced by the labours of humanity. Other reasons

besides might be given, such as that in its present-day form war is no

longer an opportunity for achieving the old ideals of heroism and that

owing to the perfection of instruments of destruction a future war might

involve the extermination of one or perhaps both of the antagonists.

All  this  is  true,  and  so  incontestably  true  that  one  can  only  feel

astonished  that  the  waging  of  war  has  not  yet  been  unanimously

repudiated.  No  doubt  debate  is  possible  upon  one  or  two  of  these

points. It may be questioned whether a community ought not to have a

right  to  dispose  of  individual  lives;  every  war  is  not  open  to

condemnation to an equal degree; so long as there exist countries and

nations that are prepared for the ruthless destruction of others, those

others must be armed for war. But I will not linger over any of these

issues; they are not what you want to discuss with me, and I have

something different in mind. It is my opinion that the main reason why

we rebel against war is that we cannot help doing so. We are pacifists

because we are obliged to be for organic reasons. And we then findno difficulty in producing arguments to justify our attitude.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4803

 

      No  doubt  this  requires  some  explanation.  My  belief  is  this.  For

incalculable  ages  mankind  has  been  passing  through  a  process  of

evolution  of  culture.  (Some  people,  I  know,  prefer  to  use  the  term

‘civilization’.)  We  owe  to  that  process  the  best  of  what  we  have

become, as well as a good part of what we suffer from. Though its

causes and beginnings are obscure and its outcome uncertain, some

of its characteristics are easy to perceive. It may perhaps be leading

to the extinction of the human race, for in more than one way it impairs

the  sexual  function;  uncultivated  races  and  backward  strata  of  the

population are already multiplying more rapidly than highly cultivated

ones.  The  process  is  perhaps  comparable  to  the  domestication  of

certain  species  of  animals  and  it  is  undoubtedly  accompanied  by

physical alterations; but we are still unfamiliar with the notion that the

evolution  of  civilization  is  an  organic  process  of  this  kind.  The

psychical modifications that go along with the process of civilization

are  striking  and  unambiguous.  They  consist  in  a  progressive

displacement  of  instinctual  aims  and  a  restriction  of  instinctual

impulses. Sensations which were pleasurable to our ancestors have

become indifferent or even intolerable to ourselves; there are organic

grounds for the changes in our ethical and aesthetic ideals. Of the

psychological characteristics of civilization two appear to be the most

important:  a  strengthening  of  the  intellect,  which  is  beginning  to

govern  instinctual  life,  and  an  internalization  of  the  aggressive

impulses, with all its consequent advantages and perils. Now war is in

the crassest opposition to the psychical attitude imposed on us by the

process  of  civilization,  and  for  that  reason  we  are  bound  to  rebel

against  it;  we  simply  cannot  any  longer  put  up  with  it.  This  is  not

merely an intellectual and emotional repudiation; we pacifists have a

constitutional intolerance of war, an idiosyncrasy magnified, as it were,

to the highest degree. It seems, indeed, as though the lowering of

aesthetic  standards  in  war  plays  a  scarcely  smaller  part  in  ourrebellion than do its cruelties.

 


                                        Why War?

                                                                                      4804

 

   And how long shall we have to wait before the rest of mankind

become pacifists too? There is no telling. But it may not be Utopian to

hope that these two factors, the cultural attitude and the justified dread

of the consequences of a future war, may result within a measurable

time in putting an end to the waging of war. By what paths or by what

side-tracks this will come about we cannot guess. But one thing we

can say: whatever fosters the growth of civilization works at the same

time against war.

 

   I trust you will forgive me if what I have said has disappointed you,

and I remain, with kindest regards,

                                                                      Sincerely yours,

                                                                        SIGM. FREUD

                                                                                       4805

 

              MY CONTACT WITH JOSEF POPPER-LYNKEUS

                                        (1932)

 


                                                                                      4806

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      4807

 

              MY CONTACT WITH JOSEF POPPER-LYNKEUS

 

It  was  in  the  winter  of  1899  that  my  book  on The Interpretation of

Dreams (though its title-page was post-dated into the new century) at

length lay before me. This work was the product of the labours of four

or  five  years  and  its  origin  was  unusual.  Holding  a  lectureship  in

Nervous Diseases at the University, I had attempted to support myself

and my rapidly increasing family by a medical practice among the so-

called ‘neurotics’ of whom there were only too many in our society. But

the task proved harder than I had expected. The ordinary methods of

treatment clearly offered little or no help: other paths must be followed.

And how was it by any means possible to give patients help when one

understood  nothing  of  their  illness,  nothing  of  the  causes  of  their

sufferings or of the meaning of their complaints? So I eagerly sought

direction  and  instruction  from  the  great  Charcot  in  Paris  and  from

Bernheim at Nancy; finally, an observation made by my teacher and

friend, Josef Breuer of Vienna, seemed to open a new prospect for

understanding and therapeutic success.

   For these new experiments made it a certainty that the patients

whom we described as neurotic were in some sense suffering from

mental  disturbances  and  ought  therefore  to  be  treated  by

psychological  methods.  Our  interest  therefore  necessarily  turned  to

psychology. The psychology which ruled at that time in the academic

schools of philosophy had very little to offer and nothing at all for our