COCAINE PAPERS FREUD POSITION STATEMENT

POSITION STATEMENTS - FREUD: ÜBER COCA (1884)

1. The coca plant (Erythroxylon coca) thrives best in warm valleys on the eastern slopes of the Andes, 5000-6000 feet above sea level, in a rainy climate free from extremes of temperature.

2. Coca leaves provide an indispensable stimulant for approximately 10 million people.

3. Indians under the influence of coca can withstand exceptional hardships and perform heavy labor without requiring proper nourishment during that time.

4. By using coca, Indians are able to travel on foot for hundreds of hours and run faster than horses without showing signs of fatigue.

5. The effect of coca on Europeans is the same as that which coca leaves have on the Indians of South America.

6. Immoderate use of coca leads to a cachexia characterized physically by digestive complaints and emaciation, and mentally by moral depravity and complete apathy toward everything not connected with the stimulant.

7. The moderate use of coca is more likely to promote health than to impair it, and coqueros live to a great age.

8. Cocaine is the true agent of the coca effect, which can be produced just as well in Europe as in South America.

9. In small doses, coca has a stimulating effect on the nervous system; in larger doses, a paralyzing effect.

10. In cold-blooded animals the paralyzing effect of cocaine is particularly noticeable, while in warm-blooded animals symptoms of stimulation are most apparent.

11. After doses of cocaine, dogs show obvious signs of happy excitement and a maniacal compulsion to move.

12. Cocaine affects all nerve centers, producing stimulation of the brain centers which control voluntary movement.

13. A few minutes after taking cocaine, one experiences a sudden exhilaration and feeling of lightness.

14. One senses an increase of self-control and feels more vigorous and more capable of work under cocaine's influence.

15. The characteristic urge for immediate activity which alcohol produces is completely absent with cocaine.

16. One is simply normal under cocaine's influence and soon finds it difficult to believe one is under the influence of any drug at all.

17. The mood induced by coca is due not so much to direct stimulation as to the disappearance of elements in one's general state of well-being which cause depression.

18. The euphoria resulting from good health is nothing more than the normal condition of a well-nourished cerebral cortex which is not conscious of the organs of the body to which it belongs.

19. Long-lasting, intensive mental or physical work can be performed without fatigue under the influence of coca.

20. Under coca's influence, the need for food and sleep which otherwise makes itself felt peremptorily at certain times is completely banished.

21. Cocaine dispels extreme fatigue and a well-justified feeling of hunger.

22. While under the influence of coca, one can eat copiously but has the clear feeling that the meal was superfluous.

23. During the first hours of the coca effect one cannot sleep, but this sleeplessness is in no way distressing.

24. Coca wards off hunger, sleep, and fatigue and steels one to intellectual effort.

25. The euphoria induced by coca is not followed by any feeling of lassitude or other state of depression.

26. After moderate doses, a part at least of the coca effect lasts for over twenty-four hours.

27. Coca, if used protractedly but in moderation, is not detrimental to the body.

28. A first dose or even repeated doses of coca produce no compulsive desire to use the stimulant further; on the contrary, one feels a certain unmotivated aversion to the substance.

29. Coca is a far more potent and far less harmful stimulant than alcohol.

30. The instantaneous effect of a dose of coca cannot be compared with that of a morphine injection, but there is no danger of general damage to the body as with chronic morphine use.

31. Protracted use of coca can lead to a lasting improvement if the inhibitions manifested before it is taken are due only to physical causes or to exhaustion.

32. Psychiatrists have ample drugs for reducing excitation of nerve centers but none to increase reduced functioning; coca fills this gap.

33. Coca is effective in treating functional disorders grouped under the name neurasthenia.

34. Coca is almost universally effective in improving hysteria, hypochondria, melancholic inhibition, stupor, and similar maladies.

35. Coca banishes dyspeptic complaints and the disorders and debility associated therewith, and after protracted use results in a permanent cure.

36. The effect of cocaine on the stomach is two-fold: stimulation of movement and reduction of the organ's sensitivity.

37. Coca achieves brilliant successes in treatments of gastralgia and enteralgia, and all painful and cramping afflictions of the stomach and intestines.

38. The use of coca is definitely indicated in cases of atonic digestive weakness and nervous stomach disorders, achieving not merely relief of symptoms but lasting improvement.

39. Long-term use of coca is recommended in all diseases involving degeneration of tissues, such as severe anemia, phthisis, and long-lasting febrile diseases.

40. In phthisis, coca has a limiting effect on fever and sweating.

41. Coca preparations possess the power to suppress the craving for morphine in habitual addicts.

42. Coca reduces to negligible proportions the serious symptoms of collapse which appear while a patient is being weaned from morphine.

43. The treatment of morphine addiction with coca does not result merely in the exchange of one kind of addiction for another—the use of coca is only temporary.

44. Coca has a directly antagonistic effect on morphine.

45. Coca can suppress the irresistible compulsion to drink in alcoholism, though suppression of alcohol craving proves more difficult than suppression of morphomania.

46. The natives of South America did not doubt the stimulative effect of coca on the genitalia; coqueros sustain a high degree of potency into old age.

47. Coca can restore potency and cause the disappearance of functional weaknesses.

48. Cocaine and its salts have a marked anesthetizing effect when brought in contact with the skin and mucous membrane in concentrated solution.

49. The anesthetizing properties of cocaine should make it suitable for a good many applications as a local anesthetic.

50. Coca spares the usual symptoms of mountain sickness (shortness of breath, pounding heart, dizziness) during high-altitude climbing, likely due to early paralysis of certain branches of the vagus nerve.