that there must be someone at the head. I knew only too well the

pitfalls that lay in wait for anyone who became engaged in analysis,

and hoped that many of them might be avoided if an authority could

be  set  up  who  would  be  prepared  to  instruct  and  admonish.  This

position  had  at  first  been  occupied  by  myself,  owing  to  my  fifteen

years’ start in experience which nothing could counterbalance. I felt

the need of transferring this authority to a younger man, who would

then as a matter of course take my place after my death. This man

could only be C. G. Jung, since Bleuler was my contemporary in age;

in favour of Jung were his exceptional talents, the contributions he had

already  made  to  psycho-analysis,  his  independent  position  and  the

impression  of  assured  energy  which  his  personality  conveyed.  In

addition to this, he seemed ready to enter into a friendly relationship

with me and for my sake to give up certain racial prejudices which he

had previously permitted himself. I had no inkling at that time that in

spite of all these advantages the choice was a most unfortunate one,

that I had lighted upon a person who was incapable of tolerating the

authority  of  another,  but  who  was  still  less  capable  of  wielding  it

himself,  and  whose  energies  were  relentlessly  devoted  to  the

furtherance of his own interests.

   I considered it necessary to form an official association because I

feared the abuses to which psycho-analysis would be subjected as

soon  as  it  became  popular.  There  should  be  some  headquarters

whose business it would be to declare: ‘All this nonsense is nothing to

do with analysis; this is not psycho-analysis.’ At the sessions of the

local  groups  (which  together  would  constitute  the  international

association)  instruction  should  be  given  as  to  how  psycho-analysis

was to be conducted and doctors should be trained, whose activities

would then receive a kind of guarantee. Moreover, it seemed to me

desirable, since official science had pronounced its solemn ban upon

psycho-analysis  and  had  declared  a  boycott  against  doctors  and

institutions practising it, that the adherents of psycho-analysis should

come  together  for  friendly  communication  with  one  another  and

mutual support.

 

   ¹ [Literally: ‘Cut it short! On the Day of Judgement it is no more than a fart.’]

               On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2908

 

   This and nothing else was what I hoped to achieve by founding the

‘International  Psycho-Analytical  Association’.  It  was  probably  more

than could be attained. Just as my opponents were to discover that it

was not possible to stem the tide of the new movement, so I was to

find that it would not proceed in the direction I wished to mark out for

it. The proposals made by Ferenczi in Nuremburg were adopted, it is

true; Jung was elected President and made Riklin his Secretary; the

publication of a bulletin which should link the Central Executive with

the local groups was resolved upon. The object of the Association was

declared to be ‘to foster and further the science of psycho-analysis

founded by Freud, both as pure psychology and in its application to

medicine  and  the  mental  sciences;  and  to  promote  mutual  support

among  its  members  in  all  endeavours  to  acquire  and  to  spread

psycho-analytic knowledge’. The scheme was strongly opposed only

by the Vienna group. Adler, in great excitement, expressed the fear

that ‘censorship and restrictions on scientific freedom’ were intended.

Finally the Viennese gave in, after having secured that the seat of the

Association should be not Zurich, but the place of residence of the

President for the time being, who was to be elected for two years.

   At this Congress three local groups were constituted: one in Berlin,

under the chairmanship of Abraham; one in Zurich, whose head had

become the President of the whole Association; and one in Vienna,

the  direction  of  which  I  made  over  to  Adler.  A  fourth  group,  in

Budapest, could not be formed until later. Bleuler had not attended the

Congress on account of illness, and later he evinced hesitation about

joining  the  Association  on  general  grounds;  he  let  himself  be

persuaded to do so, it is true, after a personal conversation with me,

but resigned again shortly afterwards as a result of disagreements in

Zurich. This severed the connection between the Zurich local group

and the Burghölzli institution.

   One outcome of the Nuremberg Congress was the founding of the

Zentralblatt für Psychoanalyse [Central Journal for Psycho-analysis],

for  which  purpose  Adler  and  Stekel  joined  forces.  It  was  obviously

intended originally to represent the Opposition: it was meant to winback for Vienna the hegemony threatened by the election of Jung. But

when the two founders of the journal, labouring under the difficulties of

finding a publisher, assured me of their peaceful intentions and as a

guarantee of their sincerity gave me a right of veto, I accepted the

direction  of  it  and  worked  energetically  for  the  new  organ;  its  first

number appeared in September, 1910.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2909

 

   I will now continue the story of the Psycho-Analytical Congresses.

The third Congress took place in September, 1911, at Weimar, and

was  even  more  successful  than  the  previous  ones  in  its  general

atmosphere and scientific interest. J. J. Putnam, who was present on

this occasion, declared afterwards in America how much pleasure it

had given him and expressed his respect for ‘the mental attitude’ of

those who attended it, quoting some words I was said to have used in

reference to them: ‘They have learnt to tolerate a bit of truth.’ (Putnam

1912.) It is a fact that no one who had attended scientific congresses

could  have  failed  to  carry  away  a  favourable  impression  of  the

Psycho-Analytical  Association.  I  myself  had  conducted  the  first  two

Congresses  and  I  had  allowed  every  speaker  time  for  his  paper,

leaving  discussions  to  take  place  in  private  afterwards  among  the

members. Jung, as President, took over the direction at Weimar and

re-introduced  formal  discussions  after  each  paper,  which,  however,

did not give rise to any difficulties as yet.

   A very different picture was presented by the fourth Congress, held

in Munich two years later, in September, 1913. It is still fresh in the

memory  of  all  who  were  present.  It  was  conducted  by  Jung  in  a

disagreeable and incorrect manner; the speakers were restricted in

time  and  the  discussions  overwhelmed  the  papers.  By  a  malicious

stroke of chance it happened that that evil genius, Hoche, had settled

in the very building in which the meetings were held. Hoche would

have had no difficulty in convincing himself of the nonsense which the

analysts made of his description of them as a fanatical sect blindly

submissive to their leader. The fatiguing and unedifying proceedingsended in the re-election of Jung to the Presidency of the International

Psycho-Analytical Association, which he accepted, although two-fifths

of those present refused him their support. We dispersed without any

desire to meet again.

   At about the time of this Congress the strength of the International

Psycho-Analytical  Association  was  as  follows.  The  local  groups  in

Vienna,  Berlin  and  Zurich  had  been  formed  at  the  Congress  in

Nuremberg as early as 1910. In May, 1911, a group at Munich under

the chairmanship of Dr. L. Seif was added. In the same year the first

American  local  group  was  formed  under  the  chairmanship  of  A.  A.

Brill,  with  the  name  ‘The  New  York  Psychoanalytic  Society’.  At  the

Weimar Congress the foundation of a second American group was

authorized; it came into existence during the following year under the

name  of  ‘The  American  Psychoanalytic  Association’,  and  included

members  from  Canada  and  the  whole  of  America;  Putnam  was

elected  President  and  Ernest  Jones  Secretary.  Shortly  before  the

Congress in Munich in 1913, the Budapest local group was formed

under the chairmanship of Ferenczi. Soon after this the first English

group was formed by Ernest Jones, who had returned to London. The

membership  of  these  local  groups,  of  which  there  were  now  eight,

naturally affords no means of estimating the number of unorganized

students and adherents of psycho-analysis.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2910

 

   The development of the periodicals devoted to psycho-analysis also

deserves  a  brief  mention.  The  first  of  these  was  a  series  of

monographs  entitled Schriften  zur  angewandten  Seelenkunde

[‘Papers on Applied Mental Science’] which have appeared irregularly

since  1907  and  now  number  fifteen  issues.  (The  publisher  was  to

begin  with  Heller  in  Vienna  and  later  F.  Deuticke.)  They  comprise

works by Freud (Nos. 1 and 7), Riklin, Jung, Abraham (Nos. 4 and

11), Rank (Nos. 5 and 13), Sadger, Pfister, Max Graf, Jones (Nos. 10

and  14),  Storfer  and  von  Hug-Hellmuth.¹  When  the  journal Imago

(which will be referred to shortly) was founded, this form of publicationceased to have quite the same value. After the meeting at Salzburg in

1908, the Jahrbuch für psychoanalytische und psychopathologische

Forschungen [Yearbook for Psycho-Analytic and Psychopathological

Researches] was founded, which appeared for two years under Jung’s

editorship and has now re-emerged, under two new editors and with a

slight  change  in  its  title,  as  the Jahrbuch  der  Psychoanalyse

[Yearbook of Psycho-Analysis.] It is no longer intended to be, as it has

been  in  recent  years,  merely  repository  for  the  publication  of  self-

contained works. Instead it will endeavour, through the activity of its

editors,  to  fulfil  the  aim  of  recording  all  the  work  done  and  all  the

advances made in the sphere of psycho-analysis.²  The Zentralblatt

für Psychoanalyse, which, as I have already said, was started by Adler

and Stekel after the foundation of the International Psycho-Analytical

Association in Nuremberg in 1910, has, during its short existence, had

a stormy career. As early as in the tenth number of the first volume an

announcement  appeared  on  the  front  page  that,  on  account  of

scientific differences of opinion with the director, Dr. Alfred Adler had

decided  to  withdraw  voluntarily  from  the  editorship.  After  this  Dr.

Stekel remained the only editor (from the summer of 1911). At the

Weimar Congress the Zentralblatt was raised to the position of official

organ  of  the  International  Association  and  made  available  to  all

members in return for an increase in the annual subscription. From the

third  number  of  the  second  volume  onwards  (winter,  1912)  Stekel

became solely responsible for its contents. His behaviour, of which it

is not easy to publish an account, had compelled me to resign the

direction and hurriedly to establish a new organ for psycho-analysis -

the Internationale Zeitschrift für ärztliche Psychoanalyse [International

Journal for Medical Psycho-Analysis]. The combined efforts of almost

all our workers and of Hugo Heller, the new publisher, resulted in the

appearance of the first number in January, 1913, whereupon it took

the  place  of  the Zentralblatt  as  official  organ  of  the  International

Psycho-Analytical Association.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] Since then, further works have appeared, by Sadger (Nos. 16 and

18) and Kielholz (No. 17).

   ² [Footnote added 1924:] It ceased publication at the beginning of the War.

               On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2911

 

   Meanwhile, early in 1912, a new periodical, Imago (published by

Heller), designed exclusively for the application of psycho-analysis to

the mental sciences, was founded by Dr. Hanns Sachs and Dr. Otto

Rank. Imago is now in the middle of its third volume and is read with

interest by a continually increasing number of subscribers, some of

whom have little connection with medical analysis.¹

      Apart  from  these  four  periodical  publications  (Schriften  zur

angewandten  Seelenkunde, Jahrbuch, Zeitschrift  and Imago)  other

German and foreign journals publish works which may claim a place in

the  literature  of  psycho-analysis. The  Journal  of  Abnormal

Psychology,  directed  by  Morton  Prince,  usually  contains  so  many

good analytic contributions that it must be regarded as the principal

representative of analytic literature in America. In the winter of 1913,

White  and  Jelliffe  in  New  York  started  a  new  periodical  (The

Psychoanalytic  Revue)  which  is  devoted  exclusively  to  psycho-

analysis, no doubt bearing in mind the fact that most medical men in

America who are interested in analysis find the German language a

difficulty.²

 

   I must now mention two secessions which have taken place among

the  adherents  of  psycho-analysis;  the  first  occurred  between  the

founding  of  the  Association  in  1910  and  the  Weimar  Congress  in

1911; the second took place after this and became manifest at Munich

in 1913. The disappointment that they caused me might have been

averted if I had paid more attention to the reactions of patients under

analytic treatment. I knew very well of course that anyone may take to

flight at his first approach to the unwelcome truths of analysis; I had

always myself maintained that everyone’s understanding of it is limited

by his own repressions (or rather, by the resistances which sustain

them) so that he cannot go beyond a particular point in his relation to

analysis.  But  I  had  not  expected  that  anyone  who  had  reached  a

certain  depth  in  his  understanding  of  analysis  could  renounce  that

understanding and lose it. And yet daily experience with patients had

shown that total rejection of analytic knowledge may result whenevera specially strong resistance arises at any depth in the mind; one may

have succeeded in laboriously bringing a patient to grasp some parts

of analytic knowledge and to handle them like possessions of his own,

and  yet  one  may  see  him,  under  the  domination  of  the  very  next

resistance,  throw  all  he  has  learnt  to  the  winds  and  stand  on  the

defensive as he did in the days when he was a carefree beginner. I

had  to  learn  that  the  very  same  thing  can  happen  with  psycho-

analysts as with patients in analysis.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] The publication of these two periodicals was transferred in 1919 to
the Internationaler Psychoanalytischer Verlag [the International Psycho-Analytical Publishing
House]. At the present time (1923) they are both in their ninth volume. (Actually, Internationale
Zeitschrift is in the eleventh and Imago in the twelfth year of its existence, but, in consequence
of events during the war, Volume IV of the Zeitschrift covered more than one year, i.e. the
years 1916-18, and Volume V of Imago the years 1917-18.) With the beginning of Volume VI
the word ‘ärztliche’ [‘medical’] was dropped from the title of the Internationale Zeitschrift.
   ² [Footnote added 1924:] In 1920 Ernest Jones undertook the founding of The International
Journal of Psycho-Analysis, intended for readers in England and America.
 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2912

 

      It  is  no  easy  or  enviable  task  to  write  the  history  of  these  two

secessions, partly because I am without any strong personal motive

for doing so - I had not expected gratitude nor am I revengeful to any

effective degree - and partly because I know that by doing so I shall

lay myself open to the invectives of my not too scrupulous opponents

and offer the enemies of analysis the spectacle they so heartily desire

-  of  ‘the  psycho-analysts  tearing  one  another  limb  from  limb’.  After

exercising  so  much  self-restraint  in  not  coming  to  blows  with

opponents outside of analysis, I now see myself compelled to take up

arms  against  its  former  followers  or  people  who  still  like  to  call

themselves its followers. I have no choice in the matter, however; only

indolence or cowardice could lead one to keep silence, and silence

would  cause  more  harm  than  a  frank  revelation  of  the  harms  that

already exist. Anyone who has followed the growth of other scientific

movements  will  know  that  the  same  upheavals  and  dissensions

commonly occur in them as well. It may be that elsewhere they are

more carefully concealed; but psycho-analysis, which repudiates somany conventional ideals, is more honest in these matters too.

      Another  very  severe  drawback  is  that  I  cannot  entirely  avoid

throwing  some  analytic  light  on  these  two  opposition  movements.

Analysis is not suited, however, for polemical use; it presupposes the

consent of the person who is being analysed and a situation in which

there  is  a  superior  and  a  subordinate.  Anyone,  therefore,  who

undertakes  an  analysis  for  polemical  purposes  must  expect  the

person  analysed  to  use  analysis  against  him  in  turn,  so  that  the

discussion will reach a state which entirely excludes the possibility of

convincing  any  impartial  third  person.  I  shall  therefore  restrict  to  a

minimum my use of analytic knowledge, and, with it, of indiscretion

and aggressiveness towards my opponents; and I may also point out

that I am not basing any scientific criticism on these grounds. I am not

concerned with the truth that may be contained in the theories which I

am rejecting, nor shall I attempt to refute them. I shall leave that task

to other qualified workers in the field of psycho-analysis, and it has,

indeed, already been partly accomplished. I wish merely to show that

these theories controvert the fundamental principles of analysis (and

on  what  points  they  controvert  them)  and  that  for  this  reason  they

should not be known by the name of analysis. So I shall avail myself

of  analysis  only  in  order  to  explain  how  these  divergences  from  it

could arise among analysts. When I come to the points at which the

divergences occurred, I shall have, it is true, to defend the just rights

of psycho-analysis with some remarks of a purely critical nature.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2913

 

 

      The  first  task  confronting  psycho-analysis  was  to  explain  the

neuroses;  it  used  the  two  facts  of  resistance  and  transference  as

starting-points, and, taking into consideration the third fact of amnesia,

accounted  for  them  with  its  theories  of  repression,  of  the  sexual

motive  forces  in  neurosis  and  of  the  unconscious.  Psycho-analysis

has never claimed to provide a complete theory of human mentality in

general, but only expected that what it offered should be applied tosupplement  and  correct  the  knowledge  acquired  by  other  means.

Adler’s theory, however, goes far beyond this point; it seeks at one

stroke to explain the behaviour and character of human beings as well

as their neurotic and psychotic illnesses. It is actually more suited to

any other field than that of neurosis, although for reasons connected

with the history of its development it still places this in the foreground.

For many years I had opportunities of studying Dr. Adler and have

never  refused  to  recognize  his  unusual  ability,  combined  with  a

particularly speculative disposition. As an instance of the ‘persecution’

to which he asserts he has been subjected by me, I can point to the

fact that after the Association was founded I made over to him the

leadership of the Vienna group. It was not until urgent demands were

put  forward  by  all  the  members  of  the  society  that  I  let  myself  be

persuaded to take the chair again at its scientific meetings. When I

perceived how little gift Adler had precisely for judging unconscious

material, my view changed to an expectation that he would succeed in

discovering the connections of psycho-analysis with psychology and

with  the  biological  foundations  of  instinctual  processes  -  an

expectation which was in some sense justified by the valuable work he

had done on ‘organ-inferiority’. And he did in fact effect something of

the kind; but his work conveys an impression ‘as if’ - to speak in his

own ‘jargon’ - it was intended to prove that psycho-analysis was wrong

in everything and that it had only attributed so much importance to

sexual  motive  forces  because  of  its  credulity  in  accepting  the

assertions  of  neurotics.  I  may  even  speak  publicly  of  the  personal

motive for his work, since he himself announced it in the presence of a

small circle of members of the Vienna group: - ‘ Do you think it gives

me such great pleasure to stand in your shadow my whole life long?’

To  be  sure,  I  see  nothing  reprehensible  in  a  younger  man  freely

admitting  his  ambition,  which  one  would  in  any  case  guess  was

among  the  incentives  for  his  work.  But  even  though  a  man  is

dominated by a motive of this kind he should know how to avoid being

what  the  English,  with  their  fine  social  tact,  call  ‘unfair’  -  which  in

German  can  only  be  expressed  by  a  much  cruder  word.  How  little

Adler  has  succeeded  in  this  is  shown  by  the  profusion  of  petty

outbursts of malice which disfigure his writings and by the indications

they  contain  of  an  uncontrolled  craving  for  priority.  At  the  ViennaPsycho-Analytical Society we once actually heard him claim priority for

the conception of the ‘unity of the neuroses’ and for the ‘dynamic view’

of  them.  This  came  as  a  great  surprise  to  me,  for  I  had  always

believed that these two principles were stated by me before I ever

made Adler’s acquaintance.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2914

 

   This striving of Adler’s for a place in the sun has, however, had one

result which is bound to be beneficial to psycho-analysis. When, after

irreconcilable scientific disagreements had come to light, I was obliged

to  bring  about  Adler’s  resignation  from  the  editorship  of  the

Zentralblatt, he left the Vienna society as well, and founded a new

one, which at first adopted the tasteful name of ‘The Society for Free

Psycho-Analysis’ [‘Verein für freie Psychoanalyse’]. But outsiders who

are  unconnected  with  analysis  are  evidently  as  unskilful  in

appreciating the differences between the views of two psycho-analysts

as  we  Europeans  are  in  detecting  the  differences  between  two

Chinese  faces.  ‘Free’  psycho-analysis  remained  in  the  shadow  of

‘official’,  ‘orthodox’  psycho-analysis  and  was  treated  merely  as  an

appendage  to  the  latter.  Then  Adler  took  a  step  for  which  we  are

thankful; he severed all connection with psycho-analysis, and gave his

theory the name of ‘Individual Psychology’. There is room enough on

God’s earth, and anyone who can has a perfect right to potter about

on it without being prevented; but it is not a desirable thing for people

who  have  ceased  to  understand  one  another  and  have  grown

incompatible with one another to remain under the same roof. Adler’s

‘Individual Psychology’ is now one of the many schools of psychology

which are adverse to psycho-analysis and its further development is

no concern of ours.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2915

 

   The Adlerian theory was from the very beginning a ‘system’ - whichpsycho-analysis was careful to avoid becoming. It is also a remarkably

good example of ‘secondary revision’, such as occurs, for instance, in

the  process  to  which  dream-material  is  submitted  by  the  action  of

waking thought. In Adler’s case the place of dream-material is taken

by the new material obtained through psycho-analytic studies; this is

then  viewed  purely  from  the  standpoint  of  the  ego,  reduced  to  the

categories  with  which  the  ego  is  familiar,  translated,  twisted  and  -

exactly as happens in dream-formation - is misunderstood. Moreover,

the Adlerian theory is characterized less by what it asserts than by

what it denies, so that it consists of three sorts of elements of quite

dissimilar  value:  useful  contributions  to  the  psychology  of  the  ego,

superfluous but admissible translations of the analytic facts into the

new ‘jargon’, and distortions and perversions of these facts when they

do not comply with the requirements of the ego.

   The elements of the first sort have never been ignored by psycho-

analysis, although they did not deserve any special attention from it; it

was more concerned to show that every ego-trend contains libidinal

components. The Adlerian theory emphasises the counterpart to this,

the  egoistic  constituent  in  libidinal  instinctual  impulses.  This  would

have been an appreciable gain if Adler had not on every occasion

used this observation in order to deny the libidinal impulses in favour

of their egoistic instinctual components. His theory does what every

patient  does  and  what  our  conscious  thought  in  general  does  -

namely, makes use of a rationalization, as Jones has called it, in order

to conceal the unconscious motive. Adler is so consistent in this that

he positively considers that the strongest motive force in the sexual

act is the man’s intention of showing himself master of the woman - of

being ‘on top’. I do not know if he has expressed these monstrous

notions in his writings.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2916

 

   Psycho-analysis recognized early that every neurotic symptom owes

its  possibility  of  existence  to  a  compromise.  Every  symptom  must

therefore  in  some  way  comply  with  the  demands  of  the  ego  whichmanipulates  the  repression;  it  must  offer  some  advantage,  it  must

admit of some useful application, or it would meet with the same fate

as the original instinctual impulse itself which has been fended off.

The term ‘gain from illness’ has taken this into account; one is even

justified in differentiating the ‘primary’ gain to the ego, which must be

operative  at  the  time  of  the  generation  of  the  symptom,  from  a

‘secondary’ part, which supervenes in attachment to other purposes of

the ego, if the symptom is to persist. It has also long been known that

the  withdrawal  of  this  gain  from  illness,  or  its  disappearance  in

consequence  of  some  change  in  real  external  circumstances,

constitutes one of the mechanisms of a cure of the symptom. In the

Adlerian doctrine the main emphasis falls on these easily verifiable

and  clearly  intelligible  connections,  while  the  fact  is  altogether

overlooked that on countless occasions the ego is merely making a

virtue of necessity in submitting, because of its usefulness, to the very

disagreeable  symptom  which  is  forced  upon  it  -  for  instance,  in

accepting anxiety as a means to security. The ego is here playing the

ludicrous part of the clown in a circus who by his gestures tries to

convince the audience that every change in the circus ring is being

carried out under his orders. But only the youngest of the spectators

are deceived by him.

      Psycho-analysis  is  obliged  to  give  its  backing  to  the  second

constituent of Adler’s theory as it would to something of its own. And

in fact it is nothing else than psycho-analytic knowledge, which that

author extracted from sources open to everyone during ten years of

work  in  common  and  which  he  has  now  labelled  as  his  own  by  a

change in nomenclature. I myself consider ‘safeguarding [Sicherung]’,

for  instance,  a  better  term  than  ‘protective  measure

[Schutzmassregel]’ which is the one I employ; but I cannot discover

any  difference  in  their  meaning.  Again,  a  host  of  familiar  features

come  to  light  in  Adler’s  propositions  when  one  restores  the  earlier

‘phantasied’ and ‘phantasy’ in place of ‘feigned [fingiert]’, ‘fictive’ and

‘fiction’. The identity of these terms would be insisted upon by psycho-

analysis even if their author had not taken part in our common work

over a period of many years.

               On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2917

 

   The third part of the Adlerian theory, the twisted interpretations and

distortions  of  the  disagreeable  facts  of  analysis,  are  what  definitely

separate  ‘Individual  Psychology’,  as  it  is  now  to  be  called,  from

psycho-analysis. As we know, the principle of Adler’s system is that

the individual’s aim of self-assertion, his ‘will to power’, is what, in the

form of a ‘masculine protest’, plays a dominating part in the conduct of

life, in character-formation and in neurosis. This ‘masculine protest’,

the  Adlerian  motive  force,  is  nothing  else,  however,  but  repression

detached  from  its  psychological  mechanism  and,  moreover,

sexualized in addition - which ill accords with the vaunted ejection of

sexuality  from  its  place  in  mental  life.  The  ‘masculine  protest’

undoubtedly exists, but if it is made into the motive force of mental life

the observed facts are being treated like a spring-board that is left

behind after it has been used to jump off from. Let us consider one of

the fundamental situations in which desire is felt in infancy: that of a

child observing the sexual act between adults. Analysis shows, in the

case  of  people  with  whose  life-story  the  physician  will  later  be

concerned, that at such moments two impulses take possession of the

immature spectator. In boys, one is the impulse to put himself in the

place of the active man, and the other, the opposing current, is the

impulse  to  identify  himself  with  the  passive  woman.  Between  them

these  two  impulses  exhaust  the  pleasurable  possibilities  of  the

situation. The first alone can come under the head of the masculine

protest, if that concept is to retain any meaning at all. The second,

however,  the  further  course  of  which  Adler  disregards  or  which  he

knows nothing about, is the one that will become the more important

in  the  subsequent  neurosis.  Adler  has  so  merged  himself  in  the

jealous narrowness of the ego that he takes account only of those

instinctual  impulses  which  are  agreeable  to  the  ego  and  are

encouraged by it; the situation in neurosis, in which the impulses are

opposed to the ego, is precisely the one that lies beyond his horizon.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2918 

   In connection with the attempt, which psycho-analysis has made

necessary, to correlate the fundamental principle of its theory with the

mental life of children, Adler exhibits the most serious departures from

actual  observation  and  the  most  fundamental  confusion  in  his

concepts.  The  biological,  social  and  psychological  meanings  of

‘masculine’ and ‘feminine’ are here hopelessly mixed. It is impossible,

and is disproved by observation, that a child, whether male or female,

should  found  the  plan  of  its  life  on  an  original  depreciation  of  the

female sex and take the wish to be a real man as its ‘guiding line’.

Children  have,  to  begin  with,  no  idea  of  the  significance  of  the

distinction  between  the  sexes;  on  the  contrary,  they  start  with  the

assumption that the same genital organ (the male one) is possessed

by  both  sexes;  they  do  not  begin  their  sexual  researches  with  the

problem  of  the  distinction  between  the  sexes,  while  the social

underestimation of women is completely foreign to them. There are

women in whose neurosis the wish to be a man has played no part.

Whatever in the nature of a masculine protest can be shown to exist is

easily traceable to a disturbance in primary narcissism due to threats

of castration or to the earliest interferences with sexual activities. All

disputes about the psychogenesis of the neuroses must eventually be

decided in the field of the neuroses of childhood. Careful dissection of

a  neurosis  in  early  childhood  puts  an  end  to  all  misapprehensions

about the aetiology of the neuroses and to all doubts about the part

played by the sexual instincts in them. That is why, in his criticism of

Jung’s paper ‘Conflicts in the Mind of the Child’, Adler was obliged to

resort  to  the  imputation  that  the  facts  of  the  case  had  been  one-

sidedly arranged, ‘no doubt by the father’.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2919

 

   I will not dwell any longer on the biological aspect of the Adlerian

theory  nor  discuss  whether  either  actual  ‘organ-inferiority’  or  the

subjective feeling of it - one does not know which - is really capable of

serving as the foundation of Adler’s system. I will merely remark inpassing that if it were so neurosis would appear as a by-product of

every kind of physical decrepitude, whereas observation shows that

an  impressive  majority  of  ugly,  misshapen,  crippled  and  miserable

people fail to react to their defects by neurosis. Nor will I deal with the

interesting assertion according to which inferiority is to be traced back

to the feeling of being a child. It shows the disguise under which the

factor  of  infantilism,  which  is  so  strongly  emphasized  by  psycho-

analysis, re-appears in ‘Individual Psychology’. On the other hand, I

must  point  out  how  all  the  psychological  acquisitions  of  psycho-

analysis have been thrown to the winds by Adler. In his book Über den

nervösen  Charakter  the  unconscious  is  still  mentioned  as  a

psychological peculiarity, without, however, any relation to his system.

Later, he has consistently declared that it is a matter of indifference to

him whether an idea is conscious or unconscious. Adler has never

from the first shown any understanding of repression. In an abstract of

a paper read by him at the Vienna Society (February, 1911) he wrote

that  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  the  evidence  in  a  particular  case

showed that the patient had never repressed his libido, but had been

continually  ‘safeguarding’  himself  against  it.  Soon  afterwards,  in  a

discussion at the Vienna Society, he said: ‘If you ask where repression

comes from, you are told, "from civilization"; but if you go on to ask

where civilization comes from, you are told "from repression". So you

see it is all simply playing with words.’ A tithe of the acuteness and

ingenuity with which Adler has unmasked the defensive devices of the

‘nervous character’ would have been enough to show him the way out

of this pettifogging argument. What is meant is simply that civilization

is based on the repressions effected by former generations, and that

each  fresh  generation  is  required  to  maintain  this  civilization  by

effecting the same repressions. I once heard of a child who thought

people  were  laughing  at  him,  and  began  to  cry,  because  when  he

asked where eggs come from he was told ‘from hens’, and when he

went on to ask where hens come from he was told ‘from eggs’. But

they were not playing with words; on the contrary, they were telling

him the truth.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement                                                                                      2920

 

   Everything that Adler has to say about dreams, the shibboleth of

psycho-analysis, is equally empty and unmeaning. At first he regarded

dreams as a turning away from the feminine to the masculine line -

which is simply a translation of the wish-fulfilment theory of dreams

into the language of the ‘masculine protest’. Later he found that the

essence of dreams lies in enabling men to accomplish unconsciously

what they are denied consciously. Adler must also be credited with

priority in confusing dreams with latent dream-thoughts - a confusion

on  which  the  discovery  of  his  ‘prospective  tendency’  rests.  Maeder

followed his lead in this later. Here the fact is readily overlooked that

every  interpretation  of  a  dream  which  is  incomprehensible  in  its

manifest  form  is  based  on  the  very  method  of  dream-interpretation

whose  premisses  and  conclusions  are  being  disputed.  In  regard  to

resistance Adler informs us that it serves the purpose of putting into

effect the patient’s opposition to the physician. This is certainly true; it

is as much as to say that it serves the purpose of resistance. Where it

comes from, however, or how it happens that its phenomena are at

the disposal of the patient is not further enquired into, as being of no

interest  to  the  ego.  The  detailed  mechanism  of  the  symptoms  and

manifestations of diseases, the explanation of the manifold variety of

those diseases and their forms of expression, are disregarded in toto;

for  everything  alike  is  pressed  into  the  service  of  the  masculine

protest, self-assertion and the aggrandizement of the personality. the

system is complete; to produce it has cost an enormous amount of

labour in the recasting of interpretations, while it has not furnished a

single new observation. I fancy I have made it clear that it has nothing

to do with psycho-analysis.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2921

 

   The view of life which is reflected in the Adlerian system is founded

exclusively on the aggressive instinct; there is no room in it for love.

We might feel surprise that such a cheerless Weltanschauung should

have met with any attention at all; but we must not forget that humanbeings, weighed down by the burden of their sexual needs, are ready

to accept anything if only the ‘overcoming of sexuality’ is offered them

as a bait.

 

   Adler’s secession took place before the Weimar Congress in 1911;

after that date the Swiss began theirs. The first signs of it, curiously

enough,  were  a  few  remarks  of  Riklin’s  in  some  popular  articles

appearing  in  Swiss  publications,  so  that  the  general  public  learned

earlier  than  those  most  intimately  concerned  in  the  subject  that

psycho-analysis had got the better of some regrettable errors which

had previously discredited it. In 1912 Jung boasted, in a letter from

America, that his modifications of psycho-analysis had overcome the

resistances of many people who had hitherto refused to have anything

to do with it. I replied that that was nothing to boast of, and that the

more he sacrificed of the hard-won truths of psycho-analysis the more

would he see resistances vanishing. This modification which the Swiss

were so proud of introducing was again nothing else but a pushing

into the background of the sexual factor in psycho-analytic theory. I

confess that from the beginning I regarded this ‘advance’ as too far-

reaching an adjustment to the demands of actuality.

   These two retrograde movements away from psycho-analysis, which

I must now compare with each other, show another point in common:

for they both court a favourable opinion by putting forward certain lofty

ideas,  which  view  things,  as  it  were, sub  specie  aeternitatis.  With

Adler, this part is played by the relativity of all knowledge and the right

of  the  personality  to  put  an  artificial  construction  on  the  data  of

knowledge according to individual taste; with Jung, the appeal is made

to the historic right of youth to throw off the fetters in which tyrannical

age with its hidebound views seeks to bind it. A few words must be

devoted to exposing the fallacy of these ideas.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2922

 

   The relativity of our knowledge is a consideration which may be

advanced against every other science just as well as against psycho-analysis. It is derived from familiar reactionary currents of present-day

feeling which are hostile to science, and it lays claim to an appearance

of superiority to which no one is entitled. None of us can guess what

the ultimate judgement of mankind about our theoretical efforts will be.

There are instances in which rejection by the first three generations

has  been  corrected  by  the  succeeding  one  and  changed  into

recognition. After a man has listened carefully to the voice of criticism

in  himself  and  has  paid  some  attention  to  the  criticisms  of  his

opponents, there is nothing for him to do but with all his strength to

maintain  his  own  convictions  which  are  based  of  experience.  One

should  be  content  to  conduct  one’s  case  honestly,  and  should  not

assume the office of judge, which is reserved for the remote future.

The stress on arbitrary personal views in scientific matters is bad; it is

clearly an attempt to dispute the right of psycho-analysis to be valued

as  a  science  -  after  that  value,  incidentally,  has  already  been

depreciated by what has been said before. Anyone who sets a high

value on scientific thought will rather seek every possible means and

method of circumscribing the factor of fanciful personal predilections

as far as possible wherever it still plays too great a part. Moreover, it is

opportune  to  recall  that  any  zeal  in  defending  ourselves  is  out  of

place. These arguments of Adler’s are not intended seriously. They

are only meant for use against his opponents; they do not touch his

own theories. Nor have they prevented his followers from hailing him

as the Messiah, for whose appearance expectant humanity has been

prepared  by  a  number  of  forerunners.  The  Messiah  is  certainly  no

relative phenomenon.

   Jung’s argument ad captandam benevolentiam¹ rests on the too

optimistic  assumption  that  the  progress  of  the  human  race,  of

civilization and knowledge, has always pursued an unbroken one; as if

there  had  been  no  periods  of  decadence,  no  reactions  and

restorations after every revolution, no generations who have taken a

backward step and abandoned the gains of their predecessors. His

approach  to  the  standpoint  of  the  masses,  his  abandonment  of  an

innovation which proved unwelcome, make it a priori improbable that

Jung’s corrected version of psycho-analysis can justly claim to be a

youthful act of liberation. After all, it is not the age of the doer that

decides this but the character of the deed. 

   ¹ [‘For the purpose of gaining good-will.’]

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2923

 

   Of the two movements under discussion Adler’s is indubitably the

more important; while radically false, it is marked by consistency and

coherence.  It  is,  moreover,  in  spite  of  everything,  founded  upon  a

theory of the instincts. Jung’s modification, on the other hand, loosens

the connection of the phenomena with instinctual life; and further, as

its critics (e.g. Abraham, Ferenczi and Jones) have pointed out, it is so

obscure, unintelligible and confused as to make it difficult to take up

any position upon it. Wherever one lays hold of anything, one must be

prepared to hear that one has misunderstood it, and one cannot see

how to arrive at a correct understanding of it. It is put forward in a

peculiarly vacillating manner, one moment as ‘quite a mild deviation,

which does not justify the outcry that has been raised about it’ (Jung),

and the next moment as a new message of salvation which is to begin

a  new  epoch  for  psycho-analysis,  and,  indeed,  a  new

Weltanschauung for everyone.

   When one thinks of the inconsistencies displayed in the various

public and private pronouncements made by the Jungian movement,

one  is  bound  to  ask  oneself  how  much  of  this  is  due  to  lack  of

clearness  and  how  much  to  lack  of  sincerity.  It  must  be  admitted,

however, that the exponents of the new theory find themselves in a

difficult position. They are now disputing things which they themselves

formerly upheld, and they are doing so, moreover, not on the ground

of fresh observations which might have taught them something further,

but  in  consequence  of  fresh  interpretations  which  make  the  things

they see look different to them now from what they did before. For this

reason  they  are  unwilling  to  give  up  their  connection  with  psycho-

analysis, as whose representatives they became known to the world,

and  prefer  to  give  it  out  that  psycho-analysis  has  changed.  At  the

Munich Congress I found it necessary to clear up this confusion, and I

did  so  by  declaring  that  I  did  not  recognize  the  innovations  of  the

Swiss  as  legitimate  continuations  and  further  developments  of  thepsycho-analysis  that  originated  with  me.  Outside  critics  (like

Furtmüller) had already seen how things were, and Abraham is right in

saying that Jung is in full retreat from psycho-analysis. I am of course

perfectly ready to allow that everyone has a right to think and to write

what he pleases; but he has no right to put it forward as something

other than what it really is.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2924

 

      Just  as  Adler’s  investigation  brought  something  new  to  psycho-

analysis  -  a  contribution  to  the  psychology  of  the  ego  -  and  then

expected us to pay too high a price for this gift by throwing over all the

fundamental theories of analysis, so in the same way Jung and his

followers  paved  the  way  for  their  fight  against  psycho-analysis  by

presenting it with a new acquisition. They traced in detail (as Pfister

did  before  them)  the  way  in  which  the  material  of  sexual  ideas

belonging to the family-complex and incestuous object-choice is made

use  of  in  representing  the  highest  ethical  and  religious  interests  of

man  -  that  is,  they  have  illuminated  an  important  instance  of  the

sublimation of the erotic instinctual forces and of their transformation

into trends which can no longer be called erotic. This was in complete

harmony with all the expectations of psycho-analysis, and would have

agreed  very  well  with  the  view  that  in  dreams  and  neurosis  a

regressive dissolution of this sublimation, as of all others, becomes

visible. But the world would have risen in indignation and protested

that ethics and religion were being sexualized. Now I cannot refrain

from  thinking  teleologically  for  once  and  concluding  that  these

discoverers were not equal to meeting such a storm of indignation.

Perhaps it even began to rage in their own bosoms. The theological

prehistory of so many of the Swiss throws no less light on their attitude

to  psycho-analysis  than  does  Adler’s  socialist  prehistory  on  the

development  of  his  psychology.  One  is  reminded  of  Mark  Twain’s

famous story of all the things that happened to his watch and of his

concluding words: ‘And he used to wonder what became of all the

unsuccessful  tinkers,  and  gunsmiths,  and  shoemakers,  andblacksmiths; but nobody could ever tell him.’

   Suppose - to make use of a simile - that in a particular social group

there lives a parvenu, who boasts of being descended from a noble

family living in another place. It is pointed out to him, however, that his

parents live somewhere in the neighbourhood, and that they are quite

humble people. There is only one way of escape from his difficulty and

he seizes on it. He can no longer repudiate his parents, but he asserts

that  they  themselves  are  of  noble  lineage  and  have  merely  come

down in the world; and he procures a family-tree from some obliging

official source. It seems to me that the Swiss have been obliged to

behave in much the same way. If ethics and religion were not allowed

to be sexualized but had to be something ‘higher’ from the start, and if

nevertheless the ideas contained in them seemed undeniably to be

descended from the Oedipus and family-complex, there could be only

one  way  out:  it  must  be  that  from  the  very  first  these  complexes

themselves do not mean what they seem to be expressing, but bear

the  higher  ‘anagogic’  meaning  (as  Silberer  calls  it)  which  made  it

possible for them to be employed in the abstract trains of thought of

ethics and religious mysticism.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2925

 

   I am quite prepared to be told again that I have misunderstood the

substance and purpose of the Neo-Zurich theory; but I must protest in

advance against any contradictions to my view of it that may be found

in  the  publications  of  that  school  being  laid  at  my  door  instead  of

theirs. I can find no other way of making the whole range of Jung’s

innovations intelligible to myself and of grasping all their implications.

All the changes that Jung has proposed to make in psycho-analysis

flow from his intention to eliminate what is objectionable in the family-

complexes, so as not to find it again in religion and ethics. For sexual

libido an abstract concept has been substituted, of which one may

safely  say  that  it  remains  mystifying  and  incomprehensible  to  wise

men and fools alike. The Oedipus complex has a merely ‘symbolic’

meaning:  the  mother  in  it  means  the  unattainable,  which  must  berenounced in the interests of civilization; the father who is killed in the

Oedipus myth is the ‘inner’ father, from whom one must set oneself

free in order to become independent. Other parts of the material of

sexual ideas will no doubt be subjected to similar re-interpretations in

the course of time. In the place of a conflict between ego-dystonic

erotic  trends  and  the  self-preservative  ones  a  conflict  appears

between the ‘life-task’ and ‘psychical inertia’; the neurotic’s sense of

guilt corresponds to his self-reproach for not properly fulfilling his ‘life-

task’.  In  this  way  a  new  religio-ethical  system  has  been  created,

which, just like the Adlerian system, was bound to re-interpret, distort

or  jettison  the  factual  findings  of  analysis.  The  truth  is  that  these

people have picked out a few cultural overtones from the symphony of

life  and  have  once  more  failed  to  hear  the  mighty  and  primordial

melody of the instincts.

      In  order  to  preserve  this  system  intact  it  was  necessary  to  turn

entirely  away  from  observation  and  from  the  technique  of  psycho-

analysis.  Occasionally  enthusiasm  for  the  cause  even  permitted  a

disregard  of  scientific  logic  -  as  when  Jung  finds  that  the  Oedipus

complex is not ‘specific’ enough for the aetiology of the neuroses, and

proceeds to attribute this specific quality to inertia, the most universal

characteristic of all matter, animate and inanimate! It is to be noted, by

the way, that the ‘Oedipus complex’ represents only a topic with which

the individual’s mental forces have to deal, and is not itself a force, like

‘psychical  inertia’.  The  study  of  individual  people  had  shown  (and

always will show) that the sexual complexes in their original sense are

alive  in  them.  On  that  account  the  investigation  of  individuals  was

pushed into the background and replaced by conclusions based on

evidence derived from anthropological research. The greatest risk of

coming  up  against  the  original,  undisguised  meaning  of  these  re-

interpreted complexes was to be met with in the early childhood of

every individual; consequently in therapy the injunction was laid down

that this past history should be dwelt on as little as possible and the

main  emphasis  put  on  reverting  to  the  current  conflict,  in  which,

moreover,  the  essential  thing  was  on  no  account  to  be  what  was

accidental  and  personal,  but  what  was  general  -  in  fact,  the  non-

fulfilment of the life-task. As we know, however, a neurotic’s current

conflict becomes comprehensible and admits of solution only when itis traced back to his prehistory, when one goes back along the path

that his libido took when he fell ill.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2926

 

   The form taken by the Neo-Zurich therapy under these influences

can be conveyed in the words of a patient who experienced it himself:

‘This  time  not  a  trace  of  attention  was  given  to  the  past  or  to  the

transference.  Wherever  I  thought  I  recognized  the  latter  it  was

pronounced to be a pure libidinal symbol. The moral instruction was

very fine and I followed it faithfully, but I did not advance a step. It was

even more annoying for me than for him, but how could I help it? . . .

Instead  of  freeing  me  by  analysis,  every  day  brought  fresh

tremendous demands on me, which had to be fulfilled if the neurosis

was to be conquered - for instance, inward concentration by means of

introversion, religious meditation, resuming life with my wife in loving

devotion, etc. It was almost beyond one’s strength; it was aiming at a

radical transformation of one’s whole inner nature. I left the analysis

as  a  poor  sinner  with  intense  feelings  of  contrition  and  the  best

resolutions,  but  at  the  same  time  in  utter  discouragement.  Any

clergyman would have advised what he recommended, but where was

I  to  find  the  strength?’  The  patient,  it  is  true,  reported  that  he  had

heard that analysis of the past and of the transference must be gone

through first; but he had been told that he had already had enough of

it.  Since  this  first  kind  of  analysis  had  not  helped  him  more,  the

conclusion seems to me justified that the patient had not had enough

of  it.  Certainly  the  subsequent  treatment,  which  no  longer  had  any

claim  to  be  called  psycho-analysis,  did  not  improve  matters.  It  is

remarkable that the members of the Zurich school should have made

the long journey round by way of Vienna in order to wind up at the

nearby  city  of  Berne,  where  Dubois  cures  neuroses  by  ethical

encouragement in a more considerate manner.¹

   The total incompatibility of this new movement with psycho-analysis

shows itself too, of course, in Jung’s treatment of repression, which is

hardly mentioned nowadays in his writings, in his misunderstanding ofdreams, which, like Adler, in complete disregard of dream-psychology,

he  confuses  with  the  latent  dream-thoughts,  and  in  his  loss  of  all

understanding of the unconscious - in short, in all the points which I

should regard as the essence of psycho-analysis. When Jung tells us

that the incest-complex is merely ‘symbolic’, that after all it has no

‘real’ existence, that after all a savage feels no desire towards an old

hag  but  prefers  a  young  and  pretty  woman,  we  are  tempted  to

conclude  that  ‘symbolic’  and  ‘without  real  existence’  simply  mean

something  which,  in  virtue  of  its  manifestations  and  pathogenic

effects, is described by psycho-analysis as ‘existing unconsciously’ - a

description that disposes of the apparent contradiction.

 

   ¹ I know the objections there are to making use of a patient’s reports, and I will therefore

expressly state that my informant is a trustworthy person, very well capable of forming a
judgement.  He  gave  me  this  information  quite  spontaneously  and  I  make  use  of  his
communication  without  asking  his  consent,  since  I  cannot  allow  that  a  psycho-analytic
technique has any right to claim the protection of medical discretion.
 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2927

 

   If one bears in mind that dreams are something different from the

latent  dream-thoughts  which  they  work  over,  there  is  nothing

surprising in patients dreaming of things with which their minds have

been filled during the treatment, whether it be the ‘life-task’, or ‘being

on  top’  or  ‘underneath’.  The  dreams  of  people  being  analysed  can

undoubtedly  be  directed,  in  the  same  way  as  they  are  by  stimuli

produced for experimental purposes. One can determine a part of the

material  which  appears  in  a  dream;  nothing  in  the  essence  or

mechanism  of  dreams  is  altered  by  this.  Nor  do  I  believe  that

‘biographical’ dreams, as they are called, occur outside analysis. If, on

the  other  hand,  one  analyses  dreams  which  occurred  before

treatment, or if one considers the dreamer’s own additions to what has

been suggested to him in the treatment, or if one avoids setting him

any such tasks, then one may convince oneself how far removed it is

from the purpose of a dream to produce attempted solutions of the

life-task. Dreams are only a form of thinking; one can never reach an

understanding of this form by reference to the content of the thoughts;only an appreciation of the dream-work will lead to that understanding.

   It is not difficult to find a factual refutation of Jung’s misconceptions

of psycho-analysis and deviations from it. Every analysis conducted in

a  proper  manner,  and  in  particular  every  analysis  of  a  child,

strengthens the convictions upon which the theory of psycho-analysis

is founded, and rebuts the re-interpretations made by both Jung’s and

Adler’s  systems.  In  the  days  before  his  illumination,  Jung  himself

carried out and published an analysis of this kind of a child; it remains

to be seen whether he will undertake a new interpretation of its results

with the help of a different ‘one-sided arrangement of the facts’, to use

the expression employed by Adler in this connection.

      The  view  that  the  sexual  representation  of  ‘higher’  thoughts  in

dreams and neurosis is nothing but an archaic mode of expression is

of  course  irreconcilable  with  the  fact  that  in  neurosis  these  sexual

complexes prove to be the bearers of the quantities of libido which

have been withdrawn from utilization in real life. If it was merely a

question of a sexual ‘jargon’, the economy of the libido could not have

been  altered  in  any  way  by  it.  Jung  admits  this  himself  in  his

Darstellung der psychoanalytischen Theorie and formulates the task

of  therapy  as  the  detaching  of  libidinal  cathexes  from  these

complexes.  This  can  never  be  achieved,  however,  by  directing  the

patient  away  from  them  and  urging  him  to  sublimate,  but  only  by

exhaustive  examination  of  them  and  by  making  them  fully  and

completely conscious. The first piece of reality which the patient must

deal  with  is  his  illness.  Efforts  to  spare  him  that  task  point  to  the

physician’s incapacity to help him to overcome his resistances, or else

to the physician’s dread of the results of the work.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2928

 

   It may be said lastly that by his ‘modification’ of psycho-analysis

Jung has given us a counterpart to the famous Lichtenberg knife. He

has changed the hilt, and he has put a new blade into it; yet because

the  same  name  is  engraved  on  it  we  are  expected  to  regard  the

instrument as the original one.   I think I have made clear, on the contrary, that the new teaching

which aims at replacing psycho-analysis signifies an abandonment of

analysis and a secession from it. Some people may be inclined to fear

that this secession is bound to have more momentous consequences

for analysis than would another, owing to its having been started by

men who have played so great a part in the movement and have done

so much to advance it. I do not share this apprehension.

      Men  are  strong  so  long  as  they  represent  a  strong  idea;  they

become powerless when they oppose it. Psycho-analysis will survive

this loss and gain new adherents in place of these. In conclusion, I

can only express a wish that fortune may grant an agreeable upward

journey to all those who have found their stay in the underworld of

psycho-analysis  too  uncomfortable  for  their  taste.  The  rest  of  us,  I

hope,  will  be  permitted  without  hindrance  to  carry  through  to  their

conclusion our labours in the depths.

                                                                      February, 1914.  

                                                                                       2929

 

                    ON NARCISSISM: AN INTRODUCTION

                                        (1914)

 


                                                                                      2930

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2931

 

                    ON NARCISSISM: AN INTRODUCTION

 

                                            I

 

The  term  narcissism  is  derived  from  clinical  description  and  was

chosen by Paul Näcke in 1899 to denote the attitude of a person who

treats his own body in the same way in which the body of a sexual

object is ordinarily treated - who looks at it, that is to say, strokes it

and  fondles  it  till  he  obtains  complete  satisfaction  through  these

activities. Developed to this degree, narcissism has the significance of

a perversion that has absorbed the whole of the subject’s sexual life,

and it will consequently exhibit the characteristics which we expect to

meet with in the study of all perversions.

   Psycho-analytic observers were subsequently struck by the fact that

individual features of the narcissistic attitude are found in many people

who suffer from other disorders - for instance, as Sadger has pointed

out, in homosexuals - and finally it seemed probable that an allocation

of the libido such as deserved to be described as narcissism might be

present far more extensively, and that it might claim a place in the

regular course of human sexual development.¹ Difficulties in psycho-

analytic  work  upon  neurotics  led  to  the  same  supposition,  for  it

seemed as though this kind of narcissistic attitude in them constituted

one of the limits to their susceptibility to influence. Narcissism in this

sense would not be a perversion, but the libidinal complement to theegoism of the instinct of self-preservation, a measure of which may

justifiably be attributed to every living creature.

 

   ¹ Otto Rank (1911c).

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2932

 

   A pressing motive for occupying ourselves with the conception of a

primary and normal narcissism arose when the attempt was made to

subsume  what  we  know  of  dementia  praecox  (Kraepelin)  or

schizophrenia  (Bleuler)  under  the  hypothesis  of  the  libido  theory.

Patients  of  this  kind,  whom  I  have  proposed  to  term  paraphrenics,

display two fundamental characteristics: megalomania and diversion

of their interest from the external world - from people and things. In

consequence of the latter change, they become inaccessible to the

influence of psycho-analysis and cannot be cured by our efforts. But

the paraphrenic’s turning away from the external world needs to be

more  precisely  characterized.  A  patient  suffering  from  hysteria  or

obsessional neurosis has also, as far as his illness extends, given up

his relation to reality. But analysis shows that he has by no means

broken  off  his  erotic  relations  to  people  and  things.  He  still  retains

them in phantasy; i.e. he has, on the one hand, substituted for real

objects imaginary ones from his memory, or has mixed the latter with

the former; and on the other hand, he has renounced the initiation of

motor activities for the attainment of his aims in connection with those

objects. Only to this condition of the libido may we legitimately apply

the  term  ‘introversion’  of  the  libido  which  is  used  by  Jung

indiscriminately. It is otherwise with the paraphrenic. He seems really

to have withdrawn his libido from people and things in the external

world, without replacing them by others in phantasy. When he does so

replace them, the process seems to be a secondary one and to be

part  of  an  attempt  at  recovery,  designed  to  lead  the  libido  back  to

objects.¹

   The question arises: What happens to the libido which has been

withdrawn from external objects in schizophrenia? The megalomania

characteristic of these states points the way. This megalomania hasno doubt come into being at the expense of object-libido. The libido

that has been withdrawn from the external world has been directed to

the  ego  and  thus  gives  rise  to  an  attitude  which  may  be  called

narcissism.  But  the  megalomania  itself  is  no  new  creation;  on  the

contrary, it is, as we know, a magnification and plainer manifestation

of a condition which had already existed previously. This leads us to

look  upon  the  narcissism  which  arises  through  the  drawing  in  of

object-cathexes as a secondary one, superimposed upon a primary

narcissism that is obscured by a number of different influences.

 

   ¹ In connection with this see my discussion of the ‘end of the world’ in the analysis of

Senatspräsident Schreber; also Abraham, 1908.
 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2933

 

   Let me insist that I am not proposing here to explain or penetrate

further into the problem of schizophrenia, but that I am merely putting

together what has already been said elsewhere, in order to justify the

introduction of the concept of narcissism.

   This extension of the libido theory - in my opinion, a legitimate one -

receives  reinforcement  from  a  third  quarter,  namely,  from  our

observations  and  views  on  the  mental  life  of  children  and  primitive

peoples. In the latter we find characteristics which, if they occurred

singly, might be put down to megalomania: an over-estimation of the

power of their wishes and mental acts, the ‘omnipotence of thoughts’,

a belief in the thaumaturgic force of words, and a technique for dealing

with  the  external  world  -  ‘magic’  -  which  appears  to  be  a  logical

application of these grandiose premisses.¹ In the children of to-day,

whose development is much more obscure to us, we expect to find an

exactly analogous attitude towards the external world.² Thus we form

the idea of there being an original libidinal cathexis of the ego, from

which  some  is  later  given  off  to  objects,  but  which  fundamentally

persists and is related to the object-cathexes much as the body of an

amoeba  is  related  to  the  pseudopodia  which  it  puts  out.  In  our

researches, taking, as they did, neurotic symptoms for their starting-

point, this part of the allocation of libido necessarily remained hiddenfrom us at the outset. All that we noticed were the emanations of this

libido - the object-cathexes, which can be sent out and drawn back

again.  We  see  also,  broadly  speaking,  an  antithesis  between  ego-

libido and object-libido. The more of the one is employed, the more

the other becomes depleted. The highest phase of development of

which object-libido is capable is seen in the state of being in love,

when the subject seems to give up his own personality in favour of an

object-cathexis; while we have the opposite condition in the paranoic’s

phantasy  (or  self-perception)  of  the  ‘end  of  the  world’.³  Finally,  as

regards  the  differentiation  of  psychical  energies,  we  are  led  to  the

conclusion that to begin with, during the state of narcissism, they exist

together and that our analysis is too coarse to distinguish between

them; not until there is object-cathexis is it possible to discriminate a

sexual energy - the libido - from an energy of the ego-instincts.

 

   ¹ Cf. the passages in my Totem and Taboo (1912-13) which deal with this subject.

   ² Cf. Ferenczi (1913a).

   ³  There are two mechanisms of this ‘end of the world’ idea: in the one case, the whole

libidinal cathexis flows off to the loved object; in the other, it all flows back into the ego.
 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2934

 

 

   Before going any further I must touch on two questions which lead

us to the heart of the difficulties of our subject. In the first place, what

is the relation of the narcissism of which we are now speaking to auto-

erotism,  which  we  have  described  as  an  early  state  of  the  libido?

Secondly, if we grant the ego a primary cathexis of libido, why is there

any  necessity  for  further  distinguishing  a  sexual  libido  from  a  non-

sexual  energy  of  the  ego-instincts?  Would  not  the  postulation  of  a

single  kind  of  psychical  energy  save  us  all  the  difficulties  of

differentiating an energy of the ego-instincts from ego-libido, and ego-

libido from object-libido?

   As regards the first question, I may point out that we are bound to

suppose  that  a  unity  comparable  to  the  ego  cannot  exist  in  the

individual from the start; the ego has to be developed. The auto-eroticinstincts,  however,  are  there  from  the  very  first;  so  there  must  be

something added to auto-erotism - a new psychical action - in order to

bring about narcissism.

   To be asked to give a definite answer to the second question must

occasion perceptible uneasiness in every psycho-analyst. One dislikes

the  thought  of  abandoning  observation  for  barren  theoretical

controversy,  but  nevertheless  one  must  not  shirk  an  attempt  at

clarification. It is true that notions such as that of an ego-libido, an

energy of the ego-instincts, and so on, are neither particularly easy to

grasp,  nor  sufficiently  rich  in  content;  a  speculative  theory  of  the

relations  in  question  would  begin  by  seeking  to  obtain  a  sharply

defined concept as its basis. But I am of opinion that that is just the

difference  between  a  speculative  theory  and  a  science  erected  on

empirical  interpretation.  The  latter  will  not  envy  speculation  its

privilege of having a smooth, logically unassailable foundation, but will

gladly  content  itself  with  nebulous,  scarcely  imaginable  basic

concepts, which it hopes to apprehend more clearly in the course of its

development, or which it is even prepared to replace by others. For

these ideas are not the foundation of science, upon which everything

rests: that foundation is observation alone. They are not the bottom

but  the  top  of  the  whole  structure,  and  they  can  be  replaced  and

discarded without damaging it. The same thing is happening in our

day in the science of physics, the basic notions of which as regards

matter, centres of force, attraction, etc., are scarcely less debatable

than the corresponding notions in psycho-analysis.

   The value of the concepts ‘ego-libido’ and ‘object-libido’ lies in the

fact that they are derived from the study of the intimate characteristics

of neurotic and psychotic processes. A differentiation of libido into a

kind which is proper to the ego and one which is attached to objects is

an unavoidable corollary to an original hypothesis which distinguished

between sexual instincts and ego-instincts. At any rate, analysis of the

pure  transference  neuroses  (hysteria  and  obsessional  neurosis)

compelled me to make this distinction and I only know that all attempts

to  account  for  these  phenomena  by  other  means  have  been

completely unsuccessful.

                           On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2935

 

   In the total absence of any theory of the instincts which would help

us to find our bearings, we may be permitted, or rather, it is incumbent

upon  us,  to  start  off  by  working  out  some  hypothesis  to  its  logical

conclusion,  until  it  either  breaks  down  or  is  confirmed.  There  are

various points in favour of the hypothesis of there having been from

the  first  a  separation  between  sexual  instincts  and  others,  ego-

instincts,  besides  the  serviceability  of  such  a  hypothesis  in  the

analysis  of  the  transference  neuroses.  I  admit  that  this  latter

consideration  alone  would  not  be  unambiguous,  for  it  might  be  a

question of an indifferent psychical energy which only becomes libido

through  the  act  of  cathecting  an  object.  But,  in  the  first  place,  the

distinction made in this concept corresponds to the common, popular

distinction between hunger and love. In the second place, there are

biological  considerations  in  its  favour.  The  individual  does  actually

carry on a twofold existence: one to serve his own purposes and the

other as a link in a chain, which he serves against his will, or at least

involuntarily.  The  individual  himself  regards  sexuality  as  one  of  his

own ends; whereas from another point of view he is an appendage to

his germ plasm, at whose disposal he puts his energies in return for a

bonus of pleasure. He is the mortal vehicle of a (possibly) immortal

substance - like the inheritor of an entailed property, who is only the

temporary holder of an estate which survives him. The separation of

the  sexual  instincts  from  the  ego-instincts  would  simply  reflect  this

twofold function of the individual. Thirdly, we must recollect that all our

provisional ideas in psychology will presumably some day be based

on an organic substructure. This makes it probable that it is special

substances and chemical processes which perform the operations of

sexuality and provide for the extension of individual life into that of the

species. We are taking this probability into account in replacing the

special chemical substances by special psychical forces.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2936

    I try in general to keep psychology clear from everything that is

different in nature from it, even biological lines of thought. For that

very  reason  I  should  like  at  this  point  expressly  to  admit  that  the

hypothesis  of  separate  ego-instincts  and  sexual  instincts  (that  is  to

say, the libido theory) rests scarcely at all upon a psychological basis,

but derives its principal support from biology. But I shall be consistent

enough to drop this hypothesis if psycho-analytic work should itself

produce some other, more serviceable hypothesis about the instincts.

So far, this has not happened. It may turn out that, most basically and

on the longest view, sexual energy - libido - is only the product of a

differentiation in the energy at work generally in the mind. But such an

assertion has no relevance. It relates to matters which are so remote

from the problems of our observation, and of which we have so little

cognizance, that it is as idle to dispute it as to affirm it; this primal

identity may well have as little to do with our analytic interests as the

primal kinship of all the races of mankind has to do with the proof of

kinship required in order to establish a legal right of inheritance. All

these speculations take us nowhere. Since we cannot wait for another

science to present us with the final conclusions on the theory of the

instincts, it is far more to the purpose that we should try to see what

light may be thrown upon this basic problem of biology by a synthesis

of the psychological phenomena. Let us face the possibility of error;

but do not let us be deterred from pursuing the logical implications of

the hypothesis we first adopted of an antithesis between ego-instincts

and sexual instincts (a hypothesis to which we were forcibly led by

analysis  of  the  transference  neuroses),  and  from  seeing  whether  it

turns out to be without contradictions and fruitful, and whether it can

be applied to other disorders as well, such as schizophrenia.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2937

 

   It would, of course, be a different matter if it were proved that the

libido theory has already come to grief in the attempt to explain the

latter disease. This has been asserted by C. G. Jung (1912) and it is

on  that  account  that  I  have  been  obliged  to  enter  upon  this  lastdiscussion,  which  I  would  gladly  have  been  spared.  I  should  have

preferred to follow to its end the course embarked upon in the analysis

of  the  Schreber  case  without  any  discussion  of  its  premisses.  But

Jung’s assertion is, to say the least of it, premature. The grounds he

gives for it are scanty. In the first place, he appeals to an admission of

my own that I myself have been obliged, owing to the difficulties of the

Schreber analysis, to extend the concept of libido (that is, to give up

its  sexual  content)  and  to  identify  libido  with  psychical  interest  in

general. Ferenczi (1913b), in an exhaustive criticism of Jung’s work,

has already said all that is necessary in correction of this erroneous

interpretation.  I  can  only  corroborate  his  criticism  and  repeat  that  I

have never made any such retractation of the libido theory. Another

argument  of  Jung’s,  namely,  that  we  cannot  suppose  that  the

withdrawal of the libido is in itself enough to bring about the loss of the

normal function of reality, is no argument but a dictum. It ‘begs the

question’,¹ and saves discussion; for whether and how this is possible

was precisely the point that should have been under investigation. In

his next major work, Jung (1913) just misses the solution I had long

since  indicated:  ‘At  the  same  time’,  he  writes,  ‘there  is  this  to  be

further taken into consideration (a point to which, incidentally, Freud

refers in his work on the Schreber case) - that the introversion of the

libido sexualis leads to a cathexis of the "ego", and that it may possibly

be  this  that  produces  the  result  of  a  loss  of  reality.  It  is  indeed  a

tempting possibility to explain the psychology of the loss of reality in

this fashion.’ But Jung does not enter much further into a discussion of

this possibility. A few lines later he dismisses it with the remark that

this  determinant  ‘would  result  in  the  psychology  of  an  ascetic

anchorite, not in a dementia praecox’. How little this inapt analogy can

help us to decide the question may be learnt from the consideration

that an anchorite of this kind, who ‘tries to eradicate every trace of

sexual interest’ (but only in the popular sense of the word ‘sexual’),

does  not  even  necessarily  display  any  pathogenic  allocation  of  the

libido. He may have diverted his sexual interest from human beings

entirely, and yet may have sublimated it into a heightened interest in

the  divine,  in  nature,  or  in  the  animal  kingdom,  without  his  libido

having undergone an introversion on to his phantasies or a return to

his ego. This analogy would seem to rule out in advance the possibilityof differentiating between interest emanating from erotic sources and

from  others.  Let  us  remember,  further,  that  the  researches  of  the

Swiss school, however valuable, have elucidated only two features in

the  picture  of  dementia  praecox  -  the  presence  in  it  of  complexes

known to us both in healthy and neurotic subjects, and the similarity of

the phantasies that occur in it to popular myths - but that they have not

been able to throw any further light on the mechanism of the disease.

We may repudiate Jung’s assertion, then, that the libido theory has

come to grief in the attempt to explain dementia praecox, and that it is

therefore disposed of for the other neuroses as well.

 

   ¹ [In English in the original.]

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2938

 

                                            II

 

   Certain special difficulties seem to me to lie in the way of a direct

study  of  narcissism.  Our  chief  means  of  access  to  it  will  probably

remain  the  analysis  of  the  paraphrenias.  Just  as  the  transference

neuroses have enabled us to trace the libidinal instinctual impulses, so

dementia  praecox  and  paranoia  will  give  us  an  insight  into  the

psychology  of  the  ego.  Once  more,  in  order  to  arrive  at  an

understanding  of  what  seems  so  simple  in  normal  phenomena,  we

shall  have  to  turn  to  the  field  of  pathology  with  its  distortions  and

exaggerations.  At  the  same  time,  other  means  of  approach  remain

open to us, by which we may obtain a better knowledge of narcissism.

These I shall now discuss in the following order: the study of organic

disease, of hypochondria and of the erotic life of the sexes.

 

   In estimating the influence of organic disease upon the distribution

of libido, I follow a suggestion made to me orally by Sándor Ferenczi.

It is universally known, and we take it as a matter of course, that a

person who is tormented by organic pain and discomfort gives up his

interest in the things of the external world, in so far as they do not

concern  his  suffering.  Closer  observation  teaches  us  that  he  alsowithdraws libidinal interest from his love-objects: so long as he suffers,

he ceases to love. The commonplace nature of this fact is no reason

why we should be deterred from translating it into terms of the libido

theory.  We  should  then  say:(the  sick  man  withdraws  his  libidinal

cathexes back upon his own ego, and sends them out again when he

recovers. ‘Concentrated is his soul’, says Wilhelm Busch of the poet

suffering from toothache, ‘in his molar’s narrow hole.’ Here libido and

ego-interest share the same fate and are once more indistinguishable

from each other. The familiar egoism of the sick person covers both.

We find it so natural because we are certain that in the same situation

we should behave in just the same way. The way in which a lover’s

feelings,  however  strong,  are  banished  by  bodily  ailments,  and

suddenly  replaced  by  complete  indifference,  is  a  theme  which  has

been exploited by comic writers to an appropriate extent.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2939

 

      The  condition  of  sleep,  too,  resembles  illness  in  implying  a

narcissistic withdrawal of the positions of the libido on to the subject’s

own  self,  or,  more  precisely,  on  to  the  single  wish  to  sleep.  The

egoism of dreams fits very well into this context. In both states we

have, if nothing else, examples of changes in the distribution of libido

that are consequent upon an alteration of the ego.

 

   Hypochondria, like organic disease, manifests itself in distressing

and painful bodily sensations, and it has the same effect as organic

disease  on  the  distribution  of  libido.  The  hypochondriac  withdraws

both  interest  and  libido  -  the  latter  specially  markedly  -  from  the

objects of the external world and concentrates both of them upon the

organ  that  is  engaging  his  attention.  A  difference  between

hypochondria and organic disease now becomes evident: in the latter,

the distressing sensations are based upon demonstrable changes; in

the former, this is not so. But it would be entirely in keeping with our

general conception of the processes of neurosis if we decided to say

that hypochondria must be right: organic changes must be supposedto be present in it, too.

   But what could these changes be? We will let ourselves be guided

at this point by our experience, which shows that bodily sensations of

an unpleasurable nature, comparable to those of hypochondria, occur

in the other neuroses as well. I have said before that I am inclined to

class hypochondria with neurasthenia and anxiety-neurosis as a third

‘actual’ neurosis. It would probably not be going too far to suppose

that in the case of the other neuroses a small amount of hypochondria

was  regularly  formed  at  the  same  time  as  well.  We  have  the  best

example of this, I think, in anxiety neurosis with its superstructure of

hysteria.  Now  the  familiar  prototype  of  an  organ  that  is  painfully

tender, that is in some way changed and that is yet not diseased in the

ordinary sense, is the genital organ in its states of excitation. In that

condition  it  becomes  congested  with  blood,  swollen  and  humected,

and is the seat of a multiplicity of sensations. Let us now, taking any

part  of  the  body,  describe  its  activity  of  sending  sexually  exciting

stimuli to the mind as its ‘erotogenicity’, and let us further reflect that

the considerations on which our theory of sexuality was based have

long accustomed us to the notion that certain other parts of the body -

the ‘erotogenic’ zones - may act as substitutes for the genitals and

behave analogously to them. We have then only one more step to

take.  We  can  decide  to  regard  erotogenicity  as  a  general

characteristic  of  all  organs  and  may  then  speak  of  an  increase  or

decrease of it in a particular part of the body. For every such change

in  the  erotogenicity  of  the  organs  there  might  then  be  a  parallel

change of libidinal cathexis in the ego. Such factors would constitute

what  we  believe  to  underlie  hypochondria  and  what  may  have  the

same effect upon the distribution of libido as is produced by a material

illness of the organs.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2940

 

   We see that, if we follow up this line of thought, we come up against

the  problem  not  only  of  hypochondria,  but  of  the  other  ‘actual’

neuroses - neurasthenia and anxiety neurosis. Let us therefore stop atthis point. It is not within the scope of a purely psychological inquiry to

penetrate so far behind the frontiers of physiological research. I will

merely mention that from this point of view we may suspect that the

relation of hypochondria to paraphrenia is similar to that of the other

‘actual’  neuroses  to  hysteria  and  obsessional  neurosis:  we  may

suspect, that is, that it is dependent on ego-libido just as the others

are  on  object-libido,  and  that  hypochondriacal  anxiety  is  the

counterpart, as coming from ego-libido, to neurotic anxiety. Further,

since  we  are  already  familiar  with  the  idea  that  the  mechanism  of

falling  ill  and  of  the  formation  of  symptoms  in  the  transference

neuroses - the path from introversion to regression - is to be linked to

a damming-up of object-libido,¹ we may come to closer quarters with

the idea of a damming-up of ego-libido as well and may bring this idea

into relation with the phenomena of hypochondria and paraphrenia.

   At this point, our curiosity will of course raise the question why this

damming-up of libido in the ego should have to be experienced as

unpleasurable. I shall content myself with the answer that unpleasure

is  always  the  expression  of  a  higher  degree  of  tension,  and  that

therefore what is happening is that a quantity in the field of material

events  is  being  transformed  here  as  elsewhere  into  the  psychical

quality of unpleasure. Nevertheless it may be that what is decisive for

the  generation  of  unpleasure  is  not  the  absolute  magnitude  of  the

material  event,  but  rather  some  particular  function  of  that  absolute

magnitude. Here we may even venture to touch on the question of

what makes it necessary at all for our mental life to pass beyond the

limits of narcissism and to attach the libido to objects. The answer

which would follow from our line of thought would once more be that

this necessity arises when the cathexis of the ego with libido exceeds

a certain amount. A strong egoism is a protection against falling ill, but

in the last resort we must begin to love in order not to fall ill, and we

are bound to fall ill if, in consequence of frustration, we are unable to

love.  This  follows  somewhat  on  the  lines  of  Heine’s  picture  of  the

psychogenesis of the Creation:

 

                                                Krankheit ist wohl der letzte Grund
                                                Des ganzen Schöpferdrangs gewesen;
                                                Erschaffend konnte ich genesen,

                                                Erschaffend wurde ich gesund.² 

      We  have  recognized  our  mental  apparatus  as  being  first  and

foremost  a  device  designed  for  mastering  excitations  which  would

otherwise  be  felt  as  distressing  or  would  have  pathogenic  effects.

Working them over in the mind helps remarkably towards an internal

draining away of excitations which are incapable of direct discharge

outwards,  or  for  which  such  a  discharge  is  for  the  moment

undesirable. In the first instance, however, it is a matter of indifference

whether this internal process of working-over is carried out upon real

or imaginary objects. The difference does not appear till later - if the

turning of the libido on to unreal objects (introversion) has led to its

being dammed up. In paraphrenics, megalomania allows of a similar

internal working-over of libido which has returned to the ego; perhaps

it is only when the megalomania fails that the damming-up of libido in

the ego becomes pathogenic and starts the process of recovery which

gives us the impression of being a disease.

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘Types of Onset of Neurosis’ (1912c).

   ² [‘Illness was no doubt the final cause of the whole urge to create. By creating, I could

recover; by creating, I became healthy.’]
 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2941

 

   I shall try here to penetrate a little further into the mechanism of

paraphrenia and shall bring together those views which already seem

to me to deserve consideration. The difference between paraphrenic

affections and the transference neuroses appears to me to lie in the

circumstance  that,  in  the  former,  the  libido  that  is  liberated  by

frustration  does  not  remain  attached  to  objects  in  phantasy,  but

withdraws on to the ego. Megalomania would accordingly correspond

to the psychical mastering of this latter amount of libido, and would

thus be the counterpart of the introversion on to phantasies that is

found in the transference neuroses; a failure of this psychical function

gives rise to the hypochondria of paraphrenia and this is homologous

to the anxiety of the transference neuroses. We know that this anxiety

can be resolved by further psychical working over, i.e. by conversion,reaction-formation  or  the  construction  of  protections  (phobias).  The

corresponding process in paraphrenics is an attempt at restoration, to

which  the  striking  manifestations  of  the  disease  are  due.  Since

paraphrenia  frequently,  if  not  usually,  brings  about  only  a partial

detachment of the libido from objects, we can distinguish three groups

of  phenomena  in  the  clinical  picture:  (1)  those  representing  what

remains of a normal state or of neurosis (residual phenomena); (2)

those representing the morbid process (detachment of libido from its

objects  and,  further,  megalomania,  hypochondria,  affective

disturbance  and  every  kind  of  regression);  (3)  those  representing

restoration, in which the libido is once more attached to objects, after

the manner of a hysteria (in dementia praecox or paraphrenia proper),

or  of  an  obsessional  neurosis  (in  paranoia).  This  fresh  libidinal

cathexis differs from the primary one in that it starts from another level

and under other conditions. The difference between the transference

neuroses  brought  about  in  the  case  of  this  fresh  kind  of  libidinal

cathexis and the corresponding formations where the ego is normal

should be able to afford us the deepest insight into the structure of our

mental apparatus.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2942

 

 

   A third way in which we may approach the study of narcissism is by

observing  the  erotic  life  of  human  beings,  with  its  many  kinds  of

differentiation  in  man  and  woman.  Just  as  object-libido  at  first

concealed ego-libido from our observation, so too in connection with

the  object-choice  of  infants  (and  of  growing  children)  what  we  first

noticed  was  that  they  derived  their  sexual  objects  from  their

experiences of satisfaction. The first auto-erotic sexual satisfactions

are  experienced  in  connection  with  vital  functions  which  serve  the

purpose  of  self-preservation.  The  sexual  instincts  are  at  the  outset

attached  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  ego-instincts;  only  later  do  they

become independent of these, and even then we have an indication of

that  original  attachment  in  the  fact  that  the  persons  who  areconcerned  with  a  child’s  feeding,  care,  and  protection  become  his

earliest sexual objects: that is to say, in the first instance his mother or

a substitute for her. Side by side, however, with this type and source

of object-choice, which may be called the ‘anaclitic’ or ‘attachment’

type, psycho-analytic research has revealed a second type, which we

were not prepared for finding. We have discovered, especially clearly

in people whose libidinal development has suffered some disturbance,

such as perverts and homosexuals, that in their later choice of love-

objects they have taken as a model not their mother but their own

selves. They are plainly seeking themselves as a love-object, and are

exhibiting a type of object-choice which must be termed ‘narcissistic’.

In this observation we have the strongest of the reasons which have

led us to adopt the hypothesis of narcissism.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2943

 

   We have, however, not concluded that human beings are divided

into two sharply differentiated groups, according as their object-choice

conforms to the anaclitic or to the narcissistic type; we assume rather

that both kinds of object-choice are open to each individual, though he

may show a preference for one or the other. We say that a human

being has originally two sexual objects - himself and the woman who

nurses him - and in doing so we are postulating a primary narcissism

in everyone, which may in some cases manifest itself in a dominating

fashion in his object-choice.

   A comparison of the male and female sexes then shows that there

are fundamental differences between them in respect of their type of

object-choice, although these differences are of course not universal.

Complete  object-love  of  the  attachment  type  is,  properly  speaking,

characteristic of the male. It displays the marked sexual overvaluation

which  is  doubtless  derived  from  the  child’s  original  narcissism  and

thus corresponds to a transference of that narcissism to the sexual

object. This sexual overvaluation is the origin of the peculiar state of

being in love, a state suggestive of a neurotic compulsion, which is

thus traceable to an impoverishment of the ego as regards libido infavour of the love-object. A different course is followed in the type of

female  most  frequently  met  with,  which  is  probably  the  purest  and

truest one. With the onset of puberty the maturing of the female sexual

organs, which up till then have been in a condition of latency, seems

to bring about an intensification of the original narcissism, and this is

unfavourable  to  the  development  of  a  true  object-choice  with  its

accompanying sexual overvaluation. Women, especially if they grow

up  with  good  looks,  develop  a  certain  self-contentment  which

compensates them for the social restrictions that are imposed upon

them in their choice of object. Strictly speaking, it is only themselves

that  such  women  love  with  an  intensity  comparable  to  that  of  the

man’s love for them. Nor does their need lie in the direction of loving,

but of being loved; and the man who fulfils this condition is the one

who finds favour with them. The importance of this type of woman for

the erotic life of mankind is to be rated very high. Such women have

the greatest fascination for men, not only for aesthetic reasons, since

as  a  rule  they  are  the  most  beautiful,  but  also  because  of  a

combination  of  interesting  psychological  factors.  For  it  seems  very

evident  that  another  person’s  narcissism  has  a  great  attraction  for

those who have renounced part of their own narcissism and are in

search of object-love. The charm of a child lies to a great extent in his

narcissism, his self-contentment and inaccessibility, just as does the

charm of certain animals which seem not to concern themselves about

us,  such  as  cats  and  the  large  beasts  of  prey.  Indeed,  even  great

criminals and humorists, as they are represented in literature, compel

our interest by the narcissistic consistency with which they manage to

keep away from their ego anything that would diminish it. It is as if we

envied them for maintaining a blissful state of mind - an unassailable

libidinal position which we ourselves have since abandoned. The great

charm of narcissistic women has, however, its reverse side; a large

part of the lover’s dissatisfaction, of his doubts of the woman’s love, of

his complaints of her enigmatic nature, has its root in this incongruity

between the types of object-choice.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2944 

   Perhaps it is not out of place here to give an assurance that this

description  of  the  feminine  form  of  erotic  life  is  not  due  to  my

tendentious desire on my part to depreciate women. Apart from the

fact  that  tendentiousness  is  quite  alien  to  me,  I  know  that  these

different  lines  of  development  correspond  to  the  differentiation  of

functions in a highly complicated biological whole; further, I am ready

to admit that there are quite a number of women who love according

to the masculine type and who also develop the sexual overvaluation

proper to that type.

   Even for narcissistic women, whose attitude towards men remains

cool, there is a road which leads to complete object-love. In the child

which  they  bear,  a  part  of  their  own  body  confronts  them  like  an

extraneous object, to which, starting out from their narcissism, they

can then give complete object-love. There are other women, again,

who  do  not  have  to  wait  for  a  child  in  order  to  take  the  step  in

development  from  (secondary)  narcissism  to  object-love.  Before

puberty they feel masculine and develop some way along masculine

lines;  after  this  trend  has  been  cut  short  on  their  reaching  female

maturity, they still retain the capacity of longing for a masculine ideal -

an  ideal  which  is  in  fact  a  survival  of  the  boyish  nature  that  they

themselves once possessed.

   What I have so far said by way of indication may be concluded by a

short summary of the paths leading to the choice of an object.

 

   A person may love:-

 

   (1) According to the narcissistic type:

            (a) what he himself is (i.e. himself),

            (b) what he himself was,

            (c) what he himself would like to be,

            (d) someone who was once part of himself.

 

   (2) According to the anaclitic (attachment) type:

            (a) the woman who feeds him,

            (b) the man who protects him,

and the succession of substitutes who take their place. The inclusionof case (c) of the first type cannot be justified till a later stage of this

discussion.

   The significance of narcissistic object-choice for homosexuality in

men must be considered in another connection.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2945

 

 

   The primary narcissism of children which we have assumed and

which forms one of the postulates of our theories of the libido, is less

easy to grasp by direct observation than to confirm by inference from

elsewhere. If we look at the attitude of affectionate parents towards

their  children,  we  have  to  recognize  that  it  is  a  revival  and

reproduction  of  their  own  narcissism,  which  they  have  long  since

abandoned.  The  trustworthy  pointer  constituted  by  overvaluation,

which we have already recognized as a narcissistic stigma in the case

of object-choice, dominates, as we all know, their emotional attitude.

Thus they are under a compulsion to ascribe every perfection to the

child - which sober observation would find no occasion to do - and to

conceal  and  forget  all  his  shortcomings.  (Incidentally,  the  denial  of

sexuality  in  children  is  connected  with  this.)  Moreover,  they  are

inclined to suspend in the child’s favour the operation of all the cultural

acquisitions which their own narcissism has been forced to respect,

and to renew on his behalf the claims to privileges which were long

ago given up by themselves. The child shall have a better time than

his parents; he shall not be subject to the necessities which they have

recognized  as  paramount  in  life.  Illness,  death,  renunciation  of

enjoyment, restrictions on his own will, shall not touch him; the laws of

nature and of society shall be abrogated in his favour; he shall once

more  really  be  the  centre  and  core  of  creation  -  ‘His  Majesty  the

Baby’,¹  as  we  once  fancied  ourselves.  The  child  shall  fulfil  those

wishful dreams of the parents which they never carried out - the boy

shall become a great man and a hero in his father’s place, and the girl

shall marry a prince as a tardy compensation for her mother. At the

most  touchy  point  in  the  narcissistic  system,  the  immortality  of  theego, which is so hard pressed by reality, security is achieved by taking

refuge in the child. Parental love, which is so moving and at bottom so

childish,  is  nothing  but  the  parents’  narcissism  born  again,  which,

transformed into object-love, unmistakably reveals its former nature.

 

   ¹ [In English in the original.]

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2946

 

                                            III

 

   The disturbances to which a child’s original narcissism is exposed,

the reactions with which he seeks to protect himself from them and the

paths into which he is forced in doing so - these are themes which I

propose to leave on one side, as an important field of work which still

awaits exploration. The most significant portion of it, however, can be

singled out in the shape of the ‘castration complex’ (in boys, anxiety

about the penis - in girls, envy for the penis) and treated in connection

with the effect of early deterrence from sexual activity. Psycho-analytic

research ordinarily enables us to trace the vicissitudes undergone by

the libidinal instincts when these, isolated from the ego-instincts, are

placed in opposition to them; but in the particular field of the castration

complex,  it  allows  us  to  infer  the  existence  of  an  epoch  and  a

psychical situation in which the two groups of instincts, still operating

in  unison  and  inseparably  mingled,  make  their  appearance  as

narcissistic interests. It is from this context that Adler has derived his

concept of the ‘masculine protest’, which he has elevated almost to

the position of the sole motive force in the formation of character and

neurosis alike and which he bases not on a narcissistic, and therefore

still  a  libidinal,  trend,  but  on  a  social  valuation.  Psycho-analytic

research has from the very beginning recognized the existence and

importance  of  the  ‘masculine  protest’,  but  it  has  regarded  it,  in

opposition  to  Adler,  as  narcissistic  in  nature  and  derived  from  the

castration  complex.  The  ‘masculine  protest’  is  concerned  in  the

formation of character, into the genesis of which it enters along with

many  other  factors,  but  it  is  completely  unsuited  for  explaining  theproblems of the neuroses, with regard to which Adler takes account of

nothing but the manner in which they serve the ego-instincts. I find it

quite  impossible  to  place  the  genesis  of  neurosis  upon  the  narrow

basis of the castration complex, however powerfully it may come to

the fore in men among their resistances to the cure of a neurosis.

Incidentally,  I  know  of  cases  of  neurosis  in  which  the  ‘masculine

protest’,  or,  as  we  regard  it,  the  castration  complex,  plays  no

pathogenic part, and even fails to appear at all.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2947

 

 

   Observation of normal adults shows that their former megalomania

has been damped down and that the psychical characteristics from

which we inferred their infantile narcissism have been effaced. What

has become of their ego-Iibido? Are we to suppose that the whole

amount of it has passed into object-cathexes? Such a possibility is

plainly contrary to the whole trend of our argument; but we may find a

hint at another answer to the question in the psychology of repression.

      We  have  learnt  that  libidinal  instinctual  impulses  undergo  the

vicissitude of pathogenic repression if they come into conflict with the

subject’s cultural and ethical ideas. By this we never mean that the

individual  in  question  has  a  merely  intellectual  knowledge  of  the

existence of such ideas; we always mean that he recognizes them as

a standard for himself and submits to the claims they make on him.

Repression, we have said, proceeds from the ego; we might say with

greater precision that it proceeds from the self-respect of the ego. The

same impressions, experiences, impulses and desires that one man

indulges or at least works over consciously will be rejected with the

utmost  indignation  by  another,  or  even  stifled  before  they  enter

consciousness. The difference between the two, which contains the

conditioning  factor  of  repression,  can  easily  be  expressed  in  terms

which enable it to be explained by the libido theory. We can say that

the one man has set up an ideal in himself by which he measures his

actual ego, while the other has formed no such ideal. For the ego theformation of an ideal would be the conditioning factor of repression.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2948

 

   This ideal ego is now the target of the self-love which was enjoyed in

childhood  by  the  actual  ego.  The  subject’s  narcissism  makes  its

appearance displaced on to this new ideal ego, which, like the infantile

ego,  finds  itself  possessed  of  every  perfection  that  is  of  value.  As

always  where  the  libido  is  concerned,  man  has  here  again  shown

himself incapable of giving up a satisfaction he had once enjoyed. He

is not willing to forgo the narcissistic perfection of his childhood; and

when, as he grows up, he is disturbed by the admonitions of others

and by the awakening of his own critical judgement, so that he can no

longer retain that perfection, he seeks to recover it in the new form of

an ego ideal. What he projects before him as his ideal is the substitute

for the lost narcissism of his childhood in which he was his own ideal.

   We are naturally led to examine the relation between this forming of

an  ideal  and  sublimation.  Sublimation  is  a  process  that  concerns

object-libido and consists in the instinct’s directing itself towards an

aim other than, and remote from, that of sexual satisfaction; in this

process the accent falls upon deflection from sexuality. Idealization is

a  process  that  concerns  the object;  by  it  that  object,  without  any

alteration  in  its  nature,  is  aggrandized  and  exalted  in  the  subject’s

mind. Idealization is possible in the sphere of ego-libido as well as in

that  of  object-libido.  For  example,  the  sexual  overvaluation  of  an

object  is  an  idealization  of  it.  In  so  far  as  sublimation  describes

something that has to do with the instinct and idealization something

to do with the object, the two concepts are to be distinguished from

each other.

   The formation of an ego ideal is often confused with the sublimation

of instinct, to the detriment of our understanding of the facts. A man

who has exchanged his narcissism for homage to a high ego ideal has

not necessarily on that account succeeded in sublimating his libidinal

instincts. It is true that the ego ideal demands such sublimation, but it

cannot enforce it; sublimation remains a special process which maybe  prompted  by  the  ideal  but  the  execution  of  which  is  entirely

independent of any such prompting. It is precisely in neurotics that we

find the highest differences of potential between the development of

their ego ideal and the amount of sublimation of their primitive libidinal

instincts; and in general it is far harder to convince an idealist of the

inexpedient location of his libido than a plain man whose pretensions

have remained more moderate. Further, the formation of an ego ideal

and  sublimation  are  quite  differently  related  to  the  causation  of

neurosis. As we have learnt, the formation of an ideal heightens the

demands  of  the  ego  and  is  the  most  powerful  factor  favouring

repression; sublimation is a way out, a way by which those demands

can be met without involving repression.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2949

 

   It would not surprise us if we were to find a special psychical agency

which performs the task of seeing that narcissistic satisfaction from

the ego ideal is ensured and which, with this end in view, constantly

watches  the  actual  ego  and  measures  it  by  that  ideal.  If  such  an

agency does exist, we cannot possibly come upon it as a discovery -

we can only recognize  it;  for  we  may  reflect  that  what  we  call  our

‘conscience’  has  the  required  characteristics.  Recognition  of  this

agency  enables  us  to  understand  the  so-called  ‘delusions  of  being

noticed’ or more correctly, of being watched, which are such striking

symptoms in the paranoid diseases and which may also occur as an

isolated  form  of  illness,  or  intercalated  in  a  transference  neurosis.

Patients of this sort complain that all their thoughts are known and

their  actions  watched  and  supervised;  they  are  informed  of  the

functioning of this agency by voices which characteristically speak to

them in the third person (‘Now she’s thinking of that again’, ‘now he’s

going out’). This complaint is justified; it describes the truth. A power

of  this  kind,  watching,  discovering  and  criticizing  all  our  intentions,

does really exist. Indeed, it exists in every one of us in normal life.

   Delusions of being watched present this power in a regressive form,

thus revealing its genesis and the reason why the patient is in revoltagainst it. For what prompted the subject to form an ego ideal, on

whose behalf his conscience acts as watchman, arose from the critical

influence of his parents (conveyed to him by the medium of the voice),

to whom were added, as time went on, those who trained and taught

him and the innumerable and indefinable host of all the other people in

his environment - his fellow-men - and public opinion.

   In this way large amounts of libido of an essentially homosexual kind

are  drawn  into  the  formation  of  the  narcissistic  ego  ideal  and  find

outlet and satisfaction in maintaining it. The institution of conscience

was  at  bottom  an  embodiment,  first  of  parental  criticism,  and

subsequently of that of society - a process which is repeated in what

takes place when a tendency towards repression develops out of a

prohibition or obstacle that came in the first instance from without. The

voices,  as  well  as  the  undefined  multitude,  are  brought  into  the

foreground again by the disease, and so the evolution of conscience is

reproduced regressively. But the revolt against this ‘censoring agency’

arises out of the subject’s desire (in accordance with the fundamental

character of his illness) to liberate himself from all these influences,

beginning  with  the  parental  one,  and  out  of  his  withdrawal  of

homosexual libido from them. His conscience then confronts him in a

regressive form as a hostile influence from without.

   The complaints made by paranoics also show that at bottom the

self-criticism  of  conscience  coincides  with  the  self-observation  on

which it is based. Thus the activity of the mind which has taken over

the  function  of  conscience  has  also  placed  itself  at  the  service  of

internal research, which furnishes philosophy with the material for its

intellectual  operations.  This  may  have  some  bearing  on  the

characteristic  tendency  of  paranoics  to  construct  speculative

systems.¹

 

    ¹ I  should  like  to  add  to  this,  merely  by  way  of  suggestion,  that  the  developing  and

strengthening  of  this  observing  agency  might  contain  within  it  the  subsequent  genesis  of
(subjective) memory and the time-factor, the latter of which has no application to unconscious
processes.
 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2950 

   It will certainly be of importance to us if evidence of the activity of

this  critically  observing  agency  -  which  becomes  heightened  into

conscience and philosophic introspection - can be found in other fields

as  well.  I  will  mention  here  what  Herbert  Silberer  has  called  the

‘functional  phenomenon’,  one  of  the  few  indisputably  valuable

additions to the theory of dreams. Silberer, as we know, has shown

that in states between sleeping and waking we can directly observe

the  translation  of  thoughts  into  visual  images,  but  that  in  these

circumstances we frequently have a representation, not of a thought-

content, but of the actual state (willingness, fatigue, etc.) of the person

who  is  struggling  against  sleep.  Similarly,  he  has  shown  that  the

conclusions of some dreams or some divisions in their content merely

signify  the  dreamer’s  own  perception  of  his  sleeping  and  waking.

Silberer has thus demonstrated the part played by observation - in the

sense of the paranoic’s delusions of being watched - in the formation

of dreams. This part is not a constant one. Probably the reason why I

overlooked it is because it does not play any great part in my own

dreams; in persons who are gifted philosophically and accustomed to

introspection it may become very evident.

   We may here recall that we have found that the formation of dreams

takes  place  under  the  dominance  of  a  censorship  which  compels

distortion  of  the  dream-thoughts.  We  did  not,  however,  picture  this

censorship as a special power, but chose the term to designate one

side of the repressive trends that govern the ego, namely the side

which is turned towards the dream-thoughts. If we enter further into

the structure of the ego, we may recognize in the ego ideal and in the

dynamic utterances of conscience the dream-censor as well. If this

censor  is  to  some  extent  on  the  alert  even  during  sleep,  we  can

understand how it is that its suggested activity of self-observation and

self-criticism - with such thoughts as, ‘now he is too sleepy to think’,

‘now he is waking up’ - makes a contribution to the content of the

dream.¹

 

   ¹ I cannot here determine whether the differentiation of the censoring agency from the rest

of  the  ego  is  capable  of  forming  the  basis  of  the  philosophic  distinction  between
consciousness and self-consciousness.
                           On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2951

 

 

   At this point we may attempt some discussion of the self-regarding

attitude in normal people and in neurotics.

   In the first place self-regard appears to us to be an expression of the

size of the ego; what the various elements are which go to determine

that  size  is  irrelevant.  Everything  a  person  possesses  or  achieves,

every  remnant  of  the  primitive  feeling  of  omnipotence  which  his

experience has confirmed, helps to increase his self-regard.

   Applying our distinction between sexual and ego-instincts, we must

recognize  that  self-regard  has  a  specially  intimate  dependence  on

narcissistic libido. Here we are supported by two fundamental facts:

that in paraphrenics self-regard is increased, while in the transference

neuroses it is diminished; and that in love-relations not being loved

lowers the self-regarding feelings, while being loved raises them. As

we have indicated, the aim and the satisfaction in a narcissistic object-

choice is to be loved.

   Further, it is easy to observe that libidinal object-cathexis does not

raise self-regard. The effect of dependence upon the loved object is to

lower that feeling: a person in love is humble. A person who loves has,

so  to  speak,  forfeited  a  part  of  his  narcissism,  and  it  can  only  be

replaced by his being loved. In all these respects self-regard seems to

remain related to the narcissistic element in love.

      The  realization  of  impotence,  of  one’s  own  inability  to  love,  in

consequence  of  mental  or  physical  disorder,  has  an  exceedingly

lowering effect upon self-regard. Here, in my judgement, we must look

for  one  of  the  sources  of  the  feelings  of  inferiority  which  are

experienced by patients suffering from the transference neuroses and

which they are so ready to report. The main source of these feelings

is, however, the impoverishment of the ego, due to the extraordinarily

large libidinal cathexes which have been withdrawn from it - due, that

is to say, to the injury sustained by the ego through sexual trends

which are no longer subject to control.

                           On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2952

 

      Adler  is  right  in  maintaining  that  when  a  person  with  an  active

mental life recognizes an inferiority in one of his organs, it acts as a

spur  and  calls  out  a  higher  level  of  performance  in  him  through

overcompensation.  But  it  would  be  altogether  an  exaggeration  if,

following  Adler’s  example,  we  sought  to  attribute  every  successful

achievement to this factor of an original inferiority of an organ. Not all

artists  are  handicapped  with  bad  eyesight,  nor  were  all  orators

originally stammerers. And there are plenty of instances of excellent

achievements  springing  from superior  organic  endowment.  In  the

aetiology  of  neuroses  organic  inferiority  and  imperfect  development

play an insignificant part - much the same as that played by currently

active perceptual material in the formation of dreams. Neuroses make

use of such inferiorities as a pretext, just as they do of every other

suitable  factor.  We  may  be  tempted  to  believe  a  neurotic  woman

patient when she tells us that it was inevitable she should fall ill, since

she is ugly, deformed or lacking in charm, so that no one could love

her; but the very next neurotic will teach us better - for she persists in

her  neurosis  and  in  her  aversion  to  sexuality,  although  she  seems

more desirable, and is more desired, than the average woman. The

majority  of  hysterical  women  are  among  the  attractive  and  even

beautiful representatives of their sex, while, on the other hand, the

frequency  of  ugliness,  organic  defects  and  infirmities  in  the  lower

classes of society does not increase the incidence of neurotic illness

among them.

   The relations of self-regard to erotism - that is, to libidinal object-

cathexes  -  may  be  expressed  concisely  in  the  following  way.  Two

cases must be distinguished, according to whether the erotic cathexes

are ego-syntonic, or, on the contrary, have suffered repression. In the

former case (where the use made of the libido is ego-syntonic), love is

assessed like any other activity of the ego. Loving in itself, in so far as

it involves longing and deprivation, lowers self-regard; whereas being

loved, having one’s love returned, and possessing the loved object,

raises it once more. When libido is repressed, the erotic cathexis is felt

as a severe depletion of the ego, the satisfaction of love is impossible,and the re-enrichment of the ego can be effected only by a withdrawal

of libido from its objects. The return of the object-libido to the ego and

its transformation into narcissism represents, as it were, a happy love

once more; and, on the other hand, it is also true that a real happy

love  corresponds  to  the  primal  condition  in  which  object-libido  and

ego-libido cannot be distinguished.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2953

 

 

      The  importance  and  extensiveness  of  the  topic  must  be  my

justification  for  adding  a  few  more  remarks  which  are  somewhat

loosely strung together.

   The development of the ego consists in a departure from primary

narcissism and gives rise to a vigorous attempt to recover that state.

This departure is brought about by means of the displacement of libido

on to an ego ideal imposed from without; and satisfaction is brought

about from fulfilling this ideal.

   At the same time the ego has sent out the libidinal object-cathexes.

It becomes impoverished in favour of these cathexes, just as it does in

favour  of  the  ego  ideal,  and  it  enriches  itself  once  more  from  its

satisfactions  in  respect  of  the  object,  just  as  it  does  by  fulfilling  its

ideal.

      One  part  of  self-regard  is  primary  -  the  residue  of  infantile

narcissism;  another  part  arises  out  of  the  omnipotence  which  is

corroborated by experience (the fulfilment of the ego ideal), whilst a

third part proceeds from the satisfaction of object-libido.

   The ego ideal has imposed severe conditions upon the satisfaction

of libido through objects; for it causes some of them to be rejected by

means of its censor, as being incompatible. Where no such ideal has

been  formed,  the  sexual  trend  in  question  makes  its  appearance

unchanged in the personality in the form of a perversion. To be their

own ideal once more, in regard to sexual no less than other trends, as

they were in childhood - this is what people strive to attain as their

happiness.   Being in love consists in a flowing-over of ego-libido on to the object.

It has the power to remove repressions and re-instate perversions. It

exalts the sexual object into a sexual ideal. Since, with the object type

(or attachment type), being in love occurs in virtue of the fulfilment of

infantile  conditions  for  loving,  we  may  say  that  whatever  fulfils  that

condition is idealized.

 


                          On Narcissism: An Introduction

                                                                                      2954

 

   The sexual ideal may enter into an interesting auxiliary relation to

the  ego  ideal.  It  may  be  used  for  substitutive  satisfaction  where

narcissistic  satisfaction  encounters  real  hindrances.  In  that  case  a

person  will  love  in  conformity  with  the  narcissistic  type  of  object-

choice,  will  love  what  he  once  was  and  no  longer  is,  or  else  what

possesses  the  excellences  which  he  never  had  at  all  (cf.  (c)). The

formula parallel to the one there stated runs thus: what possesses the

excellence which the ego lacks for making it an ideal, is loved. This

expedient is of special importance for the neurotic, who, on account of

his  excessive  object-cathexes,  is  impoverished  in  his  ego  and  is

incapable  of  fulfilling  his  ego  ideal.  He  then  seeks  a  way  back  to

narcissism  from  his  prodigal  expenditure  of  libido  upon  objects,  by

choosing a sexual ideal after the narcissistic type which possesses the

excellences to which he cannot attain. This is the cure by love, which

he generally prefers to cure by analysis. Indeed, he cannot believe in

any other mechanism of cure; he usually brings expectations of this

sort with him to the treatment and directs them towards the person of

the  physician.  The  patient’s  incapacity  for  love,  resulting  from  his

extensive  repressions,  naturally  stands  in  the  way  of  a  therapeutic

plan  of  this  kind.  An  unintended  result  is  often  met  with  when,  by

means  of  the  treatment,  he  has  been  partially  freed  from  his

repressions: he withdraws from further treatment in order to choose a

love-object, leaving his cure to be continued by a life with someone he

loves. We might be satisfied with this result, if it did not bring with it all

the dangers of a crippling dependence upon his helper in need.

   The ego ideal opens up an important avenue for the understandingof group psychology. In addition to its individual side, this ideal has a

social side; it is also the common ideal of a family, a class or a nation.

It binds not only a person’s narcissistic libido, but also a considerable

amount of his homosexual libido, which is in this way turned back into

the ego. The want of satisfaction which arises from the non-fulfilment

of this ideal liberates homosexual libido, and this is transformed into a

sense of guilt (social anxiety). Originally this sense of guilt was a fear

of punishment by the parents, or, more correctly, the fear of losing

their love; later the parents are replaced by an indefinite number of

fellow-men.  The  frequent  causation  of  paranoia  by  an  injury  to  the

ego, by a frustration of satisfaction within the sphere of the ego ideal,

is thus made more intelligible, as is the convergence of ideal-formation

and  sublimation  in  the  ego  ideal,  as  well  as  the  involution  of

sublimations and the possible transformation of ideals in paraphrenic

disorders.

                                                                                       2955

 

                      INSTINCTS AND THEIR VICISSITUDES

                                        (1915)

 


                                                                                      2956

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2957

 

                      INSTINCTS AND THEIR VICISSITUDES

 

We have often heard it maintained that sciences should be built up on

clear and sharply defined basic concepts. In actual fact no science,

not  even  the  most  exact,  begins  with  such  definitions.  The  true

beginning of scientific activity consists rather in describing phenomena

and then in proceeding to group, classify and correlate them. Even at

the  stage  of  description  it  is  not  possible  to  avoid  applying  certain

abstract ideas to the material in hand, ideas derived from somewhere

or other but certainly not from the new observations alone. Such ideas

which  will  later  become  the  basic  concepts  of  the  science  are  still

more indispensable as the material is further worked over. They must

at first necessarily possess some degree of indefiniteness; there can

be no question of any clear delimitation of their content. So long as

they remain in this condition, we come to an understanding about their

meaning by making repeated references to the material of observation

from which they appear to have been derived, but upon which, in fact,

they  have  been  imposed.  Thus,  strictly  speaking,  they  are  in  the

nature  of  conventions  -  although  everything  depends  on  their  not

being  arbitrarily  chosen  but  determined  by  their  having  significant

relations to the empirical material, relations that we seem to sense

before we can clearly recognize and demonstrate them. It is only after

more thorough investigation of the field of observation that we are able

to formulate its basic scientific concepts with increased precision, andprogressively  so  to  modify  them  that  they  become  serviceable  and

consistent over a wide area. Then, indeed, the time may have come to

confine them in definitions. The advance of knowledge, however, does

not  tolerate  any  rigidity  even  in  definitions.  Physics  furnishes  an

excellent illustration of the way in which even ‘basic concepts’ that

have been established in the form of definitions are constantly being

altered in their content.

   A conventional basic concept of this kind, which at the moment is

still somewhat obscure but which is indispensable to us in psychology,

is that of an ‘instinct [Trieb]’  .  Let  us  try  to  give  a  content  to  it  by

approaching it from different angles.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2958

 

   First, from the angle of physiology. This has given us the concept of

a ‘stimulus’ and the pattern of the reflex arc, according to which a

stimulus applied to living tissue (nervous substance) from the outside

is discharged by action to the outside. This action is expedient in so

far as it withdraws the stimulated substance from the influence of the

stimulus, removes it out of its range of operation.

   What is the relation of ‘instinct’ to ‘stimulus’? There is nothing to

prevent our subsuming the concept of ‘instinct’ under that of ‘stimulus’

and saying that an instinct is a stimulus applied to the mind. But we

are immediately set on our guard against equating instinct and mental

stimulus. There are obviously other stimuli to the mind besides those

of an instinctual kind, stimuli which behave far more like physiological

ones. For example, when a strong light falls on the eye, it is not an

instinctual stimulus; it is one, however, when a dryness of the mucous

membrane of the pharynx or an irritation of the mucous membrane of

the stomach makes itself felt.¹

   We have now obtained the material necessary for distinguishing

between  instinctual  stimuli  and  other  (physiological)  stimuli  that

operate on the mind. In the first place, an instinctual stimulus does not

arise from the external world but from within the organism itself. For

this reason it operates differently upon the mind and different actionsare necessary in order to remove it. Further, all that is essential in a

stimulus is covered if we assume that it operates with a single impact,

so that it can be disposed of by a single expedient action. A typical

instance of this is motor flight from the source of stimulation. These

impacts may, of course, be repeated and summated, but that makes

no difference to our notion of the process and to the conditions for the

removal of the stimulus. An instinct, on the other hand, never operates

as a force giving a momentary impact but always as a constant one.

Moreover,  since  it  impinges  not  from  without  but  from  within  the

organism, no flight can avail against it. A better term for an instinctual

stimulus is a ‘need’. What does away with a need is ‘satisfaction’. This

can be attained only by an appropriate (‘adequate’) alteration of the

internal source of stimulation.

 

   ¹ Assuming, of course, that these internal processes are the organic basis of the respective

needs of thirst and hunger.
 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2959

 

      Let  us  imagine  ourselves  in  the  situation  of  an  almost  entirely

helpless living organism, as yet unorientated in the world, which is

receiving  stimuli  in  its  nervous  substance.  This  organism  will  very

soon be in a position to make a first distinction and a first orientation.

On the one hand, it will be aware of stimuli which can be avoided by

muscular action (flight); these it ascribes to an external world. On the

other hand, it will also be aware of stimuli against which such action is

of no avail and whose character of constant pressure persists in spite

of it; these stimuli are the signs of an internal world, the evidence of

instinctual needs. The perceptual substance of the living organism will

thus  have  found  in  the  efficacy  of  its  muscular  activity  a  basis  for

distinguishing between an ‘outside’ and an ‘inside’.

   We thus arrive at the essential nature of instincts in the first place by

considering  their  main  characteristics  -  their  origin  in  sources  of

stimulation within the organism and their appearance as a constant

force - and from this we deduce one of their further features, namely,

that  no  actions  of  flight  avail  against  them.  In  the  course  of  thisdiscussion, however, we cannot fail to be struck by something that

obliges us to make a further admission. In order to guide us in dealing

with the field of psychological phenomena, we do not merely apply

certain conventions to our empirical material as basic concepts; we

also  make  use  of  a  number  of  complicated postulates.  We  have

already alluded to the most important of these, and all we need now

do is to state it expressly. This postulate is of a biological nature, and

makes use of the concept of ‘purpose’ (or perhaps of expediency) and

runs as follows: the nervous system is an apparatus which has the

function of getting rid of the stimuli that reach it, or of reducing them to

the lowest possible level; or which, if it were feasible, would maintain

itself in an altogether unstimulated condition. Let us for the present not

take exception to the indefiniteness of this idea and let us assign to

the nervous system the task - speaking in general terms - of mastering

stimuli.  We  then  see  how  greatly  the  simple  pattern  of  the

physiological  reflex  is  complicated  by  the  introduction  of  instincts.

External stimuli impose only the single task of withdrawing from them;

this is accomplished by muscular movements, one of which eventually

achieves  that  aim  and  thereafter,  being  the  expedient  movement,

becomes a hereditary disposition. Instinctual stimuli, which originate

from  within  the  organism,  cannot  be  dealt  with  by  this  mechanism.

Thus  they  make  far  higher  demands  on  the  nervous  system  and

cause it to undertake involved and interconnected activities by which

the  external  world  is  so  changed  as  to  afford  satisfaction  to  the

internal  source  of  stimulation.  Above  all,  they  oblige  the  nervous

system to renounce its ideal intention of keeping off stimuli, for they

maintain an incessant and unavoidable afflux of stimulation. We may

therefore well conclude that instincts and not external stimuli are the

true  motive  forces  behind  the  advances  that  have  led  the  nervous

system,  with  its  unlimited  capacities,  to  its  present  high  level  of

development. There is naturally nothing to prevent our supposing that

the instincts themselves are, at least in part, precipitates of the effects

of  external  stimulation,  which  in  the  course  of  phylogenesis  have

brought about modifications in the living substance.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes                                                                                      2960

 

      When  we  further  find  that  the  activity  of  even  the  most  highly

developed mental apparatus is subject to the pleasure principle, i. e. is

automatically  regulated  by  feelings  belonging  to  the  pleasure-

unpleasure  series,  we  can  hardly  reject  the  further  hypothesis  that

these feelings reflect the manner in which the process of mastering

stimuli takes place - certainly in the sense that unpleasurable feelings

are  connected  with  an  increase  and  pleasurable  feelings  with  a

decrease  of  stimulus.  We  will,  however,  carefully  preserve  this

assumption in its present highly indefinite form, until we succeed, if

that is possible, in discovering what sort of relation exists between

pleasure  and  unpleasure,  on  the  one  hand,  and  fluctuations  in  the

amounts of stimulus affecting mental life, on the other. It is certain that

many very various relations of this kind, and not very simple ones, are

possible.

   If now we apply ourselves to considering mental life from a biological

point of view, an ‘instinct’ appears to us as a concept on the frontier

between the mental and the somatic, as the psychical representative

of the stimuli originating from within the organism and reaching the

mind, as a measure of the demand made upon the mind for work in

consequence of its connection with the body.

 

   We are now in a position to discuss certain terms which are used in

reference to the concept of an instinct - for example, its ‘pressure’, its

‘aim’, its ‘object’ and its ‘source’.

      By  the  pressure  [Drang]  of  an  instinct  we  understand  its  motor

factor, the amount of force or the measure of the demand for work

which  it  represents.  The  characteristic  of  exercising  pressure  is

common to all instincts; it is in fact their very essence. Every instinct is

a piece of activity; if we speak loosely of passive instincts, we can only

mean instincts whose aim is passive.

   The aim [Ziel] of an instinct is in every instance satisfaction, which

can  only  be  obtained  by  removing  the  state  of  stimulation  at  the

source of the instinct. But although the ultimate aim of each instinct

remains unchangeable, there may yet be different paths leading to the

same ultimate aim; so that an instinct may be found to have variousnearer or intermediate aims, which are combined or interchanged with

one another. Experience permits us also to speak of instincts which

are ‘inhibited in their aim’, in the case of processes which are allowed

to make some advance towards instinctual satisfaction but are then

inhibited or deflected. We may suppose that even processes of this

kind involve a partial satisfaction.

   The object [Objekt] of an instinct is the thing in regard to which or

through which the instinct is able to achieve its aim. It is what is most

variable about an instinct and is not originally connected with it, but

becomes assigned to it only in consequence of being peculiarly fitted

to make satisfaction possible. The object is not necessarily something

extraneous: it may equally well be a part of the subject’s own body. It

may be changed any number of times in the course of the vicissitudes

which the instinct undergoes during its existence; and highly important

parts are played by this displacement of instinct. It may happen that

the  same  object  serves  for  the  satisfaction  of  several  instincts

simultaneously, a phenomenon which Adler has called a ‘confluence’

of instincts [Triebverschränkung]’. A particularly close attachment of

the  instinct  to  its  object  is  distinguished  by  the  term  ‘fixation’.  This

frequently  occurs  at  very  early  periods  of  the  development  of  an

instinct and puts an end to its mobility through its intense opposition to

detachment.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2961

 

   By the source [Quelle] of an instinct is meant the somatic process

which occurs in an organ or part of the body and whose stimulus is

represented in mental life by an instinct. We do not know whether this

process  is  invariably  of  a  chemical  nature  or  whether  it  may  also

correspond to the release of other, e.g. mechanical, forces. The study

of  the  sources  of  instincts  lies  outside  the  scope  of  psychology.

Although instincts are wholly determined by their origin in a somatic

source,  in  mental  life  we  know  them  only  by  their  aims.  An  exact

knowledge of the sources of an instinct is not invariably necessary for

purposes of psychological investigation; sometimes its source may beinferred from its aim.

   Are we to suppose that the different instincts which originate in the

body  and  operate  on  the  mind  are  also  distinguished  by  different

qualities,  and  that  that  is  why  they  behave  in  qualitatively  different

ways in mental life? This supposition does not seem to be justified; we

are much more likely to find the simpler assumption sufficient - that

the instincts are all qualitatively alike and owe the effect they make

only to the amount of excitation they carry, or perhaps, in addition, to

certain functions of that quantity. What distinguishes from one another

the mental effects produced by the various instincts may be traced to

the  difference  in  their  sources.  In  any  event,  it  is  only  in  a  later

connection that we shall be able to make plain what the problem of the

quality of instincts signifies.

 

   What instincts should we suppose there are, and how many? There

is obviously a wide opportunity here for arbitrary choice. No objection

can be made to anyone’s employing the concept of an instinct of play

or  of  destruction  or  of  gregariousness,  when  the  subject-matter

demands it and the limitations of psychological analysis allow of it.

Nevertheless,  we  should  not  neglect  to  ask  ourselves  whether

instinctual motives like these, which are so highly specialized on the

one hand, do not admit of further dissection in accordance with the

sources  of  the  instinct,  so  that  only  primal  instincts  -  those  which

cannot be further dissected - can lay claim to importance.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2962

 

   I have proposed that two groups of such primal instincts should be

distinguished: the ego, or self-preservative, instincts and the sexual

instincts.  But  this  supposition  has  not  the  status  of  a  necessary

postulate, as has, for instance, our assumption about the biological

purpose  of  the  mental  apparatus  (p. 2960);  it  is  merely  a  working

hypothesis, to be retained only so long as it proves useful, and it will

make  little  difference  to  the  results  of  our  work  of  description  and

classification  if  it  is  replaced  by  another.  The  occasion  for  thishypothesis arose in the course of the evolution of psycho-analysis,

which  was  first  employed  upon  the  psychoneuroses,  or,  more

precisely,  upon  the  group  described  as  ‘transference  neuroses’

(hysteria and obsessional neurosis); these showed that at the root of

all such affections there is to be found a conflict between the claims of

sexuality and those of the ego. It is always possible that an exhaustive

study  of  the  other  neurotic  affections  (especially  of  the  narcissistic

psychoneuroses,  the  schizophrenias)  may  oblige  us  to  alter  this

formula and to make a different classification of the primal instincts.

But for the present we do not know of any such formula, nor have we

met with any argument unfavourable to drawing this contrast between

sexual and ego-instincts.

      I  am  altogether  doubtful  whether  any  decisive  pointers  for  the

differentiation and classification of the instincts can be arrived at on

the  basis  of  working  over  the  psychological  material.  This  working-

over seems rather itself to call for the application to the material of

definite  assumptions  concerning  instinctual  life,  and  it  would  be  a

desirable thing if those assumptions could be taken from some other

branch of knowledge and carried over to psychology. The contribution

which biology has to make here certainly does not run counter to the

distinction  between  sexual  and  ego-instincts.  Biology  teaches  that

sexuality is not to be put on a par with other functions of the individual;

for its purposes go beyond the individual and have as their content the

production of new individuals - that is, the preservation of the species.

It shows, further, that two views, seemingly equally well-founded, may

be taken of the relation between the ego and sexuality. On the one

view,  the  individual  is  the  principal  thing,  sexuality  is  one  of  its

activities and sexual satisfaction one of its needs; while on the other

view  the  individual  is  a  temporary  and  transient  appendage  to  the

quasi-immortal germ-plasm, which is entrusted to him by the process

of  generation.  The  hypothesis  that  the  sexual  function  differs  from

other bodily processes in virtue of a special chemistry is, I understand,

also a postulate of the Ehrlich school of biological research.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2963 

 

   Since a study of instinctual life from the direction of consciousness

presents  almost  insuperable  difficulties,  the  principal  source  of  our

knowledge  remains  the  psycho-analytic  investigation  of  mental

disturbances.  Psycho-analysis,  however,  in  consequence  of  the

course taken by its development, has hitherto been able to give us

information  of  a  fairly  satisfactory  nature  only  about  the sexual

instincts; for it is precisely that group which alone can be observed in

isolation,  as  it  were,  in  the  psychoneuroses.  With  the  extension  of

psycho-analysis to the other neurotic affections, we shall no doubt find

a basis for our knowledge of the ego-instincts as well, though it would

be rash to expect equally favourable conditions for observation in this

further field of research.

   This much can be said by way of a general characterization of the

sexual instincts. They are numerous, emanate from a great variety of

organic sources, act in the first instance independently of one another

and only achieve a more or less complete synthesis at a late stage.

The aim which each of them strives for is the attainment of ‘organ-

pleasure’; only when synthesis is achieved do they enter the service of

the  reproductive  function  and  thereupon  become  generally

recognizable  as  sexual  instincts.  At  their  first  appearance  they  are

attached  to  the  instincts  of  self-preservation,  from  which  they  only

gradually become separated; in their choice of object, too, they follow

the paths that are indicated to them by the ego-instincts. A portion of

them  remains  associated  with  the  ego-instincts  throughout  life  and

furnishes them with libidinal components, which in normal functioning

easily  escape  notice  and  are  revealed  clearly  only  by  the  onset  of

illness.  They  are  distinguished  by  possessing  the  capacity  to  act

vicariously  for  one  another  to  a  wide  extent  and  by  being  able  to

change their objects readily. In consequence of the latter properties

they are capable of functions which are far removed from their original

purposive actions - capable, that is, of ‘sublimation’.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2964 

   Our inquiry into the various vicissitudes which instincts undergo in

the process of development and in the course of life must be confined

to the sexual instincts, which are the more familiar to us. Observation

shows us that an instinct may undergo the following vicissitudes:-

 

   Reversal into its opposite.

   Turning round upon the subject’s own self.

   Repression.

   Sublimation.

 

Since I do not intend to treat of sublimation here and since repression

requires a special chapter to itself, it only remains for us to describe

and discuss the two first points. Bearing in mind that there are motive

forces  which  work  against  an  instinct’s  being  carried  through  in  an

unmodified form, we may also regard these vicissitudes as modes of

defence against the instincts.

      Reversal  of  an  instinct  into  its  opposite  resolves  on  closer

examination  into  two  different  processes:  a  change  from  activity  to

passivity,  and  a  reversal  of  its  content.  The  two  processes,  being

different in their nature, must be treated separately.

 

      Examples  of  the  first  process  are  met  with  in  the  two  pairs  of

opposites:  sadism-masochism  and  scopophilia-exhibitionism.  The

reversal  affects  only  the aims  of  the  instincts.  The  active  aim  (to

torture, to look at) is replaced by the passive aim (to be tortured, to be

looked at). Reversal of content is found in the single instance of the

transformation of love into hate.

   The turning round of an instinct upon the subject’s own self is made

plausible by the reflection that masochism is actually sadism turned

round  upon  the  subject’s  own  ego,  and  that  exhibitionism  includes

looking at his own body. Analytic observation, indeed, leaves us in no

doubt that the masochist shares in the enjoyment of the assault upon

himself,  and  that  the  exhibitionist  shares  in  the  enjoyment  of  his

exposure.  The  essence  of  the  process  is  thus  the  change  of  the

object, while the aim remains unchanged. We cannot fail to notice,

however, that in these examples the turning round upon the subject’sself  and  the  transformation  from  activity  to  passivity  converge  or

coincide.

   To elucidate the situation, a more thorough investigation is essential.

   In the case of the pair of opposites sadism-masochism, the process

may be represented as follows:

   (a) Sadism consists in the exercise of violence or power upon some

other person as object.

   (b)  This object is given up and replaced by the subject’s self. With

the turning round upon the self the change from an active to a passive

instinctual aim is also effected.

      (c)  An  extraneous  person  is  once  more  sought  as  object;  this

person, in consequence of the alteration which has taken place in the

instinctual aim, has to take over the role of the subject.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2965

 

      Case  (c)  is  what  is  commonly  termed  masochism.  Here,  too,

satisfaction follows along the path of the original sadism, the passive

ego placing itself back in phantasy in its first role, which has now in

fact  been  taken  over  by  the  extraneous  subject.  Whether  there  is,

besides this, a more direct masochistic satisfaction is highly doubtful.

A primary masochism, not derived from sadism in the manner I have

described, seems not to be met with.¹ That it is not superfluous to

assume the existence of stage (b) is to be seen from the behaviour of

the sadistic instinct in obsessional neurosis. There there is a turning

round upon the subject’s self without an attitude of passivity towards

another  person:  the  change  has  only  got  as  far  as  stage  (b).  The

desire to torture has turned into self-torture and self-punishment, not

into masochism. The active voice is changed, not into the passive, but

into the reflexive, middle voice.

   Our view of sadism is further prejudiced by the circumstance that

this  instinct,  side  by  side  with  its  general  aim  (or  perhaps,  rather,

within  it),  seems  to  strive  towards  the  accomplishment  of  a  quite

special aim - not only to humiliate and master, but, in addition, to inflict

pains. Psycho-analysis would appear to show that the infliction of painplays no part among the original purposive actions of the instinct. A

sadistic child takes no account of whether or not he inflicts pains, nor

does  he  intend  to  do  so.  But  when  once  the  transformation  into

masochism has taken place, the pains are very well fitted to provide a

passive  masochistic  aim;  for  we  have  every  reason  to  believe  that

sensations of pain, like other unpleasurable sensations, trench upon

sexual excitation and produce a pleasurable condition, for the sake of

which the subject will even willingly experience the unpleasure of pain.

When once feeling pains has become a masochistic aim, the sadistic

aim of causing pains can arise also, retrogressively; for while these

pains  are  being  inflicted  on  other  people,  they  are  enjoyed

masochistically by the subject through his identification of himself with

the suffering object. In both cases, of course, it is not the pain itself

which is enjoyed, but the accompanying sexual excitation - so that this

can be done especially conveniently from the sadistic position. The

enjoyment  of  pain  would  thus  be  an  aim  which  was  originally

masochistic,  but  which  can  only  become  an  instinctual  aim  in

someone who was originally sadistic.

 

   ¹ (Footnote added 1924:) In later works (cf. ‘The Economic Problem of Masochism’, 1924c)

relating to problems of instinctual life I have expressed an opposite view.
 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2966

 

   For the sake of completeness I may add that feelings of pity cannot

be described as a result of a transformation of instinct occurring in

sadism, but necessitate the notion of a reaction-formation against that

instinct. (For the difference, see later.)

      Rather  different  and  simpler  findings  are  afforded  by  the

investigation  of  another  pair  of  opposites  -  the  instincts  whose

respective  aim  is  to  look  and  to  display  oneself  (scopophilia  and

exhibitionism, in the language of the perversions). Here again we may

postulate the same stages as in the previous instance:- (a) Looking as

an activity directed towards an extraneous object. (b) Giving up of the

object  and  turning  of  the  scopophilic  instinct  towards  a  part  of  the

subject’s own body; with this, transformation to passivity and settingup of a new aim - that of being looked at. (c) Introduction of a new

subject to whom one displays oneself in order to be looked at by him.

Here, too, it can hardly be doubted that the active aim appears before

the passive, that looking precedes being looked at. But there is an

important divergence from what happens in the case of sadism, in that

we can recognize in the case of the scopophilic instinct a yet earlier

stage than that described as (a). For the beginning of its activity the

scopophilic  instinct  is  auto-erotic:  it  has  indeed  an  object,  but  that

object is part of the subject’s own body. It is only later that the instinct

is  led,  by  a  process  of  comparison,  to  exchange  this  object  for  an

analogous part of someone else’s body - stage (a ). This preliminary

stage  is  interesting  because  it  is  the  source  of both  the  situations

represented in the resulting pair of opposites, the one or the other

according to which element in the original situation is changed. The

following  might  serve  as  a  diagrammatic  picture  of  the  scopophilic

instinct:-

 

(á) Oneself looking at a           =       A sexual organ being looked

         sexual organ                               at by oneself

                                                                       |

(â) Oneself looking at an          (ã) An object which is oneself

        extraneous object                      or part of oneself being looked

        (active scopophilia)                   at by an extraneous person

                                                                 (exhibitionism) 

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2967

 

   A preliminary stage of this kind is absent in sadism, which from the

outset is directed upon an extraneous object, although it might not be

altogether unreasonable to construct such a stage out of the child’s

efforts to gain control over his own limbs.¹

      With  regard  to  both  the  instincts  which  we  have  just  taken  as

examples,  it  should  be  remarked  that  their  transformation  by  a

reversal  from  activity  to  passivity  and  by  a  turning  round  upon  the

subject  never  in  fact  involves  the  whole  quota  of  the  instinctualimpulse. The earlier active direction of the instinct persists to some

degree side by side with its later passive direction, even when the

process  of  its  transformation  has  been  very  extensive.  The  only

correct statement to make about the scopophilic instinct would be that

all the stages of its development, its auto-erotic, preliminary stage as

well as its final active or passive form, co-exist alongside one another;

and the truth of this becomes obvious if we base our opinion, not on

the actions to which the instinct leads, but on the mechanism of its

satisfaction. Perhaps, however, it is permissible to look at the matter

and represent it in yet another way. We can divide the life of each

instinct into a series of separate successive waves, each of which is

homogeneous during whatever period of time it may last, and whose

relation to one another is comparable to that of successive eruptions

of lava. We can then perhaps picture the first, original eruption of the

instinct  as  proceeding  in  an  unchanged  form  and  undergoing  no

development at all. The next wave would be modified from the outset -

(being turned, for instance, from active to passive - and would then,

with this new characteristic, be added to the earlier wave, and so on. If

we  were  then  to  take  a  survey  of  the  instinctual  impulse  from  its

beginning up to a given point, the succession of waves which we have

described  would  inevitably  present  the  picture  of  a  definite

development of the instinct.

 

   ¹ (Footnote added 1924:) Cf.  p. 2965 n.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2968

 

   The fact that, at this later period of development of an instinctual

impulse,  its  (passive)  opposite  may  be  observed  alongside  of  it

deserves to be marked by the very apt term introduced by Bleuler -

‘ambivalence’.

      This  reference  to  the  developmental  history  of  instincts  and  the

permanence  of  their  intermediate  stages  should  make  the

development of instincts fairly intelligible to us. Experience shows that

the  amount  of  demonstrable  ambivalence  varies  greatly  between

individuals,  groups  and  races.  Marked  instinctual  ambivalence  in  ahuman being living at the present day may be regarded as an archaic

inheritance, for we have reason to suppose that the part played in

instinctual  life  by  the  active  impulses  in  their  unmodified  form  was

greater in primaeval times than it is on an average to-day.

      We  have  become  accustomed  to  call  the  early  phase  of  the

development of the ego, during which its sexual instincts find auto-

erotic  satisfaction,  ‘narcissism’,  without  at  once  entering  on  any

discussion  of  the  relation  between  auto-erotism  and  narcissism.  It

follows that the preliminary stage of the scopophilic instinct, in which

the  subject’s  own  body  is  the  object  of  the  scopophilia,  must  be

classed  under  narcissism,  and  that  we  must  describe  it  as  a

narcissistic  formation.  The  active  scopophilic  instinct  develops  from

this, by leaving narcissism behind. The passive scopophilic instinct, on

the  contrary,  holds  fast  to  the  narcissistic  object.  Similarly,  the

transformation  of  sadism  into  masochism  implies  a  return  to  the

narcissistic object. And in both these cases the narcissistic subject is,

through identification, replaced by another, extraneous ego. If we take

into account our constructed preliminary narcissistic stage of sadism,

we shall be approaching a more general realization - namely, that the

instinctual  vicissitudes  which  consist  in  the  instinct’s  being  turned

round  upon  the  subject’s  own  ego  and  undergoing  reversal  from

activity to passivity are dependent on the narcissistic organization of

the ego and bear the stamp of that phase. They perhaps correspond

to the attempts at defence which at higher stages of the development

of the ego are effected by other means.

   At this point we may call to mind that so far we have considered only

two  pairs  of  opposite  instincts:  sadism-masochism  and  scopophilia-

exhibitionism. These are the best known sexual instincts that appear

in an ambivalent manner. The other components of the later sexual

function are not yet sufficiently accessible to analysis for us to be able

to discuss them in a similar way. In general we can assert of them that

their activities are auto-erotic; that is to say, their object is negligible in

comparison  with  the  organ  which  is  their  source,  and  as  a  rule

coincides  with  that  organ.  The  object  of  the  scopophilic  instinct,

however, though it too is in the first instance a part of the subject’s

own  body,  is  not  the  eye  itself;  and  in  sadism  the  organic  source,

which is probably the muscular apparatus with its capacity for action,points unequivocally at an object other than itself, even though that

object is part of the subject’s own body. In the auto-erotic instincts, the

part played by the organic source is so decisive that, according to a

plausible suggestion of Federn (1913) and Jekels (1913), the form and

function  of  the  organ  determine  the  activity  or  passivity  of  the

instinctual aim.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2969

 

 

   The change of the content of an instinct into its opposite is observed

in a single instance only - the transformation of love into hate. Since it

is  particularly  common  to  find  both  these  directed  simultaneously

towards  the  same  object,  their  co-existence  furnishes  the  most

important example of ambivalence of feeling.

      The  case  of  love  and  hate  acquires  a  special  interest  from  the

circumstance  that  it  refuses  to  be  fitted  into  our  scheme  of  the

instincts.  It  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  there  is  the  most  intimate

relation between these two opposite feelings and sexual life, but we

are naturally unwilling to think of love as being some kind of special

component instinct of sexuality in the same way as the others we have

been discussing. We should prefer to regard loving as the expression

of the whole sexual current of feeling; but this idea does not clear up

our  difficulties,  and  we  cannot  see  what  meaning  to  attach  to  an

opposite content of this current.

   Loving admits not merely of one, but of three opposites. In addition

to the antithesis ‘loving-hating’, there is the other one of ‘loving-being

loved’; and, in addition to these, loving and hating taken together are

the opposite of the condition of unconcern or indifference. The second

of these three antitheses, loving-being loved, corresponds exactly to

the transformation from activity to passivity and may be traced to an

underlying situation in the same way as in the case of the scopophilic

instinct. This situation is that of loving oneself which we regard as the

characteristic feature of narcissism. Then, according as the object or

the  subject  is  replaced  by  an  extraneous  one,  what  results  is  theactive  aim  of  loving  or  the  passive  one  of  being  loved  -  the  latter

remaining near to narcissism.

   Perhaps we shall come to a better understanding of the several

opposites  of  loving  if  we  reflect  that  our  mental  life  as  a  whole  is

governed by three polarities, the antitheses

   Subject (ego) - Object (external world),

   Pleasure - Unpleasure, and

   Active - Passive.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2970

 

   The antithesis ego - non-ego (external), i. e. subject-object, is, as we

have  already  said,  thrust  upon  the  individual  organism  at  an  early

stage, by the experience that it can silence external stimuli by means

of muscular action but is defenceless against instinctual stimuli. This

antithesis remains, above all, sovereign in our intellectual activity and

creates for research the basic situation which no efforts can alter. The

polarity  of  pleasure-unpleasure  is  attached  to  a  scale  of  feelings,

whose paramount importance in determining our actions (our will) has

already been emphasized. The antithesis active-passive must not be

confused with the antithesis ego-subject - external world-object. The

relation  of  the  ego  to  the  external  world  is  passive  in  so  far  as  it

receives stimuli from it and active when it reacts to these. It is forced

by  its  instincts  into  a  quite  special  degree  of  activity  towards  the

external world, so that we might bring out the essential point if we say

that the ego-subject is passive in respect of external stimuli but active

through its own instincts. The antithesis active-passive coalesces later

with  the  antithesis  masculine-feminine,  which,  until  this  has  taken

place,  has  no  psychological  meaning.  The  coupling  of  activity  with

masculinity  and  of  passivity  with  femininity  meets  us,  indeed,  as  a

biological  fact;  but  it  is  by  no  means  so  invariably  complete  and

exclusive as we are inclined to assume.

   The three polarities of the mind are connected with one another in

various highly significant ways. There is a primal psychical situation in

which two of them coincide. Originally, at the very beginning of mentallife, the ego is cathected with instincts and is to some extent capable

of satisfying them on itself. We call this condition ‘narcissism’ and this

way  of  obtaining  satisfaction  ‘auto-erotic’.¹  At  this  time  the  external

world  is  not  cathected  with  interest  (in  a  general  sense)  and  is

indifferent for purposes of satisfaction. During this period, therefore,

the ego-subject coincides with what is pleasurable and the external

world with what is indifferent (or possibly unpleasurable, as being a

source  of  stimulation).  If  for  the  moment  we  define  loving  as  the

relation of the ego to its sources of pleasure, the situation in which the

ego loves itself only and is indifferent to the external world illustrates

the first of the opposites which we found to ‘loving’.

 

   ¹ Some of the sexual instincts are, as we know, capable of this auto-erotic satisfaction, and

so are adapted to being the vehicle for the development under the dominance of the pleasure
principle which we are about to describe. Those sexual instincts which from the outset require
an  object,  and  the  needs  of  the  ego-instincts,  which  are  never  capable  of  auto-erotic
satisfaction, naturally disturb this state and so pave the way for an advance from it. Indeed,
the primal narcissistic state would not be able to follow the development if it were not for the
fact that every individual passes through a period during which he is helpless and has to be
looked after and during which his pressing needs are satisfied by an external agency and are
thus prevented from becoming greater.
 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2971

 

   In so far as the ego is auto-erotic, it has no need of the external

world, but, in consequence of experiences undergone by the instincts

of self-preservation, it acquires objects from that world, and, in spite of

everything, it cannot avoid feeling internal instinctual stimuli for a time

as unpleasurable. Under the dominance of the pleasure principle a

further  development  now  takes  place  in  the  ego.  In  so  far  as  the

objects  which  are  presented  to  it  are  sources  of  pleasure,  it  takes

them into itself, ‘introjects’ them (to use Ferenczi’s term); and, on the

other  hand,  it  expels  whatever  within  itself  becomes  a  cause  of

unpleasure. (See below, the mechanism of projection.)

      Thus  the  original  ‘reality-ego’,  which  distinguished  internal  and

external  by  means  of  a  sound  objective  criterion,  changes  into  a

purified  ‘pleasure-ego’,  which  places  the  characteristic  of  pleasure

above all others. For the pleasure-ego the external world is dividedinto a part that is pleasurable, which it has incorporated into itself, and

a remainder that is extraneous to it. It has separated off a part of its

own self, which it projects into the external world and feels as hostile.

After this new arrangement, the two polarities coincide once more: the

ego-subject  coincides  with  pleasure,  and  the  external  world  with

unpleasure (with what was earlier indifference).

   When, during the stage of primary narcissism, the object makes its

appearance, the second opposite to loving, namely hating, also attains

its development.

   As we have seen, the object is brought to the ego from the external

world in the first instance by the instincts of self-preservation; and it

cannot be denied that hating, too, originally characterized the relation

of the ego to the alien external world with the stimuli it introduces.

Indifference falls into place as a special case of hate or dislike, after

having  first  appeared  as  their  forerunner.  At  the  very  beginning,  it

seems, the external world, objects, and what is hated are identical. If

later on an object turns out to be a source of pleasure, it is loved, but it

is also incorporated into the ego; so that for the purified pleasure-ego

once again objects coincide with what is extraneous and hated.

   Now, however, we may note that just as the pair of opposites love-

indifference  reflects  the  polarity  ego-external  world,  so  the  second

antithesis  love-hate  reproduces  the  polarity  pleasure-unpleasure,

which is linked to the first polarity. When the purely narcissistic stage

has given place to the object-stage, pleasure and unpleasure signify

relations of the ego to the object. If the object becomes a source of

pleasurable feelings, a motor urge is set up which seeks to bring the

object closer to the ego and to incorporate it into the ego. We then

speak of the ‘attraction’ exercised by the pleasure-giving object, and

say that we ‘love’ that object. Conversely, if the object is a source of

unpleasurable feelings, there is an urge which endeavours to increase

the distance between the object and the ego and to repeat in relation

to the object the original attempt at flight from the external world with

its emission of stimuli. We feel the ‘repulsion’ of the object, and hate it;

this hate can afterwards be intensified to the point of an aggressive

inclination against the object - an intention to destroy it.

                             Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2972

 

   We might at a pinch say of an instinct that it ‘loves’ the objects

towards which it strives for purposes of satisfaction; but to say that an

instinct ‘hates’ an object strikes us as odd. Thus we become aware

that  the  attitudes  of  love  and  hate  cannot  be  made  use  of  for  the

relations of instincts to their objects, but are reserved for the relations

of the total ego to objects. But if we consider linguistic usage, which is

certainly not without significance, we shall see that there is a further

limitation to the meaning of love and hate. We do not say of objects

which serve the interests of self-preservation that we love them; we

emphasize  the  fact  that  we need  them,  and  perhaps  express  an

additional, different kind of relation to them by using words that denote

a much reduced degree of love - such as, for example, ‘being fond of’,

‘liking’ or ‘finding agreeable’.

   Thus the word ‘to love’ moves further and further into the sphere of

the pure pleasure-relation of the ego to the object and finally becomes

fixed  to  sexual  objects  in  the  narrower  sense  and  to  those  which

satisfy  the  needs  of  sublimated  sexual  instincts.  The  distinction

between  the  ego-instincts  and  the  sexual  instincts  which  we  have

imposed upon our psychology is thus seen to be in conformity with the

spirit of our language. The fact that we are not in the habit of saying of

a single sexual instinct that it loves its object, but regard the relation of

the ego to its sexual object as the most appropriate case in which to

employ the word ‘love’ - this fact teaches us that the word can only

begin to be applied in this relation after there has been a synthesis of

all  the  component  instincts  of  sexuality  under  the  primacy  of  the

genitals and in the service of the reproductive function.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2973

 

   It is noteworthy that in the use of the word ‘hate’ no such intimate

connection with sexual pleasure and the sexual function appears. The

relation of unpleasure seems to be the sole decisive one. The ego

hates, abhors and pursues with intent to destroy all objects which area source of unpleasurable feeling for it, without taking into account

whether  they  mean  a  frustration  of  sexual  satisfaction  or  of  the

satisfaction of self-preservative needs. Indeed, it may be asserted that

the true prototypes of the relation of hate are derived not from sexual

life, but from the ego’s struggle to preserve and maintain itself.

   So we see that love and hate, which present themselves to us as

complete opposites in their content, do not after all stand in any simple

relation to each other. They did not arise from the cleavage of any

originally common entity, but sprang from different sources, and had

each  its  own  development  before  the  influence  of  the  pleasure-

unpleasure relation made them into opposites.

   It now remains for us to put together what we know of the genesis of

love and hate. Love is derived from the capacity of the ego to satisfy

some  of  its  instinctual  impulses  auto-erotically  by  obtaining  organ-

pleasure. It is originally narcissistic, then passes over on to objects,

which have been incorporated into the extended ego, and expresses

the  motor  efforts  of  the  ego  towards  these  objects  as  sources  of

pleasure.  It  becomes  intimately  linked  with  the  activity  of  the  later

sexual instincts and, when these have been completely synthesized,

coincides with the sexual impulsion as a whole. Preliminary stages of

love emerge as provisional sexual aims while the sexual instincts are

passing through their complicated development. As the first of these

aims we recognize the phase of incorporating or devouring - a type of

love  which  is  consistent  with  abolishing  the  object’s  separate

existence and which may therefore be described as ambivalent. At the

higher stage of the pregenital sadistic-anal organization, the striving

for the object appears in the form of an urge for mastery, to which

injury or annihilation of the object is a matter of indifference. Love in

this form and at this preliminary stage is hardly to be distinguished

from  hate  in  its  attitude  towards  the  object.  Not  until  the  genital

organization is established does love become the opposite of hate.

 


                            Instincts And Their Vicissitudes

                                                                                      2974

 

   Hate, as a relation to objects, is older than love. It derives from thenarcissistic ego’s primordial repudiation of the external world with its

outpouring of stimuli. As an expression of the reaction of unpleasure

evoked by objects, it always remains in an intimate relation with the

self-preservative instincts; so that sexual and ego-instincts can readily

develop an antithesis which repeats that of love and hate. When the

ego-instincts dominate the sexual function, as is the case at the stage

of the sadistic-anal organization, they impart the qualities of hate to

the instinctual aim as well.

   The history of the origins and relations of love makes us understand

how it is that love so frequently manifests itself as ‘ambivalent’ - i.e. as

accompanied by impulses of hate against the same object. The hate

which is admixed with the love is in part derived from the preliminary

stages of loving which have not been wholly surmounted; it is also in

part based on reactions of repudiation by the ego-instincts, which, in

view of the frequent conflicts between the interests of the ego and

those of love, can find grounds in real and contemporary motives. In

both cases, therefore, the admixed hate has as its source the self-

preservative instincts. If a love-relation with a given object is broken

off,  hate  not  infrequently  emerges  in  its  place,  so  that  we  get  the

impression of a transformation of love into hate. This account of what

happens leads on to the view that the hate, which has its real motives,

is  here  reinforced  by  a  regression  of  the  love  to  the  sadistic

preliminary stage; so that the hate acquires an erotic character and

the continuity of a love relation is ensured.

   The third antithesis of loving, the transformation of loving into being

loved,  corresponds  to  the  operation  of  the  polarity  of  activity  and

passivity,  and  is  to  be  judged  in  the  same  way  as  the  cases  of

scopophilia and sadism.

 

      We  may  sum  up  by  saying  that  the  essential  feature  in  the

vicissitudes  undergone  by  instincts  lies  in the  subjection  of  the

instinctual impulses to the influences of the three great polarities that

dominate mental life. Of these three polarities we might describe that

of activity-passivity as the biological, that of ego-external world as the

real, and finally that of pleasure-unpleasure as the economic polarity.

   The instinctual vicissitude of repression will form the subject of an

inquiry which follows.                                                                                       2975

 

                                      REPRESSION

                                        (1915)

 


                                                                                      2976

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2977

 

                                      REPRESSION

 

One of the vicissitudes an instinctual impulse may undergo is to meet

with  resistances  which  seek  to  make  it  inoperative.  Under  certain

conditions,  which  we  shall  presently  investigate  more  closely,  the

impulse then passes into the state of ‘repression’ [‘Verdrängung’]. If

what was in question was the operation of an external stimulus, the

appropriate method to adopt would obviously be flight; with an instinct,

flight is of no avail, for the ego cannot escape from itself. At some later

period, rejection based on judgement (condemnation) will be found to

be a good method to adopt against an instinctual impulse. Repression

is a preliminary stage of condemnation, something between flight and

condemnation; it is a concept which could not have been formulated

before the time of psycho-analytic studies.

   It is not easy in theory to deduce the possibility of such a thing as

repression. Why should an instinctual impulse undergo a vicissitude

like this? A necessary condition of its happening must clearly be that

the instinct’s attainment of its aim should produce unpleasure instead

of pleasure. But we cannot well imagine such a contingency. There

are no such instincts: satisfaction of an instinct is always pleasurable.

We should have to assume certain peculiar circumstances, some sort

of  process  by  which  the  pleasure  of  satisfaction  is  changed  into

unpleasure.

   In order the better to delimit repression, let us discuss some otherinstinctual  situations.  It  may  happen  that  an  external  stimulus

becomes  internalized  -  for  example,  by  eating  into  and  destroying

some bodily organ - so that a new source of constant excitation and

increase  of  tension  arises.  The  stimulus  thereby  acquires  a  far-

reaching similarity to an instinct. We know that a case of this sort is

experienced by us as pain. The aim of this pseudo-instinct, however,

is  simply  the  cessation  of  the  change  in  the  organ  and  of  the

unpleasure accompanying it. There is no other direct pleasure to be

attained  by  cessation  of  pain.  Further,  pain  is  imperative;  the  only

things to which it can yield are removal by some toxic agent or the

influence of mental distraction.

   The case of pain is too obscure to give any help in our purpose. Let

us  take  the  case  in  which  an  instinctual  stimulus  such  as  hunger

remains unsatisfied. It then becomes imperative and can be allayed by

nothing but the action that satisfies it; it keeps up a constant tension of

need.  Nothing  in  the  nature  of  a  repression  seems  in  this  case  to

come remotely into question.

 


                                        Repression

                                                                                      2978

 

   Thus repression certainly does not arise in cases where the tension

produced by lack of satisfaction of an instinctual impulse is raised to

an unbearable degree. The methods of defence which are open to the

organism  against  that  situation  must  be  discussed  in  another

connection.

   Let us rather confine ourselves to clinical experience, as we meet

with it in psycho-analytic practice. We then learn that the satisfaction

of an instinct which is under repression would be quite possible, and

further, that in every instance such a satisfaction would be pleasurable

in itself; but it would be irreconcilable with other claims and intentions.

It would, therefore, cause pleasure in one place and unpleasure in

another. It has consequently become a condition for repression that

the motive force of unpleasure shall have acquired more strength than

the pleasure obtained from satisfaction. Psycho-analytic observation

of  the  transference  neuroses,  moreover,  leads  us  to  conclude  thatrepression is not a defensive mechanism which is present from the

very beginning, and that it cannot arise until a sharp cleavage has

occurred between conscious and unconscious mental activity - that

the essence of repression lies simply in turning something away, and

keeping it at a distance, from the conscious. This view of repression

would be made more complete by assuming that, before the mental

organization  reaches  this  stage,  the  task  of  fending  off  instinctual

impulses is dealt with by the other vicissitudes which instincts may

undergo - e.g. reversal into the opposite or turning round upon the

subject’s own self.

 


                                        Repression

                                                                                      2979

 

   It seems to us now that, in view of the very great extent to which

repression  and  what  is  unconscious  are  correlated,  we  must  defer

probing more deeply into the nature of repression until we have learnt

more about the structure of the succession of psychical agencies and

about the differentiation between what is unconscious and conscious.

Till then, all we can do is to put together in a purely descriptive fashion

a few characteristics of repression that have been observed clinically,

even though we run the risk of having to repeat unchanged much that

has been said elsewhere.

   We have reason to assume that there is a primal repression, a first

phase  of  repression,  which  consists  in  the  psychical  (ideational)

representative  of  the  instinct  being  denied  entrance  into  the

conscious.  With  this fixation  is  established;  the  representative  in

question  persists  unaltered  from  then  onwards  and  the  instinct

remains attached to it. This is due to the properties of unconscious

processes of which we shall speak later.

   The second stage of repression, repression proper, affects mental

derivatives of the repressed representative, or such trains of thought

as, originating elsewhere, have come into associative connection with

it. On account of this association, these ideas experience the same

fate as what was primally repressed. Repression proper, therefore, is

actually an after-pressure [Nachdrängen]. Moreover, it is a mistake toemphasize only the repulsion which operates from the direction of the

conscious  upon  what  is  to  be  repressed;  quite  as  important  is  the

attraction exercised by what was primally repressed upon everything

with which it can establish a connection. Probably the trend towards

repression  would  fail  in  its  purpose  if  these  two  forces  did  not  co-

operate, if there were not something previously repressed ready to

receive what is repelled by the conscious.

 


                                        Repression

                                                                                      2980

 

 

      Under  the  influence  of  the  study  of  the  psychoneuroses,  which

brings before us the important effects of repression, we are inclined to

overvalue  their  psychological  bearing  and  to  forget  too  readily  that

repression  does  not  hinder  the  instinctual  representative  from

continuing to exist in the unconscious, from organizing itself further,

putting  out  derivatives  and  establishing  connections.  Repression  in

fact interferes only with the relation of the instinctual representative to

one psychical system, namely, to that of the conscious.

   Psycho-analysis is able to show us other things as well which are

important  for  understanding  the  effects  of  repression  in  the

psychoneuroses.  It  shows  us,  for  instance,  that  the  instinctual

representation develops with less interference and more profusely if it

is withdrawn by repression from conscious influence. It proliferates in

the dark, as it were, and takes on extreme forms of expression, which

when they are translated and presented to the neurotic are not only

bound to seem alien to him, but frighten him by giving him the picture

of an extraordinary and dangerous strength of instinct. This deceptive

strength  of  instinct  is  the  result  of  an  uninhibited  development  in

phantasy  and  of  the  damming-up  consequent  on  frustrated

satisfaction. The fact that this last result is bound up with repression

points the direction in which the true significance of repression has to

be looked for.

   Reverting once more, however, to the opposite aspect of repression,

let  us  make  it  clear  that  it  is  not  even  correct  to  suppose  thatrepression  withholds  from  the  conscious all  the  derivatives  of  what

was primally repressed. If these derivatives have become sufficiently

far removed from the repressed representative, whether owing to the

adoption  of  distortions  or  by  reason  of  the  number  of  intermediate

links inserted, they have free access to the conscious. It is as though

the resistance of the conscious against them was a function of their

distance  from  what  was  originally  repressed.  In  carrying  out  the

technique  of  psycho-analysis,  we  continually  require  the  patient  to

produce such derivatives of the repressed as, in consequence either

of their remoteness or of their distortion, can pass the censorship of

the conscious. Indeed, the associations which we require him to give

without being influenced by any conscious purposive idea and without

any criticism, and from which we reconstitute a conscious translation

of the repressed representative - these associations are nothing else

than remote and distorted derivatives of this kind. During this process

we  observe  that  the  patient  can  go  on  spinning  a  thread  of  such

associations, till he is brought up against some thought, the relation of

which to what is repressed becomes so obvious that he is compelled

to  repeat  his  attempt  at  repression.  Neurotic  symptoms,  too,  must

have  fulfilled  this  same  condition,  for  they  are  derivatives  of  the

repressed,  which  has,  by  their  means,  finally  won  the  access  to

consciousness which was previously denied to it.

 


                                        Repression

                                                                                      2981

 

   We can lay down no general rule as to what degree of distortion and

remoteness  is  necessary  before  the  resistance  on  the  part  of  the

conscious is removed. A delicate balancing is here taking place, the

play  of  which  is  hidden  from  us;  its  mode  of  operation,  however,

enables  us  to  infer  that  it  is  a  question  of  calling  a  halt  when  the

cathexis of the unconscious reaches a certain intensity - an intensity

beyond which the unconscious would break through to satisfaction.

Repression acts, therefore, in a highly individual manner. Each single

derivative of the repressed may have its own special vicissitude; a

little more or a little less distortion alters the whole outcome. In thisconnection we can understand how it is that the objects to which men

give most preference, their ideals, proceed from the same perceptions

and experiences as the objects which they most abhor, and that they

were  originally  only  distinguished  from  one  another  through  slight

modifications. Indeed, as we found in tracing the origin of the fetish, it

is possible for the original instinctual representative to be split in two,

one  part  undergoing  repression,  while  the  remainder,  precisely  on

account of this intimate connection, undergoes idealization.

   The same result as follows from an increase or a decrease in the

degree  of  distortion  may  also  be  achieved  at  the  other  end  of  the

apparatus,  so  to  speak,  by  a  modification  in  the  condition  for  the

production of pleasure and unpleasure. Special techniques have been

evolved, with the purpose of bringing about such changes in the play

of mental forces that what would otherwise give rise to unpleasure

may on this occasion result in pleasure; and, whenever a technical

device  of  this  sort  comes  into  operation,  the  repression  of  an

instinctual  representative  which  would  otherwise  be  repudiated  is

lifted. These techniques have till now only been studied in any detail in

jokes.  As  a  rule  the  repression  is  only  temporarily  lifted  and  is

promptly re-instated.

 


                                        Repression

                                                                                      2982

 

   Observations like this, however, enable us to note some further

characteristics of repression. Not only is it, as we have just shown,

individual  in  its  operation,  but  it  is  also  exceedingly mobile.  The

process of repression is not to be regarded as an event which takes

place once, the results of which are permanent, as when some living

thing has been killed and from that time onward is dead; repression

demands a persistent expenditure of force, and if this were to cease

the success of the repression would be jeopardized, so that a fresh

act  of  repression  would  be  necessary.  We  may  suppose  that  the

repressed  exercises  a  continuous  pressure  in  the  direction  of  the

conscious, so that this pressure must be balanced by an unceasing

counter-pressure. Thus the maintenance of a repression involves anuninterrupted  expenditure  of  force,  while  its  removal  results  in  a

saving from an economic point of view. The mobility of repression,

incidentally, also finds expression in the psychical characteristics of

the  state  of  sleep,  which  alone  renders  possible  the  formation  of

dreams. With a return to waking life the repressive cathexes which

have been drawn in are once more sent out.

   Finally, we must not forget that after all we have said very little about

an instinctual impulse when we have established that it is repressed.

Without prejudice to its repression, such an impulse may be in widely

different states. It may be inactive, i.e. only very slightly cathected with

mental  energy;  or  it  may  be  cathected  in  varying  degrees,  and  so

enabled to be active. True, its activation will not result in a direct lifting

of the repression, but it will set in motion all the processes which end

in a penetration by the impulse into consciousness along circuitous

paths. With unrepressed derivatives of the unconscious the fate of a

particular idea is often decided by the degree of its activity or cathexis.

It  is  an  everyday  occurrence  that  such  a  derivative  remains

unrepressed so long as it represents only a small amount of energy,

although its content would be calculated to give rise to a conflict with

what  is  dominant  in  consciousness.  The  quantitative  factor  proves

decisive  for  this  conflict:  as  soon  as  the  basically  obnoxious  idea

exceeds a certain degree of strength, the conflict becomes a real one,

and  it  is  precisely  this  activation  that  leads  to  repression.  So  that,

where  repression  is  concerned,  an  increase  of  energic  cathexis

operates in the same sense as an approach to the unconscious, while

a  decrease  of  that  cathexis  operates  in  the  same  sense  as

remoteness  from  the  unconscious  or  distortion.  We  see  that  the

repressive trends may find a substitute for repression in a weakening

of what is distasteful.

 


                                        Repression

                                                                                      2983

 

 

   In our discussion so far we have dealt with the repression of an

instinctual representative, and by the latter we have understood anidea  or  group  of  ideas  which  is  cathected  with  a  definite  quota  of

psychical energy (libido or interest) coming from an instinct. Clinical

observation  now  obliges  us  to  divide  up  what  we  have  hitherto

regarded as a single entity; for it shows us that besides the idea, some

other element representing the instinct has to be taken into account,

and that this other element undergoes vicissitudes of repression which

may  be  quite  different  from  those  undergone  by  the  idea.  For  this

other element of the psychical representative the term quota of affect

has been generally adopted. It corresponds to the instinct in so far as

the latter has become detached from the idea and finds expression,

proportionate to its quantity, in processes which are sensed as affects.

From this point on, in describing a case of repression, we shall have to

follow up separately what, as the result of repression, becomes of the

idea, and what becomes of the instinctual energy linked to it.

   We should be glad to be able to say something general about the

vicissitudes of both; and having taken our bearings a little we shall in

fact be able to do so. The general vicissitude which overtakes the idea

that represents the instinct can hardly be anything else than that it

should vanish from the conscious if it was previously conscious, or

that  it  should  be  held  back  from  consciousness  if  it  was  about  to

become  conscious.  The  difference  is  not  important;  it  amounts  to

much  the  same  thing  as  the  difference  between  my  ordering  an

undesirable guest out of my drawing-room (or out of my front hall),

and my refusing, after recognizing him, to let him cross my threshhold

at  all.¹  The quantitative  factor  of  the  instinctual  representative  has

three possible vicissitudes, as we can see from a cursory survey of

the  observations  made  by  psycho-analysis:  either  the  instinct  is

altogether suppressed, so that no trace of it is found, or it appears as

an affect which is in some way or other qualitatively coloured, or it is

changed into anxiety. The two latter possibilities set us the task of

taking  into  account,  as  a  further  instinctual  vicissitude,  the

transformation into affects, and especially into anxiety, of the psychical

energies of instincts.

   We recall the fact that the motive and purpose of repression has

nothing  else  than  the  avoidance  of  unpleasure.  It  follows  that  the

vicissitude of the quota of affect belonging to the representative is far

more  important  than  the  vicissitude  of  the  idea,  and  this  fact  isdecisive  for  our  assessment  of  the  process  of  repression.  If  a

repression does not succeed in preventing feelings of unpleasure or

anxiety from arising, we may say that it has failed, even though it may

have  achieved  its  purpose  as  far  as  the  ideational  portion  is

concerned.  Repressions  that  have  failed  will  of  course  have  more

claim on our interest than any that may have been successful; for the

latter will for the most part escape our examination.

 

   ¹ This simile, which is thus applicable to the process of repression, may also be extended to

a characteristic of it which has been mentioned earlier: I have merely to add that I must set a
permanent guard over the door which I have forbidden this guest to enter, since he would
otherwise burst it open. (See above.)
 


                                        Repression

                                                                                      2984

 

 

   We must now try to obtain some insight into the mechanism of the

process of repression. In particular we want to know whether there is

a  single  mechanism  only,  or  more  than  one,  and  whether  perhaps

each  of  the  psychoneuroses  is  distinguished  by  a  mechanism  of

repression peculiar to it. At the outset of this enquiry, however, we are

met  by  complications.  The  mechanism  of  a  repression  becomes

accessible  to  us  only  by  our  deducing  that  mechanism  from  the

outcome of the repression. Confining our observations to the effect of

repression on the ideational portion of the representative, we discover

that  as  a  rule  it  creates  a substitutive  formation.  What  is  the

mechanism  by  which  such  a  substitute  is  formed?    Or  should  we

distinguish several mechanisms here as well?  Further, we know that

repression leaves symptoms behind it. May we then suppose that the

forming of substitutes and the forming of symptoms coincide, and, if

this is so on the whole, is the mechanism of forming symptoms the

same as that of repression? The general probability would seem to be

that the two are widely different, and that it is not the repression itself

which produces substitutive formations and symptoms, but that these

latter  are  indications  of  a return  of  the  repressed  and  owe  their

existence to quite other processes. It would also seem advisable toexamine  the  mechanisms  by  which  substitutes  and  symptoms  are

formed before considering the mechanisms of repression.

   Obviously this is no subject for further speculation. The place of

speculation  must  be  taken  by  a  careful  analysis  of  the  results  of

repression  observable  in  the  different  neuroses.  I  must,  however,

suggest that we should postpone this task, too, until we have formed

reliable  conceptions  of  the  relation  of  the  conscious  to  the

unconscious.  But,  in  order  that  the  present  discussion  may  not  be

entirely  unfruitful,  I  will  say  in  advance  that  (1)  the  mechanism  of

repression  does  not  in  fact  coincide  with  the  mechanism  or

mechanisms  of  forming  substitutes,  (2)  there  are  a  great  many

different mechanisms of forming substitutes and (3) the mechanisms

of repression have at least this one thing in common: a withdrawal of

the cathexis of energy (or of libido, where we are dealing with sexual

instincts).

 


                                        Repression

                                                                                      2985

 

      Further,  restricting  myself  to  the  three  best-known  forms  of

psychoneurosis,  I  will  show  by  means  of  some  examples  how  the

concepts here introduced find application to the study of repression.

      From  the  field  of anxiety hysteria  I  will  choose  a  well-analysed

example  of  an  animal  phobia.  The  instinctual  impulse  subjected  to

repression here is a libidinal attitude towards the father, coupled with

fear  of  him.  After  repression,  this  impulse  vanishes  out  of

consciousness: the father does not appear in it as an object of libido.

As a substitute for him we find in a corresponding place some animal

which is more or less fitted to be an object of anxiety. The formation of

the  substitute  for  the  ideational  portion  has  come  about  by

displacement along a chain of connections which is determined in a

particular  way.  The  quantitative  portion  has  not  vanished,  but  has

been transformed into anxiety. The result is fear of a wolf, instead of a

demand for love from the father. The categories here employed are of

course  not  enough  to  supply  an  adequate  explanation  of  even  the

simplest  case  of  psychoneurosis:  there  are  always  otherconsiderations to be taken into account. A repression such as occurs

in an animal phobia must be described as radically unsuccessful. All

that  it  has  done  is  to  remove  and  replace  the  idea;  it  has  failed

altogether in sparing unpleasure. And for this reason, too, the work of

the neurosis does not cease. It proceeds to a second phase, in order

to attain its immediate and more important purpose. What follows is an

attempt at flight - the formation of the phobia proper, of a number of

avoidances which are intended to prevent a release of the anxiety.

More  specialized  investigation  enables  us  to  understand  the

mechanism by which the phobia achieves its aim.

 


                                        Repression

                                                                                      2986

 

      We  are  obliged  to  take  quite  another  view  of  the  process  of

repression when we consider the picture of a true conversion hysteria.

Here  the  salient  point  is  that  it  is  possible  to  bring  about  a  total

disappearance  of  the  quota  of  affect.  When  this  is  so,  the  patient

displays  towards  his  symptoms  what  Charcot  called  ‘la  belle

indifférence hystériques’.  In  other  cases  this  suppression  is  not  so

completely successful: some distressing sensations may attach to the

symptoms themselves, or it may prove impossible to prevent some

release  of  anxiety,  which  in  turn  sets  to  work  the  mechanism  of

forming  a  phobia.  The  ideational  content  of  the  instinctual

representative  is  completely  withdrawn  from  consciousness;  as  a

substitute - and at the same time as a symptom - we have an over-

strong innervation (in typical cases, a somatic one), sometimes of a

sensory, sometimes of a motor character, either as an excitation or an

inhibition. The over-innervated area proves on a closer view to be a

part of the repressed instinctual representative itself - a part which, as

though by a process of condensation, has drawn the whole cathexis

on to itself. These remarks do not of course bring to light the whole

mechanism  of  a  conversion  hysteria;  in  especial  the  factor  of

regression, which will be considered in another connection, has also

to be taken into account. In so far as repression in hysteria is made

possible  only  by  the  extensive  formation  of  substitutes,  it  may  bejudged to be entirely unsuccessful; as regards dealing with the quota

of affect, however, which is the true task of repression, it generally

signifies  a  total  success.  In  conversion  hysteria  the  process  of

repression is completed with the formation of the symptom and does

not, as in anxiety hysteria, need to continue to a second phase - or

rather, strictly speaking, to continue endlessly.

 


                                        Repression

                                                                                      2987

 

   A totally different picture of repression is shown, once more, in the

third  disorder  which  we  shall  consider  for  the  purposes  of  our

illustration - in obsessional neurosis. Here we are at first in doubt what

it is that we have to regard as the instinctual representative that is

subjected to repression - whether it is a libidinal or a hostile trend. This

uncertainty arises because obsessional neurosis has as its basis a

regression owing to which a sadistic trend has been substituted for an

affectionate one. It is this hostile impulsion against someone who is

loved which is subjected to repression. The effect at an early stage of

the work of repression is quite different from what it is at a later one.

At first the repression is completely successful; the ideational content

is  rejected  and  the  affect  made  to  disappear.  As  a  substitutive

formation  there  arises  an  alteration  in  the  ego  in  the  shape  of  an

increased  conscientiousness,  and  this  can  hardly  be  called  a

symptom. Here, substitute and symptom do not coincide. From this we

learn  something,  too,  about  the  mechanism  of  repression.  In  this

instance, as in all others, repression has brought about a withdrawal

of  libido;  but  here  it  has  made  use  of reaction-formation  for  this

purpose, by intensifying an opposite. Thus in this case the formation

of a substitute has the same mechanism as repression and at bottom

coincides with it, while chronologically, as well as conceptually, it is

distinct from the formation of a symptom. It is very probable that the

whole process is made possible by the ambivalent relationship into

which  the  sadistic  impulsion  that  has  to  be  repressed  has  been

introduced. But the repression, which was at first successful, does not

hold  firm;  in  the  further  course  of  things  its  failure  becomesincreasingly marked. The ambivalence which has enabled repression

through reaction-formation to take place is also the point at which the

repressed succeeds in returning. The vanished affect comes back in

its transformed shape as social anxiety, moral anxiety and unlimited

self-reproaches;  the  rejected  idea  is  replaced  by  a substitute  by

displacement,  often  a  displacement  on  to  something  very  small  or

indifferent.  A  tendency  to  a  complete  re-establishment  of  the

repressed idea is as a rule unmistakably present. The failure in the

repression  of  the  quantitative,  affective  factor  brings  into  play  the

same mechanism of flight, by means of avoidance and prohibitions, as

we  have  seen  at  work  in  the  formation  of  hysterical  phobias.  The

rejection  of  the idea  from  the  conscious  is,  however,  obstinately

maintained, because it entails abstention from action, a motor fettering

of the impulsion. Thus in obsessional neurosis the work of repression

is prolonged in a sterile and interminable struggle.

 


                                        Repression

                                                                                      2988

 

 

      The  short  series  of  comparisons  presented  here  may  easily

convince  us  that  more  comprehensive  investigations  are  necessary

before  we  can  hope  thoroughly  to  understand  the  processes

connected with repression and the formation of neurotic symptoms.

The  extraordinary  intricacy  of  all  the  factors  to  be  taken  into

consideration leaves only one way of presenting them open to us. We

must select first one and then another point of view, and follow it up

through the material as long as the application of it seems to yield

results. Each separate treatment of the subject will be incomplete in

itself, and there cannot fail to be obscurities where it touches upon

material that has not yet been treated; but we may hope that a final

synthesis will lead to a proper understanding.

                                                                                       2989

 

                                THE UNCONSCIOUS

                                        (1915)

 


                                                                                      2990

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2991

 

                                THE UNCONSCIOUS

 

We have learnt from psycho-analysis that the essence of the process

of repression lies, not in putting an end to, in annihilating, the idea

which  represents  an  instinct,  but  in  preventing  it  from  becoming

conscious. When this happens we say of the idea that it is in a state of

being ‘unconscious’, and we can produce good evidence to show that

even when it is unconscious it can produce effects, even including

some which finally reach consciousness. Everything that is repressed

must remain unconscious; but let us state at the very outset that the

repressed  does  not  cover  everything  that  is  unconscious.  The

unconscious has the wider compass: the repressed is a part of the

unconscious.

   How are we to arrive at a knowledge of the unconscious? It is of

course  only  as  something  conscious  that  we  know  it,  after  it  has

undergone  transformation  or  translation  into  something  conscious.

Psycho-analytic work shows us every day that translation of this kind

is possible. In order that this should come about, the person under

analysis must overcome certain resistances - the same resistances as

those  which,  earlier,  made  the  material  concerned  into  something

repressed by rejecting it from the conscious.

 

          I.  JUSTIFICATION FOR THE CONCEPT OF THE UNCONSCIOUS

       Our  right  to  assume  the  existence  of  something  mental  that  is

unconscious  and  to  employ  that  assumption  for  the  purposes  of

scientific work is disputed in many quarters. To this we can reply that

our assumption of the unconscious is necessary and legitimate, and

that we possess numerous proofs of its existence.

   It is necessary because the data of consciousness have a very large

number of gaps in them; both in healthy and in sick people psychical

acts often occur which can be explained only by presupposing other

acts,  of  which,  nevertheless,  consciousness  affords  no  evidence.

These not only include parapraxes and dreams in healthy people, and

everything described as a psychical symptom or an obsession in the

sick; our most personal daily experience acquaints us with ideas that

come into our head we do not know from where, and with intellectual

conclusions arrived at we do not know how. All these conscious acts

remain disconnected and unintelligible if we insist upon claiming that

every  mental  act  that  occurs  in  us  must  also  necessarily  be

experienced by us through consciousness; on the other hand, they fall

into a demonstrable connection if we interpolate between them the

unconscious  acts  which  we  have  inferred.  A  gain  in  meaning  is  a

perfectly  justifiable  ground  for  going  beyond  the  limits  of  direct

experience. When, in addition, it turns out that the assumption of there

being an unconscious enables us to construct a successful procedure

by  which  we  can  exert  an  effective  influence  upon  the  course  of

conscious  processes,  this  success  will  have  given  us  an

incontrovertible proof of the existence of what we have assumed. This

being  so,  we  must  adopt  the  position  that  to  require  that  whatever

goes on in the mind must also be known to consciousness is to make

an untenable claim.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      2992

 

      We  can  go  further  and  argue,  in  support  of  there  being  an

unconscious psychical state, that at any given moment consciousness

includes only a small content, so that the greater part of what we call

conscious  knowledge  must  in  any  case  be  for  very  considerableperiods of time in a state of latency, that is to say, of being psychically

unconscious.  When  all  our  latent  memories  are  taken  into

consideration it becomes totally incomprehensible how the existence

of  the  unconscious  can  be  denied.  But  here  we  encounter  the

objection that these latent recollections can no longer be described as

psychical, but that they correspond to residues of somatic processes

from  which  what  is  psychical  can  once  more  arise.  The  obvious

answer  to  this  is  that  a  latent  memory  is,  on  the  contrary,  an

unquestionable  residuum  of  a psychical  process.  But  it  is  more

important to realize clearly that this objection is based on the equation

- not, it is true, explicitly stated but taken as axiomatic - of what is

conscious with what is mental. This equation is either a petitio principii

which begs the question whether everything that in psychical is also

necessarily  conscious;  or  else  it  is  a  matter  of  convention,  of

nomenclature.  In  this  latter  case  it  is,  of  course,  like  any  other

convention, not open to refutation. The question remains, however,

whether the convention is so expedient that we are bound to adopt it.

To this we may reply that the conventional equation of the psychical

with  the  conscious  is  totally  inexpedient.  It  disrupts  psychical

continuities,  plunges  us  into  the  insoluble  difficulties  of  psycho-

physical  parallelism,  is  open  to  the  reproach  that  for  no  obvious

reason it over-estimates the part played by consciousness, and that it

forces us prematurely to abandon the field of psychological research

without being able to offer us any compensation from other fields.

   It is clear in any case that this question - whether the latent states of

mental life, whose existence is undeniable, are to be conceived of as

conscious mental states or as physical ones - threatens to resolve

itself into a verbal dispute. We shall therefore be better advised to

focus our attention on what we know with certainty of the nature of

these  debatable  states.  As  far  as  their  physical  characteristics  are

concerned,  they  are  totally  inaccessible  to  us:  no  physiological

concept or chemical process can give us any notion of their nature.

On the other hand, we know for certain that they have abundant points

of contact with conscious mental processes; with the help of a certain

amount  of  work  they  can  be  transformed  into,  or  replaced  by,

conscious mental processes, and all the categories which we employ

to  describe  conscious  mental  acts,  such  as  ideas,  purposes,resolutions and so on, can be applied to them. Indeed, we are obliged

to say of some of these latent states that the only respect in which

they  differ  from  conscious  ones  is  precisely  in  the  absence  of

consciousness. Thus we shall not hesitate to treat them as objects of

psychological research, and to deal with them in the most intimate

connection with conscious mental acts.

   The stubborn denial of a psychical character to latent mental acts is

accounted  for  by  the  circumstance  that  most  of  the  phenomena

concerned  have  not  been  the  subject  of  study  outside  psycho-

analysis. Anyone who is ignorant of pathological facts, who regards

the parapraxes of normal people as accidental, and who is content

with the old saw that dreams are froth [‘Träume sind Schäume’] has

only  to  ignore  a  few  more  problems  of  the  psychology  of

consciousness  in  order  to  spare  himself  any  need  to  assume  an

unconscious  mental  activity.  Incidentally,  even  before  the  time  of

psycho-analysis, hypnotic experiments, and especially post-hypnotic

suggestion,  had  tangibly  demonstrated  the  existence  and  mode  of

operation of the mental unconscious.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      2993

 

      The  assumption  of  an  unconscious  is,  moreover,  a  perfectly

legitimate one, inasmuch as in postulating it we are not departing a

single  step  from  our  customary  and  generally  accepted  mode  of

thinking.  Consciousness  makes  each  of  us  aware  only  of  his  own

states of mind; that other people, too, possess a consciousness is an

inference which we draw by analogy from their observable utterances

and actions, in order to make this behaviour of theirs intelligible to us.

(It would no doubt be psychologically more correct to put it in this way:

that without any special reflection we attribute to everyone else our

own constitution and therefore our consciousness as well, and that

this  identification  is  a sine  qua  non  of  our  understanding.)  This

inference (or this identification) was formerly extended by the ego to

other human beings, to animals, plants, inanimate objects and to the

world at large, and proved serviceable so long as their similarity to theindividual  ego  was  overwhelmingly  great;  but  it  became  more

untrustworthy  in  proportion  as  the  difference  between  the  ego  and

these  ‘others’  widened.  To-day,  our  critical  judgement  is  already  in

doubt on the question of consciousness in animals; we refuse to admit

it in plants and we regard the assumption of its existence in inanimate

matter  as  mysticism.  But  even  where  the  original  inclination  to

identification has withstood criticism - that is, when the ‘others’ are our

fellow-men - the assumption of a consciousness in them rests upon an

inference and cannot share the immediate certainty which we have of

our own consciousness.

   Psycho-analysis demands nothing more than that we should apply

this process of inference to ourselves also - a proceeding to which, it

is true, we are not constitutionally inclined. If we do this, we must say:

all the acts and manifestations which I notice in myself and do not

know how to link up with the rest of my mental life must be judged as if

they belonged to someone else: they are to be explained by a mental

life ascribed to this other person. Furthermore, experience shows that

we understand very well how to interpret in other people (that is, how

to fit into their chain of mental events) the same acts which we refuse

to  acknowledge  as  being  mental  in  ourselves.  Here  some  special

hindrance evidently deflects our investigations from our own self and

prevents our obtaining a true knowledge of it.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      2994

 

   This process of inference, when applied to oneself in spite of internal

opposition,  does  not,  however,  lead  to  the  disclosure  of  an

unconscious; it leads logically to the assumption of another, second

consciousness which is united in one’s self with the consciousness

one knows. But at this point, certain criticisms may fairly be made. In

the first place, a consciousness of which its own possessor knows

nothing is something very different from a consciousness belonging to

another person, and it is questionable whether such a consciousness,

lacking,  as  it  does,  its  most  important  characteristic,  deserves  any

discussion  at  all.  Those  who  have  resisted  the  assumption  of  anunconscious psychical are not likely to be ready to exchange it for an

unconscious consciousness.  the  second  place,  analysis  shows  that

the  different  latent  mental  processes  inferred  by  us  enjoy  a  high

degree of mutual independence, as though they had no connection

with  one  another,  and  knew  nothing  of  one  another.  We  must  be

prepared, if so, to assume the existence in us not only of a second

consciousness, but of a third, fourth, perhaps of an unlimited number

of states of consciousness, all unknown to us and to one another. In

the third place - and this is the most weighty argument of all - we have

to take into account the fact that analytic investigation reveals some of

these  latent  processes  as  having  characteristics  and  peculiarities

which  seem  alien  to  us,  or  even  incredible,  and  which  run  directly

counter to the attributes of consciousness with which we are familiar.

Thus we have grounds for modifying our inference about ourselves

and  saying  that  what  is  proved  is  not  the  existence  of  a  second

consciousness in us, but the existence of psychical acts which lack

consciousness.  We  shall  also  be  right  in  rejecting  the  term

‘subconsciousness’  as  incorrect  and  misleading.  The  well-known

cases  of  ‘double  conscience’¹  (splitting  of  consciousness)  prove

nothing against our view. We may most aptly describe them as cases

of a splitting of the mental activities into two groups, and say that the

same  consciousness  turns  to  one  or  the  other  of  these  groups

alternately.

 

   ¹ [The French term for ‘dual consciousness’.]

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      2995

 

   In psycho-analysis there is no choice for us but to assert that mental

processes are in themselves unconscious, and to liken the perception

of them by means of consciousness to the perception of the external

world by means of the sense-organs. We can even hope to gain fresh

knowledge from the comparison. The psycho-analytic assumption of

unconscious  mental  activity  appears  to  us,  on  the  one  hand,  as  a

further expansion of the primitive animism which caused us to see

copies  of  our  own  consciousness  all  around  us,  and,  on  the  otherhand, as an extension of the corrections undertaken by Kant of our

views on external perception. Just as Kant warned us not to overlook

the fact that our perceptions are subjectively conditioned and must not

be regarded as identical with what is perceived though unknowable,

so psycho-analysis warns us not to equate perceptions by means of

consciousness with the unconscious mental processes which are their

object.  Like  the  physical,  the  psychical  is  not  necessarily  in  reality

what it appears to us to be. We shall be glad to learn, however, that

the correction of internal perception will turn out not to offer such great

difficulties  as  the  correction  of  external  perception  -  that  internal

objects are less unknowable than the external world.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      2996

 

                  II.  VARIOUS MEANINGS OF ‘THE UNCONSCIOUS’ -
                        THE TOPOGRAPHICAL POINT OF VIEW

 

      Before  going  any  further,  let  us  state  the  important,  though

inconvenient, fact that the attribute of being unconscious is only one

feature that is found in the psychical and is by no means sufficient fully

to characterize it. There are psychical acts of very varying value which

yet agree in possessing the characteristic of being unconscious. The

unconscious  comprises,  on  the  one  hand,  acts  which  are  merely

latent, temporarily unconscious, but which differ in no other respect

from  conscious  ones  and,  on  the  other  hand,  processes  such  as

repressed ones, which if they were to become conscious would be

bound to stand out in the crudest contrast to the rest of the conscious

processes. It would put an end to all misunderstandings if, from now

on,  in  describing  the  various  kinds  of  psychical  acts  we  were  to

disregard  the  question  of  whether  they  were  conscious  or

unconscious, and were to classify and correlate them only according

to their relation to instincts and aims, according to their composition

and  according  to  which  of  the  hierarchy  of  psychical  systems  they

belong to. This, however, is for various reasons impracticable, so that

we cannot escape the ambiguity of using the words ‘conscious’ and

‘unconscious’  sometimes  in  a  descriptive  and  sometimes  in  asystematic  sense,  in  which  latter  they  signify  inclusion  in  particular

systems and possession of certain characteristics. We might attempt

to  avoid  confusion  by  giving  the  psychical  systems  which  we  have

distinguished  certain  arbitrarily  chosen  names  which  have  no

reference to the attribute of being conscious. Only we should first have

to specify what the grounds are on which we distinguish the systems,

and in doing this we should not be able to evade the attribute of being

conscious,  seeing  that  it  forms  the  point  of  departure  for  all  our

investigations.  Perhaps  we  may  look  for  some  assistance  from  the

proposal  to  employ,  at  any  rate  in  writing,  the  abbreviation Cs. for

consciousness and Ucs. for what is unconscious, when we are using

the two words in the systematic sense.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      2997

 

 

   Proceeding now to an account of the positive findings of psycho-

analysis, we may say that in general a psychical act goes through two

phases as regards its state, between which is interposed a kind of

testing (censorship). In the first phase the psychical act is unconscious

and belongs to the system Ucs.; if, on testing, it is rejected by the

censorship, it is not allowed to pass into the second phase; it is then

said to be ‘repressed’ and must remain unconscious. If, however, it

passes  this  testing,  it  enters  the  second  phase  and  thenceforth

belongs to the second system, which we will call the system Cs. But

the  fact  that  it  belongs  to  that  system  does  not  yet  unequivocally

determine its relation to consciousness. It is not yet conscious, but it is

certainly capable of becoming conscious (to use Breuer’s expression)

- that is, it can now, given certain conditions, become an object of

consciousness without any special resistance. In consideration of this

capacity  for  becoming  conscious  we  also  call  the  system Cs.  the

‘preconscious’. If it should turn out that a certain censorship also plays

a part in determining whether the preconscious becomes conscious,

we shall discriminate more sharply between the systems Pcs. and Cs.

For the present let it suffice us to bear in mind that the system Pcs.shares  the  characteristics  of  the  system Cs.  and  that  the  rigorous

censorship exercises its office at the point of transition from the Ucs.

to the Pcs. (or Cs.).

      By  accepting  the  existence  of  these  two  (or  three)  psychical

systems,  psycho-analysis  has  departed  a  step  further  from  the

descriptive  ‘psychology  of  consciousness’  and  has  raised  new

problems and acquired a new content. Up till now, it has differed from

that  psychology  mainly  by  reason  of  its dynamic  view  of  mental

processes;  now  in  addition  it  seems  to  take  account  of  psychical

topography as well, and to indicate in respect of any given mental act

within  what  system  or  between  what  systems  it  takes  place.  On

account of this attempt, too, it has been given the name of ‘depth-

psychology’. We shall hear that it can be further enriched by taking yet

another point of view into account.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      2998

 

   If we are to take the topography of mental acts seriously we must

direct  our  interest  to  a  doubt  which  arises  at  this  point.  When  a

psychical  act  (let  us  confine  ourselves  here  to  one  which  is  in  the

nature of an idea) is transposed from the system Ucs. into the system

Cs.  (or Pcs.),  are  we  to  suppose  that  this  transposition  involves  a

fresh  record  -  as  it  were,  a  second  registration  -  of  the  idea  in

question,  which  may  thus  be  situated  as  well  in  a  fresh  psychical

locality, and alongside of which the original unconscious registration

continues to exist? Or are we rather to believe that the transposition

consists in a change in the state of the idea, a change involving the

same material and occurring in the same locality? This question may

appear  abstruse,  but  it  must  be  raised  if  we  wish  to  form  a  more

definite conception of psychical topography, of the dimension of depth

in  the  mind.  It  is  a  difficult  one  because  it  goes  beyond  pure

psychology and touches on the relations of the mental apparatus to

anatomy.  We  know  that  in  the  very  roughest  sense  such  relations

exist.  Research  has  given  irrefutable  proof  that  mental  activity  is

bound up with the function of the brain as it is with no other organ. Weare taken a step further - we do not know how much - by the discovery

of the unequal importance of the different parts of the brain and their

special relations to particular parts of the body and to particular mental

activities.  But  every  attempt  to  go  on  from  there  to  discover  a

localization of mental processes, every endeavour to think of ideas as

stored up in nerve-cells and of excitations as travelling along nerve-

fibres,  has  miscarried  completely.  The  same  fate  would  await  any

theory  which  attempted  to  recognize,  let  us  say,  the  anatomical

position of the system Cs. - conscious mental activity - as being in the

cortex, and to localize the unconscious processes in the sub-cortical

parts of the brain. There is a hiatus here which at present cannot be

filled, nor is it one of the tasks of psychology to fill it. Our psychical

topography has for  the  present  nothing  to  do  with  anatomy;  it  has

reference  not  to  anatomical  localities,  but  to  regions  in  the  mental

apparatus, wherever they may be situated in the body.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      2999

 

   In this respect, then, our work is untrammelled and may proceed

according to its own requirements. It will, however, be useful to remind

ourselves that as things stand our hypotheses set out to be no more

than graphic illustrations. The first of the two possibilities which we

considered - namely, that the Cs. phase of an idea implies a fresh

registration of it, which is situated in another place - is doubtless the

cruder but also the more convenient. The second hypothesis - that of

a merely functional change of state - is a priori more probable, but it is

less plastic, less easy to manipulate. With the first, or topographical,

hypothesis  is  bound  up  that  of  a  topographical  separation  of  the

systems Ucs. and Cs. and also the possibility that an idea may exist

simultaneously in two places in the mental apparatus indeed, that if it

is not inhibited by the censorship, it regularly advances from the one

position  to  the  other,  possibly  without  losing  its  first  location  or

registration.

   This view may seem odd, but it can be supported by observations

from psycho-analytic practice. If we communicate to a patient someidea  which  he  has  at  one  time  repressed  but  which  we  have

discovered  in  him,  our  telling  him  makes  at  first  no  change  in  his

mental  condition.  Above  all,  it  does  not  remove  the  repression  nor

undo its effects, as might perhaps be expected from the fact that the

previously  unconscious  idea  has  now  become  conscious.  On  the

contrary, all that we shall achieve at first will be a fresh rejection of the

repressed idea. But now the patient has in actual fact the same idea in

two forms indifferent places in his mental apparatus: first, he has the

conscious memory of the auditory trace of the idea, conveyed in what

we told him; and secondly, he also has - as we know for certain - the

unconscious memory of his experience as it was in its earlier form.

Actually there is no lifting of the repression until the conscious idea,

after  the  resistances  have  been  overcome,  has  entered  into

connection with the unconscious memory-trace. It is only through the

making  conscious  of  the  latter  itself  that  success  is  achieved.  On

superficial consideration this would seem to show that conscious and

unconscious  ideas  are  distinct  registrations,  topographically

separated, of the same content. But a moment’s reflection shows that

the identity of the information given to the patient with his repressed

memory  is  only  apparent.  To  have  heard  something  and  to  have

experienced  something  are  in  their  psychological  nature  two  quite

different things, even though the content of both is the same.

   So for the moment we are not in a position to decide between the

two possibilities that we have discussed. Perhaps later on we shall

come upon factors which may turn the balance in favour of one or the

other.  Perhaps  we  shall  make  the  discovery  that  our  question  was

inadequately framed and that the difference between an unconscious

and a conscious idea has to be defined in quite another way.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3000

 

                            III.  UNCONSCIOUS EMOTIONS

 

   We have limited the foregoing discussion to ideas; we may now

raise a new question, the answer to which is bound to contribute to the

elucidation  of  our  theoretical  views.  We  have  said  that  there  areconscious  and  unconscious  ideas;  but  are  there  also  unconscious

instinctual  impulses,  emotions  and  feelings,  or  is  it  in  this  instance

meaningless to form combinations of the kind?

      I  am  in  fact  of  the  opinion  that  the  antithesis  of  conscious  and

unconscious  is  not  applicable  to  instincts.  An  instinct  can  never

become an object of consciousness - only the idea that represents the

instinct can. Even in the unconscious, moreover, an instinct cannot be

represented otherwise than by an idea. If the instinct did not attach

itself to an idea or manifest itself as an affective state, we could know

nothing  about  it.  When  we  nevertheless  speak  of  an  unconscious

instinctual impulse or of a repressed instinctual impulse, the looseness

of phraseology is a harmless one. We can only mean an instinctual

impulse  the  ideational  representative  of  which  is  unconscious,  for

nothing else comes into consideration.

   We should expect the answer to the question about unconscious

feelings, emotions and affects to be just as easily given. It is surely of

the essence of an emotion that we should be aware of it, i.e. that it

should become known to consciousness. Thus the possibility of the

attribute of unconsciousness would be completely excluded as far as

emotions, feelings and affects are concerned. But in psycho-analytic

practice  we  are  accustomed  to  speak  of  unconscious  love,  hate,

anger,  etc.,  and  find  it  impossible  to  avoid  even  the  strange

conjunction  ‘unconscious  consciousness  of  guilt’,  or  a  paradoxical

‘unconscious  anxiety’.  Is  there  more  meaning  in  the  use  of  these

terms than there is in speaking of ‘unconscious instincts’?

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3001

 

   The two cases are in fact not on all fours. In the first place, it may

happen  that  an  affective  or  emotional  impulse  is  perceived  but

misconstrued. Owing to the repression of its proper representative it

has been forced to become connected with another idea, and is now

regarded by consciousness as the manifestation of that idea. If we

restore the true connection, we call the original affective impulse an

‘unconscious’ one. Yet its affect was never unconscious; all that hadhappened was that its idea had undergone repression. In general, the

use of the terms ‘unconscious affect’ and ‘unconscious emotion’ has

reference  to  the  vicissitudes  undergone,  in  consequence  of

repression,  by  the  quantitative  factor  in  the  instinctual  impulse.  We

know  that  three  such  vicissitudes  are  possible:¹  either  the  affect

remains,  wholly  or  in  part,  as  it  is;  or  it  is  transformed  into  a

qualitatively  different  quota  of  affect,  above  all  into  anxiety;  or  it  is

suppressed,  i.e.  it  is  prevented  from  developing  at  all.  (These

possibilities may perhaps be studied even more easily in the dream-

work  than  in  neuroses.)  We  know,  too,  that  to  suppress  the

development of affect is the true aim of repression and that its work is

incomplete  if  this  aim  is  not  achieved.  In  every  instance  where

repression has succeeded in inhibiting the development of affects, we

term  those  affects  (which  we  restore  when  we  undo  the  work  of

repression) ‘unconscious’. Thus it cannot be denied that the use of the

terms in question is consistent; but in comparison with unconscious

ideas  there  is  the  important  difference  that  unconscious  ideas

continue to exist after repression as actual structures in the system

Ucs.,  whereas  all  that  corresponds  in  that  system  to  unconscious

affects is a potential beginning which is prevented from developing.

Strictly speaking, then, and although no fault can be found with the

linguistic  usage,  there  are  no  unconscious  affects  as  there  are

unconscious ideas. But there may very well be in the system Ucs.

affective structures which, like others, become conscious. The whole

difference arises from the fact that ideas are cathexes - basically of

memory-traces - whilst affects and feelings correspond to processes

of  discharge,  the  final  manifestations  of  which  are  perceived  as

feelings. In the present state of our knowledge of affects and feelings

we cannot express this difference more clearly.

 

   ¹ Cf. the preceding paper on ‘Repression’.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3002

 

      It  is  of  especial  interest  to  us  to  have  established  the  fact  that

repression can succeed in inhibiting an instinctual impulse from beingturned into a manifestation of affect. This shows us that the system

Cs. normally controls affectivity as well as access to motility; and it

enhances the importance of repression, since it shows that repression

results not only in withholding things from consciousness, but also in

preventing the development of affect and the setting-off of muscular

activity. Conversely, too, we may say that as long as the system Cs.

controls affectivity and motility, the mental condition of the person in

question  is  spoken  of  as  normal.  Nevertheless,  there  is  an

unmistakable difference in the relation of the controlling system to the

two contiguous processes of discharge.¹  Whereas the control by the

Cs.  over  voluntary  motility  is  firmly  rooted,  regularly  withstands  the

onslaught of neurosis and only breaks down in psychosis, control by

the Cs. over the development of affects is less secure. Even within the

limits  of  normal  life  we  can  recognize  that  a  constant  struggle  for

primacy over affectivity goes on between the two systems Cs. and

Ucs.,  that  certain  spheres  of  influence  are  marked  off  from  one

another and that intermixtures between the operative forces occur.

   The importance of the system Cs. (Pcs.) as regards access to the

release of affect and to action enables us also to understand the part

played by substitutive ideas in determining the form taken by illness. It

is possible for the development of affect to proceed directly from the

system Ucs.;  in  that  case  the  affect  always  has  the  character  of

anxiety,  for  which  all  ‘repressed’  affects  are  exchanged.  Often,

however,  the  instinctual  impulse  has  to  wait  until  it  has  found  a

substitutive idea in the system Cs. The development of affect can then

proceed  from  this  conscious  substitute,  and  the  nature  of  that

substitute determines the qualitative character of the affect. We have

asserted  that  in  repression  a  severance  takes  place  between  the

affect and the idea to which it belongs, and that each then undergoes

its  separate  vicissitudes.  Descriptively,  this  is  incontrovertible;  in

actuality, however, the affect does not as a rule arise till the break-

through  to  a  new  representation  in  the  system Cs.  has  been

successfully achieved.

 

    ¹ Affectivity  manifests  itself  essentially  in  motor  (secretory  and  vasomotor)  discharge

resulting in an (internal) alteration of the subject’s own body without reference to the external
world; motility, in actions designed to effect changes in the external world.
                                     The Unconscious

                                                                                      3003

 

                IV.  TOPOGRAPHY AND DYNAMICS OF REPRESSION

 

   We have arrived at the conclusion that repression is essentially a

process affecting ideas on the border between the systems Ucs. and

Pcs. (Cs.),  and  we  can  now  make  a  fresh  attempt  to  describe  the

process in greater detail.

   It must be a matter of a withdrawal of cathexis; but the question is, in

which system does the withdrawal take place and to which system

does  the  cathexis  that  is  withdrawn  belong?  The  repressed  idea

remains  capable  of  action  in  the Ucs.,  and  it  must  therefore  have

retained its cathexis. What has been withdrawn must be something

else. Let us take the case of repression proper (‘after-pressure’), as it

affects  an  idea  which  is  preconscious  or  even  actually  conscious.

Here  repression  can  only  consist  in  withdrawing  from  the  idea  the

(preconscious cathexis which belongs to the system Pcs. The idea

then either remains uncathected, or receives cathexis from the Ucs.,

or  retains  the Ucs.  cathexis  which  it  already  had.  Thus  there  is  a

withdrawal of the preconscious cathexis, retention of the unconscious

cathexis,  or  replacement  of  the  preconscious  cathexis  by  an

unconscious  one.  We  notice,  moreover,  that  we  have  based  these

reflections (as it were, without meaning to) on the assumption that the

transition from the system Ucs. to the system next to it is not effected

through the making of a new registration but through a change in its

state, an alteration in its cathexis. The functional hypothesis has here

easily defeated the topographical one.

   But this process of withdrawal of libido is not adequate to make

another  characteristic  of  repression  comprehensible  to  us.  It  is  not

clear  why  the  idea  which  has  remained  cathected  or  has  received

cathexis from the Ucs. should not, in virtue of its cathexis, renew the

attempt  to  penetrate  into  the  system Pcs.  If  it  could  do  so,  the

withdrawal of libido from it would have to be repeated, and the same

performance would go on endlessly; but the outcome would not be

repression. So, too, when it comes to describing primal repression, the

mechanism  just  discussed  of  withdrawal  of  preconscious  cathexiswould  fail  to  meet  the  case;  for  here  we  are  dealing  with  an

unconscious idea which has as yet received no cathexis from the Pcs.

and therefore cannot have that cathexis withdrawn from it.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3004

 

   What we require, therefore, is another process which maintains the

repression  in  the  first  case  and,  in  the  second,  ensures  its  being

established  as  well  as  continued.  This  other  process  can  only  be

found in the assumption of an anticathexis, by means of which the

system Pcs.  protects  itself  from  the  pressure  upon  it  of  the

unconscious idea. We shall see from clinical examples how such an

anticathexis, operating in the system Pcs., manifests itself. It is this

which represents the permanent expenditure of a primal repression,

and  which  also  guarantees  the  permanence  of  that  repression.

Anticathexis is the sole mechanism of primal repression; in the case of

repression proper (‘after-pressure’) there is in addition withdrawal of

the Pcs. cathexis. It is very possible that it is precisely the cathexis

which is withdrawn from the idea that is used for anticathexis.

    We see how we have gradually been led into adopting a third point

of view in our account of psychical phenomena. Besides the dynamic

and the topographical points of view, we have adopted the economic

one.  This  endeavours  to  follow  out  the  vicissitudes  of  amounts  of

excitation  and  to  arrive  at  least  at  some relative  estimate  of  their

magnitude.

   It will not be unreasonable to give a special name to this whole way

of regarding our subject-matter, for it is the consummation of psycho-

analytic  research.  I  propose  that  when  we  have  succeeded  in

describing  a  psychical  process  in  its  dynamic,  topographical  and

economic  aspects,  we  should  speak  of  it  as  a metapsychological

presentation. We must say at once that in the present state of our

knowledge there are only a few points at which we shall succeed in

this.

                                     The Unconscious

                                                                                      3005

 

 

      Let  us  make  a  tentative  effort  to  give  a  metapsychological

description  of  the  process  of  repression  in  the  three  transference

neuroses which are familiar to us. Here we may replace ‘cathexis’ by

‘libido’, because, as we know, it is the vicissitudes of sexual impulses

with which we shall be dealing.

      In  anxiety  hysteria  a  first  phase  of  the  process  is  frequently

overlooked,  and  may  perhaps  be  in  fact  missed  out;  on  careful

observation, however, it can be clearly discerned. It consists in anxiety

appearing without the subject knowing what he is afraid of. We must

suppose  that  there  was  present  in  the Ucs.  some  love-impulse

demanding to be transposed into the system Pcs.; but the cathexis

directed to it from the latter system has drawn back from the impulse

(as  though  in  an  attempt  at  flight)  and  the  unconscious  libidinal

cathexis  of  the  rejected  idea  has  been  discharged  in  the  form  of

anxiety.

      On  the  occasion  of  a  repetition  (if  there  should  be  one)  of  this

process,  a  first  step  is  taken  in  the  direction  of  mastering  the

unwelcome development of anxiety. The cathexis that has taken flight

attaches  itself  to  a  substitutive  idea  which,  on  the  one  hand,  is

connected by association with the rejected idea, and, on the other,

has escaped repression by reason of its remoteness from that idea.

This substitutive idea - a ‘substitute by displacement’ - permits the still

uninhibitable development of anxiety to be rationalized. It now plays

the part of an anticathexis for the system Cs. (Pcs.), by securing it

against an emergence in the Cs. of the repressed idea. On the other

hand it is, or acts as if it were, the point of departure for the release of

the anxiety-affect, which has now really become quite uninhibitable.

Clinical observation shows, for instance, that a child suffering from an

animal phobia experiences anxiety under two kinds of conditions: in

the first place, when his repressed love-impulse becomes intensified,

and, in the second, when he perceives the animal he is afraid of. The

substitutive idea acts in the one instance as a point at which there is a

passage across from the system Ucs. to the system Cs., and, in theother instance, as a self-sufficing source for the release of anxiety.

The extending dominance of the system Cs. usually manifests itself in

the  fact  that  the  first  of  these  two  modes  of  excitation  of  the

substitutive idea gives place more and more to the second. The child

may  perhaps  end  by  behaving  as  though  he  had  no  predilection

whatever towards his father but had become quite free from him, and

as though his fear of the animal was a real fear - except that this fear

of the animal, fed as such a fear is from an unconscious instinctual

source, proves obdurate and exaggerated in the face of all influences

brought  to  bear  from  the  system Cs.,  and  thereby  betrays  its

derivation  from  the  system Ucs.  -  In  the  second  phase  of  anxiety

hysteria, therefore, the anticathexis from the system Cs. has led to

substitute-formation.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3006

 

   Soon the same mechanism finds a fresh application. The process of

repression, as we know, is not yet completed, and it finds a further aim

in the task of inhibiting the development of the anxiety which arises

from the substitute. This is achieved by the whole of the associated

environment  of  the  substitutive  idea  being  cathected  with  special

intensity,  so  that  it  can  display  a  high  degree  of  sensibility  to

excitation.  Excitation  of  any  point  in  this  outer  structure  must

inevitably, on account of its connection with the substitutive idea, give

rise  to  a  slight  development  of  anxiety;  and  this  is  now  used  as  a

signal to inhibit, by means of a fresh flight on the part of the cathexis,

the further progress of the development of anxiety. The further away

the  sensitive  and  vigilant  anticathexes  are  situated  from  the  feared

substitute, the more precisely can the mechanism function which is

designed to isolate the substitutive idea and to protect it from fresh

excitations. These precautions naturally only guard against excitations

which approach the substitutive idea from outside, through perception;

they  never  guard  against  instinctual  excitation,  which  reaches  the

substitutive idea from the direction of its link with the repressed idea.

Thus the precautions do not begin to operate till the substitute hassatisfactorily taken over representation of the repressed, and they can

never  operate  with  complete  reliability.  With  each  increase  of

instinctual excitation the protecting rampart round the substitutive idea

must be shifted a little further outwards. The whole construction, which

is  set  up  in  an  analogous  way  in  the  other  neuroses,  is  termed  a

phobia. The flight from a conscious cathexis of the substitutive idea is

manifested in the avoidances, renunciations and prohibitions by which

we recognize anxiety hysteria.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3007

 

      Surveying  the  whole  process,  we  may  say  that  the  third  phase

repeats the work of the second on an ampler scale. The system Cs.

now protects itself against the activation of the substitutive idea by an

anticathexis of its environment, just as previously it had secured itself

against  the  emergence  of  the  repressed  idea  by  a  cathexis  of  the

substitutive  idea.  In  this  way  the  formation  of  substitutes  by

displacement has been further continued. We must also add that the

system Cs. had earlier only one small area at which the repressed

instinctual impulse could break through, namely, the substitutive idea;

but that ultimately this enclave of unconscious influence extends to the

whole  phobic  outer  structure.  Further,  we  may  lay  stress  on  the

interesting  consideration  that  by  means  of  the  whole  defensive

mechanism thus set in action a projection outward of the instinctual

danger has been achieved. The ego behaves as if the danger of a

development  of  anxiety  threatened  it  not  from  the  direction  of  an

instinctual impulse but from the direction of a perception, and it is thus

enabled to react against this external danger with the attempts at flight

represented  by  phobic  avoidances.  In  this  process  repression  is

successful in one particular: the release of anxiety can to some extent

be dammed up, but only at a heavy sacrifice of personal freedom.

Attempts  at  flight  from  the  demands  of  instinct  are,  however,  in

general useless, and, in spite of everything, the result of phobic flight

remains unsatisfactory.

   A great deal of what we have found in anxiety hysteria also holdsgood  for  the  other  two  neuroses,  so  that  we  can  confine  our

discussion  to  their  points  of  difference  and  to  the  part  played  by

anticathexis.  In  conversion  hysteria  the  instinctual  cathexis  of  the

repressed idea is changed into the innervation of the symptom. How

far and in what circumstances the unconscious idea is drained empty

by this discharge into innervation, so that it can relinquish its pressure

upon  the  system Cs.  -  these  and  similar  questions  had  better  be

reserved for a special investigation of hysteria. In conversion hysteria

the part played by the anticathexis proceeding from the system Cs.

(Pcs.) is clear and becomes manifest in the formation of the symptom.

It is the anticathexis that decides upon what portion of the instinctual

representative  the  whole  cathexis  of  the  latter  is  able  to  be

concentrated. The portion thus selected to be a symptom fulfils the

condition of expressing the wishful aim of the instinctual impulse no

less than the defensive or punitive efforts of the system Cs.; thus it

becomes hypercathected, and it is maintained from both directions like

the substitutive idea in anxiety hysteria. From this circumstance we

may conclude without hesitation that the amount of energy expended

by the system Cs. on repression need not be so great as the cathectic

energy of the symptom; for the strength of the repression is measured

by  the  amount  of  anticathexis  expended,  whereas  the  symptom  is

supported  not  only  by  this  anticathexis  but  also  by  the  instinctual

cathexis from the system Ucs. which is condensed in the symptom.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3008

 

      As  regards  obsessional  neurosis,  we  need  only  add  to  the

observations brought forward in the preceding paper that it is here that

the anticathexis from the system Cs. comes most noticeably into the

foreground. It is this which, organized as a reaction-formation, brings

about the first repression, and which is later the point at which the

repressed idea breaks through. We may venture the supposition that it

is because of the predominance of the anticathexis and the absence

of discharge that the work of repression seems far less successful in

anxiety  hysteria  and  in  obsessional  neurosis  than  in  conversionhysteria.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3009

 

            V.  THE SPECIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SYSTEM Ucs.

 

   The distinction we have made between the two psychical systems

receives  fresh  significance  when  we  observe  that  processes  in  the

one system, the Ucs.,  show  characteristics  which  are  not  met  with

again in the system immediately above it.

   The nucleus of the Ucs. consists of instinctual representatives which

seek to discharge their cathexis; that is to say, it consists of wishful

impulses. These instinctual impulses are co-ordinate with one another,

exist side by side without being influenced by one another, and are

exempt from mutual contradiction. When two wishful impulses whose

aims must appear to us incompatible become simultaneously active,

the two impulses do not diminish each other or cancel each other out,

but combine to form an intermediate aim, a compromise.

      There  are  in  this  system  no  negation,  no  doubt,  no  degrees  of

certainty:  all  this  is  only  introduced  by  the  work  of  the  censorship

between the Ucs. and the Pcs. Negation is a substitute, at a higher

level, for repression. In the Ucs. there are only contents, cathected

with greater or lesser strength.

   The cathectic intensities are much more mobile. By the process of

displacement one idea may surrender to another its whole quota of

cathexis; by the process of condensation it may appropriate the whole

cathexis of several other ideas. I have proposed to regard these two

processes as distinguishing marks of the so-called primary psychical

process.  In  the  system Pcs.  the secondary  process¹  is  dominant.

When a primary process is allowed to take its course in connection

with elements belonging to the system Pcs., it appears ‘comic’ and

excites laughter.

 

   ¹ Cf. the discussion in Chapter VII of The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), based on ideas

developed by Breuer in Studies on Hysteria (Breuer and Freud, 1895).
                                     The Unconscious

                                                                                      3010

 

   The processes of the system Ucs. are timeless; i.e. they are not

ordered temporally, are not altered by the passage of time; they have

no reference to time at all. Reference to time is bound up, once again,

with the work of the system Cs.

   The Ucs. processes pay just as little regard to reality. They are

subject  to  the  pleasure  principle;  their  fate  depends  only  on  how

strong  they  are  and  on  whether  they  fulfil  the  demands  of  the

pleasure-unpleasure regulation.

   To sum up: exemption from mutual contradiction, primary process

(mobility of cathexes), timelessness, and replacement of external by

psychical reality - these are the characteristics which we may expect

to find in processes belonging to the system Ucs.¹

   Unconscious processes only become cognizable by us under the

conditions  of  dreaming  and  of  neurosis  -  that  is  to  say,  when

processes of the higher, Pcs., system are set back to an earlier stage

by  being  lowered  (by  regression).  In  themselves  they  cannot  be

cognized, indeed are even incapable of carrying on their existence; for

the system Ucs. is at a very early moment overlaid by the Pcs. which

has taken over access to consciousness and to motility. Discharge

from the system Ucs. passes into somatic innervation that leads to

development of affect; but even this path of discharge is, as we have

seen, contested by the Pcs. By itself, the system Ucs. would not in

normal conditions be able to bring about any expedient muscular acts,

with the exception of those already organized as reflexes.

 

   ¹ We are reserving for a different context the mention of another notable privilege of the

Ucs.
 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3011

 

      The  full  significance  of  the  characteristics  of  the  system Ucs.

described  above  could  only  be  appreciated  by  us  if  we  were  to

contrast and compare them with those of the system Pcs. But thiswould take us so far afield that I propose that we should once more

call a halt and not undertake the comparison of the two till we can do

so in connection with our discussion of the higher system. Only the

most pressing points of all will be mentioned at this stage.

   The processes of the system Pcs. display - no matter whether they

are already conscious or only capable of becoming conscious - an

inhibition of the tendency of cathected ideas towards discharge. When

a process passes from one idea to another, the first idea retains a part

of  its  cathexis  and  only  a  small  portion  undergoes  displacement.

Displacements  and  condensations  such  as  happen  in  the  primary

process  are  excluded  or  very  much  restricted.  This  circumstance

caused  Breuer  to  assume  the  existence  of  two  different  states  of

cathectic energy in mental life: one in which the energy is tonically

‘bound’ and the other in which it is freely mobile and presses towards

discharge. In my opinion this distinction represents the deepest insight

we have gained up to the present into the nature of nervous energy,

and I do not see how we can avoid making it. A metapsychological

presentation  would  most  urgently  call  for  further  discussion  at  this

point, though perhaps that would be too daring an undertaking as yet.

   Further, it devolves upon the system Pcs. to make communication

possible  between  the  different  ideational  contents  so  that  they  can

influence one another, to give them an order in time, and to set up a

censorship or several censorships; ‘reality testing’ too, and the reality-

principle, are in its province. Conscious memory, moreover, seems to

depend wholly on the Pcs. This should be clearly distinguished from

the memory-traces in which the experiences of the Ucs. are fixed, and

probably corresponds to a special registration such as we proposed

(but  later  rejected)  to  account  for  the  relation  of  conscious  to

unconscious ideas. In this connection, also, we shall find means for

putting an end to our oscillations in regard to the naming of the higher

system - which we have hitherto spoken of indifferently, sometimes as

the Pcs. and sometimes as the Cs.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3012

    Nor will it be out of place here to utter a warning against any over-

hasty generalization of what we have brought to light concerning the

distribution of the various mental functions between the two systems.

We are describing the state of affairs as it appears in the adult human

being, in whom the system Ucs. operates, strictly speaking, only as a

preliminary stage of the higher organization. The question of what the

content and connections of that system are during the development of

the individual, and of what significance it possesses in animals - these

are  points  on  which  no  conclusion  can  be  deduced  from  our

description:  they  must  be  investigated  independently.  Moreover,  in

human  beings  we  must  be  prepared  to  find  possible  pathological

conditions under which the two systems alter, or even exchange, both

their content and their characteristics.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3013

 

                VI.  COMMUNICATION BETWEEN THE TWO SYSTEMS

 

   It would nevertheless be wrong to imagine that the Ucs. remains at

rest while the whole work of the mind is performed by the Pcs. - that

the Ucs. is something finished with, a vestigial organ, a residuum from

the  process  of  development.  It  is  wrong  also  to  suppose  that

communication  between  the  two  systems  is  confined  to  the  act  of

repression, with the Pcs. casting everything that seems disturbing to it

into  the  abyss  of  the Ucs.  On  the  contrary,  the Ucs.  is  alive  and

capable  of  development  and  maintains  a  number  of  other  relations

with the Pcs., amongst them that of co-operation. In brief, it must be

said that the Ucs. is continued into what are known as derivatives, that

it is accessible to the impressions of life, that it constantly influences

the Pcs., and is even, for its part, subjected to influences from the Pcs.

   Study of the derivatives of the Ucs. will completely disappoint our

expectations of a schematically clear-cut distinction between the two

psychical systems. This will no doubt give rise to dissatisfaction with

our results and will probably be used to cast doubts on the value of

the way in which we have divided up the psychical processes. Our

answer is, however, that we have no other aim but that of translatinginto theory the results of observation, and we deny that there is any

obligation on us to achieve at our first attempt a well-rounded theory

which  will  commend  itself  by  its  simplicity.  We  shall  defend  the

complications  of  our  theory  so  long  as  we  find  that  they  meet  the

results of observation, and we shall not abandon our expectations of

being led in the end by those very complications to the discovery of a

state of affairs which, while simple in itself, can account for all the

complications of reality.

   Among the derivatives of the Ucs. instinctual impulses, of the sort

we  have  described,  there  are  some  which  unite  in  themselves

characters  of  an  opposite  kind.  On  the  one  hand,  they  are  highly

organized,  free  from  self-contradiction,  have  made  use  of  every

acquisition of the system Cs. and would hardly be distinguished in our

judgement from the formations of that system. On the other hand they

are  unconscious  and  are  incapable  of  becoming  conscious.  Thus

qualitatively they belong to the system Pcs., but factually to the Ucs.

Their origin is what decides their fate. We may compare them with

individuals of mixed race who, taken all round, resemble white men,

but  who  betray  their  coloured  descent  by  some  striking  feature  or

other, and on that account are excluded from society and enjoy none

of  the  privileges  of  white  people.  Of  such  a  nature  are  those

phantasies of normal people as well as of neurotics which we have

recognized as preliminary stages in the formation both of dreams and

of symptoms and which, in spite of their high degree of organization,

remain repressed and therefore cannot become conscious. They draw

near to consciousness and remain undisturbed so long as they do not

have an intense cathexis, but as soon as they exceed a certain height

of  cathexis  they  are  thrust  back.  Substitutive  formations,  too,  are

highly organized derivatives of the Ucs. of this kind; but these succeed

in  breaking  through  into  consciousness,  when  circumstances  are

favourable  -  for  example,  if  they  happen  to  join  forces  with  an

anticathexis from the Pcs.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3014

       When,  elsewhere,  we  come  to  examine  more  closely  the

preconditions  for  becoming  conscious,  we  shall  be  able  to  find  a

solution of some of the difficulties that arise at this juncture. Here it

seems a good plan to look at things from the angle of consciousness,

in  contrast  to  our  previous  approach,  which  was  upwards  from  the

Ucs.  To  consciousness  the  whole  sum  of  psychical  processes

presents itself as the realm of the preconscious. A very great part of

this preconscious originates in the unconscious, has the character of

its derivatives and is subjected to a censorship before it can become

conscious. Another part of the Pcs. is capable of becoming conscious

without  any  censorship.  Here  we  come  upon  a  contradiction  of  an

earlier assumption. In discussing the subject of repression we were

obliged  to  place  the  censorship  which  is  decisive  for  becoming

conscious  between  the  systems Ucs.  and Pcs..  Now  it  becomes

probable  that  there  is  a  censorship  between  the Pcs.  and  the Cs.

Nevertheless  we  shall  do  well  not  to  regard  this  complication  as  a

difficulty, but to assume that to every transition from one system to

that immediately above it (that is, every advance to a higher stage of

psychical organization) there corresponds a new censorship. This, it

may be remarked, does away with the assumption of a continuous

laying down of new registrations.

   The reason for all these difficulties is to be found in the circumstance

that the attribute of being conscious, which is the only characteristic of

psychical  processes  that  is  directly  presented  to  us,  is  in  no  way

suited to serve as a criterion for the differentiation of systems. Apart

from the fact that the conscious is not always conscious but also at

times  latent,  observation  has  shown  that  much  that  shares  the

characteristics of the system Pcs. does not become conscious; and

we learn in addition that the act of becoming conscious is dependent

on the attention of the Pcs. being turned in certain directions. Hence

consciousness  stands  in  no  simple  relation  either  to  the  different

systems or to repression. The truth is that it is not only the psychically

repressed that remains alien to consciousness, but also some of the

impulses which dominate our ego - something, therefore, that forms

the strongest functional antithesis to the repressed. The more we seek

to win our way to a metapsychological view of mental life, the more we

must  learn  to  emancipate  ourselves  from  the  importance  of  thesymptom of ‘being conscious’.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3015

 

   So long as we still cling to this belief we see our generalizations

regularly broken through by exceptions. On the one hand we find that

derivatives of the Ucs. become conscious as substitutive formations

and  symptoms  -  generally,  it  is  true,  after  having  undergone  great

distortion as compared with the unconscious, though often retaining

many characteristics which call for repression. On the other hand, we

find that many preconscious formations remain unconscious, though

we should have expected that, from their nature, they might very well

have  become  conscious.  Probably  in  the  latter  case  the  stronger

attraction of the Ucs. is asserting itself. We are led to look for the more

important  distinction  as  lying,  not  between  the  conscious  and  the

preconscious,  but  between  the  preconscious  and  the  unconscious.

The Ucs. is turned back on the frontier of the Pcs. by the censorship,

but derivatives of the Ucs. can circumvent this censorship, achieve a

high degree of organization and reach a certain intensity of cathexis in

the Pcs. When, however, this intensity is exceeded and they try to

force  themselves  into  consciousness,  they  are  recognized  as

derivatives of the Ucs. and are repressed afresh at the new frontier of

censorship,  between  the Pcs.  and  the Cs.  Thus  the  first  of  these

censorships  is  exercised  against  the Ucs.  itself,  and  the  second

against its Pcs. derivatives. One might suppose that in the course of

individual development the censorship had taken a step forward.

   In psycho-analytic treatment the existence of the second censorship,

located  between  the  systems Pcs.  and Cs.,  is  proved  beyond

question. We require the patient to form numerous derivatives of the

Ucs., we make him pledge himself to overcome the objections of the

censorship  to  these  preconscious  formations  becoming  conscious,

and  by  overthrowing this  censorship,  we  open  up  the  way  to

abrogating the repression accomplished by the earlier one. To this let

us add that the existence of the censorship between the Pcs. and the

Cs. teaches us that becoming conscious is no mere act of perception,but  is  probably  also  a hypercathexis,  a  further  advance  in  the

psychical organization.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3016

 

   Let us turn to the communications between the Ucs. and the other

systems, less in order to establish anything new than in order to avoid

omitting what is most prominent. At the roots of instinctual activity the

systems communicate with one another most extensively. One portion

of the processes which are there excited passes through the Ucs., as

through  a  preparatory  stage,  and  reaches  the  highest  psychical

development in the Cs.; another portion is retained as Ucs. But the

Ucs.  is  also  affected  by  experiences  originating  from  external

perception. Normally all the paths from perception to the Ucs. remain

open, and only those leading on from the Ucs. are subject to blocking

by repression.

   It is a very remarkable thing that the Ucs. of one human being can

react  upon  that  of  another,  without  passing  through  the Cs.  This

deserves  closer  investigation,  especially  with  a  view  to  finding  out

whether preconscious activity can be excluded as playing a part in it;

but, descriptively speaking, the fact is incontestable.

      The  content  of  the  system Pcs.  (or Cs.)  is  derived  partly  from

instinctual  life  (through  the  medium  of  the Ucs.),  and  partly  from

perception.  It  is  doubtful  how  far  the  processes  of  this  system  can

exert a direct influence on the Ucs.; examination of pathological cases

often  reveals  an  almost  incredible  independence  and  lack  of

susceptibility  to  influence  on  the  part  of  the Ucs.  A  complete

divergence of their trends, a total severance of the two systems, is

what  above  all  characterizes  a  condition  of  illness.  Nevertheless,

psycho-analytic treatment is based upon an influencing of the Ucs.

from the direction of the Cs., and at any rate shows that this, though a

laborious task, is not impossible. The derivatives of the Ucs. which act

as intermediaries between the two systems open the way, as we have

already said, towards accomplishing this. But we may safely assume

that a spontaneously effected alteration in the Ucs. from the directionof the Cs. is a difficult and slow process.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3017

 

   Co-operation between a preconscious and an unconscious impulse,

even when the latter is intensely repressed, may come about if there

is a situation in which the unconscious impulse can act in the same

sense as one of the dominant trends. The repression is removed in

this instance, and the repressed activity is admitted as a reinforcement

of  the  one  intended  by  the  ego.  The  unconscious  becomes  ego-

syntonic  in  respect  of  this  single  conjunction  without  any  change

taking place in its repression apart from this. In this co-operation the

influence of the Ucs. is unmistakable: the reinforced tendencies reveal

themselves  as  being  nevertheless  different  from  the  normal;  they

make  specially  perfect  functioning  possible,  and  they  manifest  a

resistance in the face of opposition which is similar to that offered, for

instance, by obsessional symptoms.

      The  content  of  the Ucs.  may  be  compared  with  an  aboriginal

population  in  the  mind.  If  inherited  mental  formations  exist  in  the

human  being  -  something  analogous  to  instinct¹  in  animals  -  these

constitute the nucleus of the Ucs. Later there is added to them what is

discarded during childhood development as unserviceable; and this

need not differ in its nature from what is inherited. A sharp and final

division between the content of the two systems does not, as a rule,

take place till puberty.

 

   ¹ [The German word here is ‘Instinkt’, not the usual ‘Trieb’.]

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3018

 

                      VII.  ASSESSMENT OF THE UNCONSCIOUS

 

   What we have put together in the preceding discussions is probably

as much as we can say about the Ucs. so long as we only draw uponour  knowledge  of  dream-life  and  the  transference  neuroses.  It  is

certainly  not  much,  and  at  some  points  it  gives  an  impression  of

obscurity and confusion; and above all it offers us no possibility of co-

ordinating or subsuming the Ucs. into any context with which we are

already familiar. It is only the analysis of one of the affections which

we call narcissistic psychoneuroses that promises to furnish us with

conceptions through which the enigmatic Ucs. will be brought more

within our reach and, as it were, made tangible.

   Since the publication of a work by Abraham (1908) - which that

conscientious author has attributed to my instigation - we have tried to

base our characterization of Kraepelin’s ‘dementia praecox’ (Bleuler’s

‘schizophrenia’)  on  its  position  with  reference  to  the  antithesis

between  ego  and  object.  In  the  transference  neuroses  (anxiety

hysteria,  conversion  hysteria  and  obsessional  neurosis)  there  was

nothing  to  give  special  prominence  to  this  antithesis.  We  knew,

indeed, that frustration in regard to the object brings on the outbreak

of the neurosis and that the neurosis involves a renunciation of the

real object; we knew too that the libido that is withdrawn from the real

object reverts first to a phantasied object and then to one that had

been repressed (introversion). But in these disorders object-cathexis

in  general  is  retained  with  great  energy,  and  more  detailed

examination of the process of repression has obliged us to assume

that object-cathexis persists in the system Ucs. in spite of - or rather in

consequence of - repression. Indeed, the capacity for transference, of

which  we  make  use  for  therapeutic  purposes  in  these  affections,

presupposes an unimpaired object-cathexis.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3019

 

   In the case of schizophrenia, on the other hand, we have been

driven to the assumption that after the process of repression the libido

that has been withdrawn does not seek a new object, but retreats into

the ego; that is to say, that here the object-cathexes are given up and

a  primitive  objectless  condition  of  narcissism  is  re-established.  The

incapacity of these patients for transference (so far as the pathologicalprocess  extends),  their  consequent  inaccessibility  to  therapeutic

efforts,  their  characteristic  repudiation  of  the  external  world,  the

appearance  of  signs  of  a  hypercathexis  of  their  own  ego,  the  final

outcome in complete apathy - all these clinical features seem to agree

excellently with the assumption that their object-cathexes have been

given up. As regards the relation of the two psychical systems to each

other, all observers have been struck by the fact that in schizophrenia

a  great  deal  is  expressed  as  being  conscious  which  in  the

transference neuroses can only be shown to be present in the Ucs. by

psycho-analysis. But to begin with we were not able to establish any

intelligible  connection  between  the  ego-object  relation  and  the

relationships of consciousness.

      What  we  are  seeking  seems  to  present  itself  in  the  following

unexpected  way.  In  schizophrenics  we  observe  -  especially  in  the

initial  stages,  which  are  so  instructive  -  a  number  of  changes  in

speech, some of which deserve to be regarded from a particular point

of  view.  The  patient  often  devotes  peculiar  care  to  his  way  of

expressing  himself,  which  becomes  ‘stilted’  and  ‘precious’.  The

construction of his sentences undergoes a peculiar disorganization,

making  them  so  incomprehensible  to  us  that  his  remarks  seem

nonsensical. Some reference to bodily organs or innervations is often

given prominence in the content of these remarks. To this may be

added  the  fact  that  in  such  symptoms  of  schizophrenia  as  are

comparable with the substitutive formations of hysteria or obsessional

neurosis,  the  relation  between  the  substitute  and  the  repressed

material nevertheless displays peculiarities which would surprise us in

these two forms of neurosis.

      Dr.  Victor  Tausk  of  Vienna  has  placed  at  my  disposal  some

observations that he has made in the initial stages of schizophrenia in

a female patient, which are particularly valuable in that the patient was

ready to explain her utterances herself. I will take two of his examples

to illustrate the view I wish to put forward, and I have no doubt that

every observer could easily produce plenty of such material.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3020 

   A patient of Tausk’s, a girl who was brought to the clinic after a

quarrel with her lover, complained that her eyes were not right, they

were twisted. This she herself explained by bringing forward a series

of reproaches against her lover in coherent language. ‘She could not

understand  him  at  all,  he  looked  different  every  time;  he  was  a

hypocrite,  an  eye-twister,¹  he  had  twisted  her  eyes;  now  she  had

twisted  eyes;  they  were  not  her  eyes  any  more;  now  she  saw  the

world with different eyes.’

   The patient’s comments on her unintelligible remark have the value

of an analysis, for they contain the equivalent of the remark expressed

in a generally comprehensible form. They throw light at the same time

on the meaning and the genesis of schizophrenic word-formation. I

agree  with  Tausk  in  stressing  in  this  example  the  point  that  the

patient’s relation to a bodily organ (the eye) has arrogated to itself the

representation of the whole content. Here the schizophrenic utterance

exhibits a hypochondriac trait: it has become ‘organ-speech’.

   A second communication by the same patient was as follows: ‘She

was standing in church. Suddenly she felt a jerk; she had to change

her position, as though somebody was putting her into a position, as

though she was being put in a certain position.’

   Now came the analysis of this through a fresh series of reproaches

against her lover. ‘He was common, he had made her common, too,

though she was naturally refined. He had made her like himself by

making her think that he was superior to her; now she had become

like him, because she thought she would be better if she were like

him. He had given a false impression of his position; now she was just

like him’ (by identification), ‘he had put her in a false position’.

   The physical movement of ‘changing her position’, Tausk remarks,

depicted  the  words  ‘putting  her  in  a  false  position’  and  her

identification with her lover. I would call attention once more to the fact

that the whole train of thought is dominated by the element which has

for  its  content  a  bodily  innervation  (or,  rather,  the  sensation  of  it).

Furthermore, a hysterical woman would, in the first example, have in

fact  convulsively  twisted  her  eyes,  and,  in  the  second,  have  given

actual jerks, instead of having the impulse to do so or the sensation of

doing so: and in neither example would she have any accompanyingconscious thoughts, nor would she have been able to express any

such thoughts afterwards.

 

   ¹ [The German ‘Augenverdreher’ has the figurative meaning of ‘deceiver’.]

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3021

 

   These two observations, then, argue in favour of what we have

called hypochondriacal speech or ‘organ-speech’. But, what seems to

us  more  important,  they  also  point  to  something  else,  of  which  we

have innumerable instances (for example, in the cases collected in

Bleuler’s monograph) and which may be reduced to a definite formula.

In schizophrenia words  are  subjected  to  the  same  process  as  that

which makes the dream images out of latent dream-thoughts - to what

we  have  called  the  primary  psychical  process.  They  undergo

condensation, and by means of displacement transfer their cathexes

to  one  another  in  their  entirety.  The  process  may  go  so  far  that  a

single  word,  if  it  is  specially  suitable  on  account  of  its  numerous

connections, takes over the representation of a whole train of thought.

The works of Bleuler, Jung and their pupils offer a quantity of material

which particularly supports this assertion.¹

   Before we draw any conclusion from impressions such as these, let

us  consider  further  the  distinctions  between  the  formation  of

substitutes  in  schizophrenia  on  the  one  hand,  and  in  hysteria  and

obsessional  neurosis  on  the  other  -  subtle  distinctions  which

nevertheless make a strange impression. A patient whom I have at

present under observation has allowed himself to be withdrawn from

all the interests of life on account of a bad condition of the skin of his

face. He declares that he has black heads and deep holes in his face

which  everyone  notices.  Analysis  shows  that  he  is  playing  out  his

castration  complex  upon  his  skin.  At  first  he  worked  at  these

blackheads  remorselessly;  and  it  gave  him  great  satisfaction  to

squeeze them out, because, as he said, something spurted out when

be  did  so.  Then  he  began  to  think  that  a  deep  cavity  appeared

wherever he had got rid of a blackhead, and he reproached himself

most vehemently with having ruined his skin for ever by ‘constantlyfiddling  about  with  his  hand’.  Pressing  out  the  content  of  the

blackheads is clearly to him a substitute for masturbation. The cavity

which then appears owing to his fault is the female genital, i.e. the

fulfilment of the threat of castration (or the phantasy representing that

threat) provoked by his masturbating. This substitutive formation has,

in spite of its hypochondriacal character, considerable resemblance to

a  hysterical  conversion;  and  yet  we  have  a  feeling  that  something

different must be going on here, that a substitutive formation such as

this cannot be attributed to hysteria, even before we can say in what

the difference consists. A tiny little cavity such as a pore of the skin

would hardly be used by a hysteric as a symbol for the vagina, which

he is otherwise ready to compare with every imaginable object that

encloses a hollow space. Besides, we should expect the multiplicity of

these little cavities to prevent him from using them as a substitute for

the female genital. The same applies to the case of a young patient

reported by Tausk some years ago to the Vienna Psycho-Analytical

Society. This patient behaved in other respects exactly as though he

were suffering from an obsessional neurosis; he took hours to wash

and dress, and so on. It was noticeable, however, that he was able to

give the meaning of his inhibitions without any resistance. In putting

on his stockings, for instance, he was disturbed by the idea that he

must pull apart the stitches in the knitting, i.e. the holes, and to him

every hole was a symbol of the female genital aperture. This again is

a thing which we cannot attribute to an obsessional neurotic. Reitler

observed a patient of the latter sort, who also suffered from having to

take  a  long  time  over  putting  on  his  stockings;  this  man,  after

overcoming  his  resistances,  found  as  the  explanation  that  his  foot

symbolized  a  penis,  that  putting  on  the  stocking  stood  for  a

masturbatory act, and that he had to keep on pulling the stocking on

and off, partly in order to complete the picture of masturbation, and

partly in order to undo that act.

 

   ¹ The dream-work, too, occasionally treats words like things, and so creates very similar

‘schizophrenic’ utterances or neologisms.
 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3022 

   If we ask ourselves what it is that gives the character of strangeness

to the substitutive formation and the symptom in schizophrenia, we

eventually come to realize that it is the predominance of what has to

do with words over what has to do with things. As far as the thing

goes, there is only a very slight similarity between squeezing out a

blackhead  and  an  emission  from  the  penis,  and  still  less  similarity

between the innumerable shallow pores of the skin and the vagina;

but in the former case there is, in both instances, a ‘spurting out’, while

in the latter the cynical saying, ‘a hole is a hole’, is true verbally. What

has  dictated  the  substitution  is  not  the  resemblance  between  the

things denoted but the sameness of the words used to express them.

Where the two - word and thing - do not coincide, the formation of

substitutes  in  schizophrenia  deviates  from  that  in  the  transference

neuroses.

      If  now  we  put  this  finding  alongside  the  hypothesis  that  in

schizophrenia object-cathexes are given up, we shall be obliged to

modify  the  hypothesis  by  adding  that  the  cathexis  of  the word-

presentations of objects is retained. What we have permissibly called

the conscious presentation of the object can now be split up into the

presentation of the word and the presentation of the thing; the latter

consists  in  the  cathexis,  if  not  of  the  direct  memory-images  of  the

thing, at least of remoter memory-traces derived from these. We now

seem to know all at once what the difference is between a conscious

and an unconscious presentation. The two are not, as we supposed,

different  registrations  of  the  same  content  in  different  psychical

localities, nor yet different functional states of cathexis in the same

locality; but the conscious presentation comprises the presentation of

the thing plus the presentation of the word belonging to it, while the

unconscious presentation is the presentation of the thing alone. The

system Ucs.   contains the thing-cathexes of the objects, the first and

true  object-cathexes;  the  system Pcs.  comes  about  by  this  thing-

presentation being hypercathected through being linked with the word-

presentations corresponding to it. It is these hypercathexes, we may

suppose, that bring about a higher psychical organization and make it

possible for the primary process to be succeeded by the secondary

process which is dominant in the Pcs. Now, too, we are in a position tostate  precisely  what  it  is  that  repression  denies  to  the  rejected

presentation  in  the  transference  neuroses:  what  it  denies  to  the

presentation is translation into words which shall remain attached to

the object. A presentation which is not put into words, or a psychical

act which is not hypercathected, remains thereafter in the Ucs. in a

state of repression.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3023

 

   I should like to point out at what an early date we already possessed

the insight which to-day enables us to understand one of the most

striking characteristics of schizophrenia. In the last few pages of The

Interpretation of Dreams, which was published in 1900, the view was

developed that thought-processes, i.e. those acts of cathexis which

are comparatively remote from perception, are in themselves without

quality and unconscious, and that they attain their capacity to become

conscious only through being linked with the residues of perceptions

of words. But word-presentations, for their part too, are derived from

sense-perceptions, in the same way as thing-presentations are; the

question  might  therefore  be  raised  why  presentations  of  objects

cannot become conscious through the medium of their own perceptual

residues.  Probably,  however,  thought  proceeds  in  systems  so  far

remote from the original perceptual residues that they have no longer

retained anything of the qualities of those residues, and, in order to

become conscious, need to be reinforced by new qualities. Moreover,

by  being  linked  with  words,  cathexes  can  be  provided  with  quality

even  when  they  represent  only relations  between  presentations  of

objects and are thus unable to derive any quality from perceptions.

Such  relations,  which  become  comprehensible  only  through  words,

form a major part of our thought-processes. As we can see, being

linked with word-presentations is not yet the same thing as becoming

conscious, but only makes it possible to become so; it is therefore

characteristic of the system Pcs. and of that system alone. With these

discussions, however, we have evidently departed from our subject

proper  and  find  ourselves  plunged  into  problems  concerning  thepreconscious  and  the  conscious,  which  for  good  reasons  we  are

reserving for separate treatment.

 


                                    The Unconscious

                                                                                      3024

 

   As regards schizophrenia, which we only touch on here so far as

seems indispensable for a general understanding of the Ucs., a doubt

must  occur  to  us  whether  the  process  here  termed  repression  has

anything at all in common with the repression which takes place in the

transference neuroses. The formula that repression is a process which

occurs between the systems Ucs. and Pcs. (or Cs.), and results in

keeping  something  at  a  distance  from  consciousness,  must  in  any

event be modified, in order that it may also be able to include the case

of dementia praecox and other narcissistic affections. But the ego’s

attempt  at  flight,  which  expresses  itself  in  the  withdrawal  of  the

conscious cathexis, nevertheless remains a factor common [to the two

classes  of  neurosis].  The  most  superficial  reflection  shows  us  how

much more radically and profoundly this attempt at flight, this flight of

the ego, is put into operation in the narcissistic neuroses.

   If, in schizophrenia, this flight consists in withdrawal of instinctual

cathexis from the points which represent the unconscious presentation

of the object, it may seem strange that the part of the presentation of

this  object  which  belongs  to  the  system Pcs.  -  namely,  the  word-

presentations corresponding to it - should, on the contrary, receive a

more  intense  cathexis.  We  might  rather  expect  that  the  word-

presentation, being the preconscious part, would have to sustain the

first impact of repression and that it would be totally uncathectable

after  repression  had  proceeded  as  far  as  the  unconscious  thing-

presentations. This, it is true, is difficult to understand. It turns out that

the  cathexis  of  the  word-presentation  is  not  part  of  the  act  of

repression, but represents the first of the attempts at recovery or cure

which so conspicuously dominate the clinical picture of schizophrenia.

These endeavours are directed towards regaining the lost object, and

it may well be that to achieve this purpose they set off on a path that

leads to the object via the verbal part of it, but then find themselvesobliged to be content with words instead of things. It is a general truth

that  our  mental  activity  moves  in  two  opposite  directions:  either  it

starts  from  the  instincts  and  passes  through  the  system Ucs.  to

conscious  thought-activity;  or,  beginning  with  an  instigation  from

outside, it passes through the system Cs. and Pcs. till it reaches the

Ucs. cathexes of the ego and objects. This second path must, in spite

of the repression which has taken place, remain traversable, and it lies

open  to  some  extent  to  the  endeavours  made  by  the  neurosis  to

regain its objects. When we think in abstractions there is a danger that

we  may  neglect  the  relations  of  words  to  unconscious  thing-

presentations,  and  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  expression  and

content of our philosophizing then begins to acquire an unwelcome

resemblance to the mode of operation of schizophrenics. We may, on

the other hand, attempt a characterization of the schizophrenic’s mode

of  thought  by  saying  that  he  treats  concrete  things  as  though  they

were abstract.

   If we have made a true assessment of the nature of the Ucs. and

have correctly defined the difference between an unconscious and a

preconscious presentation, then our researches will inevitably bring us

back from many other points to this same piece of insight.

                                                                                       3025

 

  A METAPSYCHOLOGICAL SUPPLEMENT TO THE THEORY OF

                                        DREAMS

                                    (1917 [1915])

 


                                                                                      3026

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3027

 

  A METAPSYCHOLOGICAL SUPPLEMENT TO THE THEORY OF

                                      DREAMS ¹

 

We  shall  discover  in  various  connections  how  much  our  enquiries

benefit if certain states and phenomena which may be regarded as

normal  prototypes  of  pathological  affections  are  brought  up  for

purposes of comparison. Among these we may include such affective

states as grief and being in love, as well as the state of sleep and the

phenomenon of dreaming.

   We are not in the habit of devoting much thought to the fact that

every night human beings lay aside the wrappings in which they have

enveloped their skin, as well as anything which they may use as a

supplement to their bodily organs (so far as they have succeeded in

making good those organs’ deficiencies by substitutes), for instance,

their spectacles, their false hair and teeth, and so on. We may add

that  when  they  go  to  sleep  they  carry  out  an  entirely  analogous

undressing  of  their  minds  and  lay  aside  most  of  their  psychical

acquisitions. Thus on both counts they approach remarkably close to

the  situation  in  which  they  began  life.  Somatically,  sleep  is  a

reactivation of intrauterine existence, fulfilling as it does the conditions

of repose, warmth and exclusion of stimulus; indeed, in sleep many

people resume the foetal posture. The psychical state of a sleeping

person is characterized by an almost complete withdrawal from thesurrounding world and a cessation of all interest in it.

      In  investigating  psychoneurotic  states,  we  find  ourselves  led  to

emphasize in each of them what are known as temporal regressions,

i.e.  the  amount  of  developmental  recession  peculiar  to  it.  We

distinguish two such regressions - one affecting the development of

the ego and the other that of the libido. In the state of sleep, the latter

is  carried  to  the  point  of  restoring  primitive  narcissism,  while  the

former goes back to the stage of hallucinatory satisfaction of wishes.

 

   ¹ This paper and the following one are derived from a collection which I originally intended

to publish in book form under the title ‘Zur Vorbereitung einer Metapsychologie’ [‘Preliminaries
to a Metapsychology’]. They follow on some papers which were printed in Volume III of the
Internationale  Zeitschrift  für  ärztliche  Psychoanalyse  (‘Instincts  and  their  Vicissitudes’,
‘Repression’ and ‘The Unconscious’). The intention of the series is to clarify and carry deeper
the theoretical assumptions on which a psycho-analytic system could be founded.
 


      A Metapsychological Supplement To The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      3028

 

   It is, of course, the study of dreams which has taught us what we

know of the psychical characteristics of the state of sleep. It is true

that dreams only show us the dreamer in so far as he is not sleeping;

nevertheless they are bound to reveal at the same time characteristics

of  sleep  itself.  We  have  come  to  know  from  observation  some

peculiarities  of  dreams  which  we  could  not  at  first  understand,  but

which we can now fit into the picture without difficulty. Thus, we know

that dreams are completely egoistic and that the person who plays the

chief part in their scenes is always to be recognized as the dreamer.

This is now easily to be accounted for by the narcissism of the state of

sleep. Narcissism and egoism, indeed, coincide; the word ‘narcissism’

is  only  intended  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  egoism  is  a  libidinal

phenomenon as well; or, to put it in another way, narcissism may be

described  as  the  libidinal  complement  of  egoism.  The  ‘diagnostic’

capacity of dreams - a phenomenon which is generally acknowledged,

but regarded as puzzling - becomes equally comprehensible, too. In

dreams, incipient physical disease is often detected earlier and more

clearly  than  in  waking  life,  and  all  the  current  bodily  sensations

assume gigantic proportions. This magnification is hypochondriacal incharacter;  it  is  conditional  upon  the  withdrawal  of  all  psychical

cathexes from the external world back on to the ego, and it makes

possible early recognition of bodily changes which in waking life would

still for a time have remained unobserved.

      A  dream  tells  us  that  something  was  going  on  which  tended  to

interrupt sleep, and it enables us to understand in what way it has

been possible to fend off this interruption. The final outcome is that the

sleeper has dreamt and is able to go on sleeping; the internal demand

which was striving to occupy him has been replaced by an external

experience,  whose  demand  has  been  disposed  of.  A  dream  is,

therefore, among other things, a projection: an externalization of an

internal  process.  We  may  recall  that  we  have  already  met  with

projection  elsewhere  among  the  means  adopted  for  defence.  The

mechanism of a hysterical phobia, too, culminates in the fact that the

subject  is  able  to  protect  himself  by  attempts  at  flight  against  an

external danger which has taken the place of an internal instinctual

claim. We will, however, defer the full treatment of projection till we

come  to  analyse  the  narcissistic  disorder  in  which  this  mechanism

plays the most striking part.

 


      A Metapsychological Supplement To The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      3029

 

   In what way, however, can a case arise in which the intention to

sleep meets with an interruption? The interruption may proceed from

an internal excitation or from an external stimulus. Let us first consider

the  more  obscure  and  more  interesting  case  of  interruption  from

within. Observation shows that dreams are instigated by residues from

the previous day - thought-cathexes which have not submitted to the

general  withdrawal  of  cathexes,  but  have  retained  in  spite  of  it  a

certain  amount  of  libidinal  or  other  interest.  Thus  the  narcissism  of

sleep has from the outset had to admit an exception at this point, and

it is here that the formation of dreams takes its start. In analysis we

make the acquaintance of these ‘day’s residues’ in the shape of latent

dream-thoughts; and, both by reason of their nature and of the whole

situation, we must regard them as preconscious ideas, as belonging tothe system Pcs.

      We  cannot  proceed  any  further  in  explaining  the  formation  of

dreams till we have overcome certain difficulties. The narcissism of

the state of sleep implies a withdrawal of cathexis from all ideas of

objects, from both the unconscious and the preconscious portions of

those  ideas.  If,  then,  certain  day’s  residues  have  retained  their

cathexis, we hesitate to suppose that they have acquired at night so

much energy as to compel notice on the part of consciousness; we

should  be  more  inclined  to  suppose  that  the  cathexis  they  have

retained is far weaker than that which they possessed during the day.

Here  analysis  saves  us  further  speculation,  for  it  shows  that  these

day’s residues must receive a reinforcement which has its source in

unconscious instinctual impulses if they are to figure as constructors

of dreams. This hypothesis presents no immediate difficulties, for we

have every reason to suppose that in sleep the censorship between

the Pcs.  and  the Ucs.  is  greatly  reduced,  so  that  communication

between the two systems is made easier.

 


      A Metapsychological Supplement To The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      3030

 

   But there is another doubt, which we must not pass over in silence.

If the narcissistic state of sleep has resulted in a drawing in of all the

cathexes of the systems Ucs. and Pcs., then there can no longer be

any possibility of the preconscious day’s residues being reinforced by

unconscious instinctual impulses, seeing that these themselves have

surrendered  their  cathexes  to  the  ego.  Here  the  theory  of  dream-

formation  ends  up  in  a  contradiction,  unless  we  can  rescue  it  by

introducing a modification into our assumption about the narcissism of

sleep.

   A restrictive modification of this kind is, as we shall discover later,

necessary in the theory of dementia praecox as well. This must be to

the  effect  that  the  repressed  portion  of  the  system Ucs.  does  not

comply with the wish to sleep that comes from the ego, that it retains

its cathexis in whole or in part, and that in general, in consequence of

repression, it has acquired a certain measure of independence of theego. Accordingly, too, some amount of the expenditure on repression

(anticathexis) would have to be maintained throughout the night, in

order to meet the instinctual danger - though the inaccessibility of all

paths leading to a release of affect and to motility may considerably

diminish  the  height  of  the  anticathexis  that  is  necessary.  Thus  we

should picture the situation which leads to the formation of dreams as

follows. The wish to sleep endeavours to draw in all the cathexes sent

out by the ego and to establish an absolute narcissism. This can only

partly  succeed,  for  what  is  repressed  in  the  system Ucs.  does  not

obey the wish to sleep. A part of the anticathexes has therefore to be

maintained, and the censorship between the Ucs. and the Pcs. must

remain, even if not at its full strength. So far as the dominance of the

ego extends, all the systems are emptied of cathexes. The stronger

the Ucs. instinctual cathexes are, the more unstable is sleep. We are

acquainted, too, with the extreme case where the ego gives up the

wish to sleep, because it feels unable to inhibit the repressed impulses

set  free  during  sleep  -  in  other  words,  where  it  renounces  sleep

because of its fear of its dreams.

 


      A Metapsychological Supplement To The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      3031

 

   Later on we shall learn to recognize the momentous nature of this

hypothesis  regarding  the  unruliness  of  repressed  impulses.  For  the

present let us follow out the situation which occurs in dream-formation.

   The possibility mentioned above - that some of the preconscious

thoughts of the day may also prove resistant and retain a part of their

cathexis - must be recognized as a second breach in narcissism. At

bottom, the two cases may be identical. The resistance of the day’s

residues may originate in a link with unconscious impulses which is

already  in  existence  during  waking  life;  or  the  process  may  be

somewhat less simple, and the day’s residues which have not been

wholly  emptied  of  cathexis  may  establish  a  connection  with  the

repressed material only after the state of sleep has set in, thanks to

the easing of communication between the Pcs. and the Ucs. In both

cases there follows the same decisive step in dream-formation: thepreconscious  dream-wish  is  formed,  which gives  expression  to  the

unconscious  impulse  in  the  material  of  the  preconscious  day’s

residues.  This  dream-wish  must  be  sharply  distinguished  from  the

day’s  residues;  it  need  not  have  existed  in  waking  life  and  it  may

already display the irrational character possessed by everything that is

unconscious  when  we  translate  it  into  the  conscious.  Again,  the

dream-wish  must  not  be  confused  with  the  wishful  impulses  which

may have been present, though they certainly need not necessarily be

present,  amongst  the  preconscious  (latent)  dream-thoughts.  If,

however, there were any such preconscious wishes, the dream-wish

associates itself with them, as a most effective reinforcement of them.

 


      A Metapsychological Supplement To The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      3032

 

   We have now to consider the further vicissitudes undergone by this

wishful  impulse,  which  in  its  essence  represents  an  unconscious

instinctual  demand  and  which  has  been  formed  in  the Pcs.  as  a

dream-wish  (a  wish-fulfilling  phantasy).  Reflection  tells  us  that  this

wishful impulse may be dealt with along three different paths. It may

follow the path that would be normal in waking life, by pressing from

the Pcs. to consciousness; or it may bypass the Cs. and find direct

motor  discharge;  or  it  may  take  the  unexpected  path  which

observation  enables  us  in  fact  to  trace.  In  the  first  case,  it  would

become a delusion having as content the fulfilment of the wish; but in

the state of sleep this never happens. With our scanty knowledge of

the  metapsychological  conditions  of  mental  processes,  we  may

perhaps take this fact as a hint that a complete emptying of a system

renders  it  little  susceptible  to  instigation.  The  second  case,  that  of

direct motor discharge, should be excluded by the same principle; for

access  to  motility  normally  lies  yet  another  step  beyond  the

censorship  of  consciousness.  But  we  do  meet  with  exceptional

instances in which this happens, in the form of somnambulism. We do

not  know  what  conditions  make  this  possible,  or  why  it  does  not

happen more often. What actually happens in dream-formation is a

very remarkable and quite unforeseen turn of events. The process,begun in the Pcs. and reinforced by the Ucs., pursues a backward

course,  through  the Ucs.      to  perception,  which  is  pressing  upon

consciousness. This regression is the third phase of dream-formation.

For  the  sake  of  clarity,  we  will  repeat  the  two  earlier  ones:  the

reinforcement of the Pcs. by the Ucs., and the setting up of the dream-

wish.

   We call this kind of regression a topographical one, to distinguish it

from the previously mentioned temporal or developmental regression.

The  two  do  not  necessarily  always  coincide,  but  they  do  so  in  the

particular  example  before  us.  The  reversal  of  the  course  of  the

excitation from the Pcs. through the Ucs. to perception is at the same

time a return to the early stage of hallucinatory wish-fulfilment.

 


      A Metapsychological Supplement To The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      3033

 

   We have already in The Interpretation of Dreams described the way

in which the regression of the preconscious day’s residues takes place

in  dream-formation.  In  this  process  thoughts  are  transformed  into

images, mainly of a visual sort; that is to say, word-presentations are

taken back to the thing-presentations which correspond to them, as if,

in  general,  the  process  were  dominated  by  considerations  of

representability. When regression has been completed, a number of

cathexes are left over in the system Ucs. - cathexes of memories of

things.  The  primary  psychical  process  is  brought  to  bear  on  these

memories,  till,  by  condensation  of  them  and  displacement  between

their respective cathexes, it has shaped the manifest dream-content.

Only where the word-presentations occurring in the day’s residues are

recent and current residues of perceptions, and not the expression of

thoughts,  are  they  themselves  treated  like  thing-presentations,  and

subjected to the influence of condensation and displacement. Hence

the  rule  laid  down  in The  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  and  since

confirmed beyond all doubt, that words and speeches in the dream-

content are not freshly formed, but are modelled on speeches from the

day preceding the dream (or on some other recent impressions, such

as something that has been read). It is very noteworthy how little thedream-work  keeps  to  the  word-presentations;  it  is  always  ready  to

exchange  one  word  for  another  till  it  finds  the  expression  which  is

most handy for plastic representation.¹

 

   ¹ I  also  ascribe  to  considerations  of  representability  the  fact  which  is  insisted  on  and

perhaps over-estimated by Silberer that some dreams admit of two simultaneous, and yet
essentially  different  interpretations,  one  of  which  he  calls  the  ‘analytic’  and  the  other  the
‘anagogic’. When this happens, we are invariably concerned with thoughts of a very abstract
nature,  which  must  have  made  their  representation  in  the  dream  very  difficult.  We  might
compare  it  with  the  problem  of  representing  in  pictures  a  leading  article  from  a  political
newspaper. In such cases, the dream-work must first replace the text that consists of abstract
thoughts by one more concrete, connected with the former in some way - by comparison,
symbolism, allegorical allusion, or best of all, genetically - so that the more concrete text then
takes the place of the abstract one as material for the dream-work. The abstract thoughts
yield the so-called anagogic interpretation, which, in our interpretative work, we discover more
easily than the true analytic one. Otto Rank has justly remarked that certain dreams about
their treatment, dreamt by patients in analysis, are the best models on which to form a view of
these dreams which admit of more than one interpretation.
 


      A Metapsychological Supplement To The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      3034

 

   Now it is in this respect that the essential difference between the

dream-work  and  schizophrenia  becomes  clear.  In  the  latter,  what

becomes the subject of modification by the primary process are the

words themselves in which the preconscious thought was expressed;

in dreams, what are subject to this modification are not the words, but

the thing-presentations to which the words have been taken back. In

dreams there is a topographical regression; in schizophrenia there is

not.  In  dreams  there  is  free  communication  between  (Pcs.)  word-

cathexes  and  (Ucs.)  thing-cathexes,  while  it  is  characteristic  of

schizophrenia that this communication is cut off. The impression this

difference  makes  on  one  is  lessened  precisely  by  the  dream-

interpretations we carry out in psycho-analytic practice. For, owing to

the  fact  that  dream-interpretation  traces  the  course  taken  by  the

dream-work, follows the paths which lead from the latent thoughts to

the dream-elements, reveals the way in which verbal ambiguities have

been exploited, and points out the verbal bridges between different

groups of material - owing to all this, we get an impression now of a

joke, now of schizophrenia, and are apt to forget that for a dream alloperations with words are no more than a preparation for a regression

to things.

      The  completion  of  the  dream-process  consists  in  the  thought-

content  -  regressively  transformed  and  worked  over  into  a  wishful

phantasy - becoming conscious as a sense-perception; while this is

happening it undergoes secondary revision, to which every perceptual

concept is subject. The dream-wish, as we say, is hallucinated, and,

as a hallucination, meets with belief in the reality of its fulfilment. It is

precisely round this concluding piece in the formation of dreams that

the gravest uncertainties centre, and it is in order to clear them up that

we are proposing to compare dreams with pathological states akin to

them.

      The  formation  of  the  wishful  phantasy  and  its  regression  to

hallucination are the most essential parts of the dream-work, but they

do  not  belong  exclusively  to  dreams.  They  are  also  found  in  two

morbid states: in acute hallucinatory confusion (Meynert’s ‘amentia’),

and  in  the  hallucinatory  phase  of  schizophrenia.  The  hallucinatory

delirium of amentia is a clearly recognizable wishful phantasy, often

completely well ordered like a perfect day-dream. One might speak

quite generally of a ‘hallucinatory wishful psychosis’, and attribute it

equally to dreams and amentia. There are even dreams which consist

of nothing but undistorted wishful phantasies with a very rich content.

The  hallucinatory  phase  of  schizophrenia  has  been  less  thoroughly

studied;  it  seems  as  a  rule  to  be  of  a  composite  nature,  but  in  its

essence  it  might  well  correspond  to  a  fresh  attempt  at  restitution,

designed  to  restore  a  libidinal  cathexis  to  the  ideas  of  objects.¹  I

cannot  extend  the  comparison  to  the  other  hallucinatory  states  in

various  pathological  disorders,  because  in  their  case  I  have  no

experience of my own upon which to draw, and cannot utilize that of

other observers.

 

   ¹ In the paper on ‘The Unconscious’ we recognized the hypercathexis of word-presentations

as a first attempt of this kind.
 


      A Metapsychological Supplement To The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      3035

    Let us be clear that the hallucinatory wishful psychosis - in dreams

or elsewhere - achieves two by no means identical results. It not only

brings  hidden  or  repressed  wishes  into  consciousness;  it  also

represents  them,  with  the  subject’s  entire  belief,  as  fulfilled.  The

concurrence  of  these  two  results  calls  for  explanation.  It  is  quite

impossible to maintain that unconscious wishes must necessarily be

taken for realities when once they have become conscious; for, as we

know,  our  judgement  is  very  well  able  to  distinguish  realities  from

ideas and wishes, however intense they may be. On the other hand, it

seems  justifiable  to  assume  that  belief  in  reality  is  bound  up  with

perception through the senses. When once a thought has followed the

path to regression as far back as to the unconscious memory-traces of

objects and thence to perception, we accept the perception of it as

real. So hallucination brings belief in reality with it. We now have to

ask  ourselves  what  determines  the  coming  into  being  of  a

hallucination. The first answer would be regression, and this would

replace  the  problem  of  the  origin  of  hallucination  by  that  of  the

mechanism of regression. As regards dreams, this latter problem need

not remain long unanswered. Regression of Pcs. dream-thoughts to

mnemic images of things is clearly the result of the attraction which

the Ucs.  instinctual  representatives  -  e.g.  repressed  memories  of

experiences - exercise upon the thoughts which have been put into

words. But we soon perceive that we are on a false scent. If the secret

of  hallucination  is  nothing  else  than  that  of  regression,  every

regression  of  sufficient  intensity  would  produce  hallucination  with

belief in its reality. But we are quite familiar with situations in which a

process  of  regressive  reflection  brings  to  consciousness  very  clear

visual mnemic images, though we do not on that account for a single

moment  take  them  for  real  perceptions.  Again,  we  could  very  well

imagine the dream-work penetrating to mnemic images of this kind,

making conscious to us that was previously unconscious, and holding

up to us a wishful phantasy which rouses our longing, but which we

should not regard as a real fulfilment of the wish. Hallucination must

therefore be something more than the regressive revival of mnemic

images that are in themselves Ucs.

       A Metapsychological Supplement To The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      3036

 

   Let us, furthermore, bear in mind the great practical importance of

distinguishing perceptions from ideas, however intensely recalled. Our

whole relation to the external world, to reality, depends on our ability

to  do  so.  We  have  put  forward  the  fiction  that  we  did  not  always

possess this ability and that at the beginning of our mental life we did

in fact hallucinate the satisfying object when we felt the need for it. But

in such a situation satisfaction did not occur, and this failure must very

soon  have  moved  us  to  create  some  contrivance  with  the  help  of

which it was possible to distinguish such wishful perceptions from a

real fulfilment and to avoid them for the future. In other words, we

gave up hallucinatory satisfaction of our wishes at a very early period

and set up a kind of ‘reality-testing’. The question now arises in what

this  reality-testing  consisted,  and  how  the  hallucinatory  wishful

psychosis of dreams and amentia and similar conditions succeeds in

abolishing it and in re-establishing the old mode of satisfaction.

      The  answer  can  be  given  if  we  now  proceed  to  define  more

precisely the third of our psychical systems, the system Cs., which

hitherto  we  have  not  sharply  distinguished  from  the Pcs.  In The

Interpretation of Dreams we were already led to a decision to regard

conscious perception as the function of a special system, to which we

ascribed certain curious properties, and to which we shall now have

good  grounds  for  attributing  other  characteristics  as  well.  We  may

regard this system, which is there called the Pcpt., as coinciding with

the  system Cs.,  on  whose  activity  becoming  conscious  usually

depends.  Nevertheless,  even  so,  the  fact  of  a  thing’s  becoming

conscious still does not wholly coincide with its belonging to a system,

for we have learnt that it is possible to be aware of sensory mnemic

images to which we cannot possibly allow a psychical location in the

systems Cs. or Pcpt.

   We must, however, put off discussing this difficulty till we can focus

our interest upon the system Cs. itself. In the present connection we

may be allowed to assume that hallucination consists in a cathexis of

the system Cs. (Pcpt.), which, however, is not effected - as normally -

from without, but from within, and that a necessary condition for theoccurrence  of  hallucination  is  that  regression  shall  be  carried  far

enough to reach this system itself and in so doing be able to pass over

reality-testing.¹

   In an earlier passage² we ascribed to the still helpless organism a

capacity  for  making  a  first  orientation  in  the  world  by  means  of  its

perceptions, distinguishing ‘external’ and ‘internal’ according to their

relation  to  its  muscular  action.  A  perception  which  is  made  to

disappear by an action is recognized as external, as reality; where

such an action makes no difference, the perception originates within

the subject’s own body - it is not real. It is of value to the individual to

possess  a  means  such  as  this  of  recognizing  reality,  which  at  the

same  time  helps  him  to  deal  with  it,  and  he  would  be  glad  to  be

equipped with a similar power against the often merciless claims of his

instincts. That is why he takes such pains to transpose outwards what

becomes troublesome to him from within - that is, to project it.

 

   ¹ I may add by way of supplement that any attempt to explain hallucination would have to

start out from negative rather than positive hallucination.

   ² ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’.

 


      A Metapsychological Supplement To The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      3037

 

      This  function  of  orientating  the  individual  in  the  world  by

discrimination between what is internal and what is external must now,

after detailed dissection of the mental apparatus, be ascribed to the

system Cs. (Pcpt.) alone. The Cs. must have at its disposal a motor

innervation which determines whether the perception can be made to

disappear  or  whether  it  proves  resistant.  Reality-testing  need  be

nothing more than this contrivance.¹ We can say nothing more precise

on this point, for we know too little as yet of the nature and mode of

operation of the system Cs. We shall place reality-testing among the

major institutions of the ego, alongside the censorships which we have

come  to  recognize  between  the  psychical  systems,  and  we  shall

expect that the analysis of the narcissistic disorders will help to bring

other similar institutions to light.

   On the other hand, we can already learn from pathology the way inwhich reality-testing may be done away with or put out of action. We

shall see this more clearly in the wishful psychosis of amentia than in

that of dreams. Amentia is the reaction to a loss which reality affirms,

but  which  the  ego  has  to  deny,  since  it  finds  it  insupportable.

Thereupon the ego breaks off its relation to reality; it withdraws the

cathexis from the system of perceptions, Cs. - or rather, perhaps, it

withdraws a cathexis, the special nature of which may be the subject

of further enquiry. With this turning away from reality, reality-testing is

got rid of, the (unrepressed, completely conscious) wishful phantasies

are able to press forward into the system, and they are there regarded

as a better reality. Such a withdrawal may be put on a par with the

processes of repression. Amentia presents the interesting spectacle of

a  breach  between  the  ego  and  one  of  its  organs  -  one  which  had

perhaps been its most faithful servant and had been bound up with it

the most intimately.²

 

   ¹ Cf. a later passage on the distinction between testing with regard to reality and testing

with regard to immediacy. [‘Relitätsprüfung’ and ‘Aktualitätsprüfung’.]

   ² I may venture to suggest in this connection that the toxic hallucinoses, too, e.g. alcoholic

delirium, are to be understood in an analogous fashion. Here the unbearable loss imposed by
reality would be precisely the loss of alcohol. When the latter is supplied, the hallucinations
cease.
 


      A Metapsychological Supplement To The Theory Of Dreams

                                                                                      3038

 

   What is performed in amentia by this ‘repression’ is performed in

dreams by voluntary renunciation. The state of sleep does not wish to

know anything of the external world; it takes no interest in reality, or

only  so  far  as  abandoning  the  state  of  sleep  -  waking  up  -  is

concerned. Hence it withdraws cathexis from the system Cs. as well

as from the other systems, the Pcs. and the Ucs., in so far as the

cathexes in them obey the wish to sleep. With the system Cs. thus

uncathected,  the  possibility  of  reality-testing  is  abandoned;  and  the

excitations which, independently of the state of sleep, have entered on

the path of regression will find that path clear as far as the system Cs.

where they will count as undisputed reality.¹

   As regards the hallucinatory psychosis of dementia praecox, weshall infer from our discussion that that psychosis cannot be among

the initial symptoms of the affection. It becomes possible only when

the patient’s ego is so far disintegrated that reality-testing no longer

stands in the way of hallucination.

   In what concerns the psychology of dream-processes we arrive at

the  result  that  all  the  essential  characteristics  of  dreams  are

determined by the conditioning factor of sleep. Aristotle was entirely

right,  long  ago,  in  his  modest  pronouncement  that  dreams  are  the

mental activity of the sleeper. We might expand this and say: they are

a  residue  of  mental  activity,  made  possible  by  the  fact  that  the

narcissistic  state  of  sleep  has  not  been  able  to  be  completely

established.  This  does  not  sound  very  different  from  what

psychologists and philosophers have said all along, but it is based on

quite different views about the structure and function of the mental

apparatus. These views have this advantage over the earlier ones,

that  they  have  given  us  an  understanding,  too,  of  all  the  detailed

characteristics of dreams.

   Finally, let us once more glance at the significant light which the

topography  of  the  process  of  repression  throws  for  us  on  the

mechanism  of  mental  disturbances.  In  dreams  the  withdrawal  of

cathexis  (libido  or  interest)  affects  all  systems  equally;  in  the

transference  neuroses,  the Pcs.  cathexis  is  withdrawn;  in

schizophrenia, the cathexis of the Ucs.; in amentia, that of the Cs.

 

   ¹ Here the principle of the insusceptibility to excitation of uncathected systems appears to

be invalidated in the case of the system Cs. (Pcpt.). But it may be a question of only the
partial removal of cathexis; and for the perceptual system in especial we must assume many
conditions for excitation which are widely divergent from those of other systems. - We are not,
of course, intending to disguise or gloss over the uncertain and tentative character of these
metapsychological discussions. Only deeper investigation can lead to the achievement of a
certain degree of probability.

                                                                                       3039

 

                          MOURNING AND MELANCHOLIA

                                    (1917 [1915])

 


                                                                                      3040

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3041

 

                          MOURNING AND MELANCHOLIA

 

Dreams having served us as the prototype in normal life of narcissistic

mental disorders, we will now try to throw some light on the nature of

melancholia by comparing it with the normal affect of mourning. This

time, however, we must begin by making an admission, as a warning

against  any  over-estimation  of  the  value  of  our  conclusions.

Melancholia,  whose  definition  fluctuates  even  in  descriptive

psychiatry,  takes  on  various  clinical  forms  the  grouping  together  of

which  into  a  single  unity  does  not  seem  to  be  established  with

certainty;  and  some  of  these  forms  suggest  somatic  rather  than

psychogenic affections. Our material, apart from such impressions as

are  open  to  every  observer,  is  limited  to  a  small  number  of  cases

whose psychogenic nature was indisputable. We shall, therefore, from

the outset drop all claim to general validity for our conclusions, and we

shall  console  ourselves  by  reflecting  that,  with  the  means  of

investigation at our disposal to-day, we could hardly discover anything

that was not typical, if not of a whole class of disorders, at least of a

small group of them.

   The correlation of melancholia and mourning seems justified by the

general picture of the two conditions.¹ Moreover, the exciting causes

due to environmental influences are, so far as we can discern them at

all, the same for both conditions. Mourning is regularly the reaction to

the loss of a loved person, or to the loss of some abstraction whichhas taken the place of one, such as one’s country, liberty, an ideal,

and so on. In some people the same influences produce melancholia

instead  of  mourning  and  we  consequently  suspect  them  of  a

pathological  disposition.  It  is  also  well  worth  notice  that,  although

mourning involves grave departures from the normal attitude to life, it

never occurs to us to regard it as a pathological condition and to refer

it to medical treatment. We rely on its being overcome after a certain

lapse of time, and we look upon any interference with it as useless or

even harmful.

 

   ¹  Abraham (1912), to whom we owe the most important of the few analytic studies on this

subject, also took this comparison as his starting point.
 


                              Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3042

 

   The distinguishing mental features of melancholia are a profoundly

painful dejection, cessation of interest in the outside world, loss of the

capacity to love, inhibition of all activity, and a lowering of the self-

regarding feelings to a degree that finds utterance in self-reproaches

and  self-revilings,  and  culminates  in  a  delusional  expectation  of

punishment. This picture becomes a little more intelligible when we

consider  that,  with  one  exception,  the  same  traits  are  met  with  in

mourning. The disturbance of self-regard is absent in mourning; but

otherwise the features are the same. Profound mourning, the reaction

to the loss of someone who is loved, contains the same painful frame

of mind, the same loss of interest in the outside world - in so far as it

does  not  recall  him  -  the  same  loss  of  capacity  to  adopt  any  new

object of love (which would mean replacing him) and the same turning

away from any activity that is not connected with thoughts of him. It is

easy to see that this inhibition and circumscription of the ego is the

expression of an exclusive devotion to mourning which leaves nothing

over for other purposes or other interests. It is really only because we

know so well how to explain it that this attitude does not seem to us

pathological.

   We should regard it as an appropriate comparison, too, to call the

mood  of  mourning  a  ‘painful’  one.  We  shall  probably  see  thejustification for this when we are in a position to give a characterization

of the economics of pain.

   In what, now, does the work which mourning performs consist? I do

not think there is anything far-fetched in presenting it in the following

way. Reality-testing has shown that the loved object no longer exists,

and it proceeds to demand that all libido shall be withdrawn from its

attachments  to  that  object.  This  demand  arouses  understandable

opposition - it is a matter of general observation that people never

willingly  abandon  a  libidinal  position,  not  even,  indeed,  when  a

substitute is already beckoning to them. This opposition can be so

intense that a turning away from reality takes place and a clinging to

the object through the medium of a hallucinatory wishful psychosis.¹

Normally,  respect  for  reality  gains  the  day.  Nevertheless  its  orders

cannot be obeyed at once. They are carried out bit by bit, at great

expense  of  time  and  cathectic  energy,  and  in  the  meantime  the

existence of the lost object is psychically prolonged. Each single one

of the memories and expectations in which the libido is bound to the

object is brought up and hypercathected, and detachment of the libido

is accomplished in respect of it. Why this compromise by which the

command  of  reality  is  carried  out  piecemeal  should  be  so

extraordinarily  painful  is  not  at  all  easy  to  explain  in  terms  of

economics. It is remarkable that this painful unpleasure is taken as a

matter of course by us. The fact is, however, that when the work of

mourning is completed the ego becomes free and uninhibited again.

 

   ¹ Cf. the preceding paper.

 


                              Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3043

 

      Let  us  now  apply  to  melancholia  what  we  have  learnt  about

mourning. In one set of cases it is evident that melancholia too may be

the reaction to the loss of a loved object. Where the exciting causes

are different one can recognize that there is a loss of a more ideal

kind. The object has not perhaps actually died, but has been lost as

an object of love (e.g. in the case of a betrothed girl who has been

jilted). In yet other cases one feels justified in maintaining the beliefthat a loss of this kind has occurred, but one cannot see clearly what it

is that has been lost, and it is all the more reasonable to suppose that

the patient cannot consciously perceive what he has lost either. This,

indeed, might be so even if the patient is aware of the loss which has

given  rise  to  his  melancholia,  but  only  in  the  sense  that  he  knows

whom he has lost but not what he has lost in him. This would suggest

that  melancholia  is  in  some  way  related  to  an  object-loss  which  is

withdrawn  from  consciousness,  in  contradistinction  to  mourning,  in

which there is nothing about the loss that is unconscious.

   In mourning we found that the inhibition and loss of interest are fully

accounted for by the work of mourning in which the ego is absorbed.

In melancholia, the unknown loss will result in a similar internal work

and will therefore be responsible for the melancholic inhibition. The

difference is that the inhibition of the melancholic seems puzzling to us

because we cannot see what it is that is absorbing him so entirely.

The melancholic displays something else besides which is lacking in

mourning  -  an  extraordinary  diminution  in  his  self-regard,  an

impoverishment  of  his  ego  on  a  grand  scale.  In  mourning  it  is  the

world which has become poor and empty; in melancholia it is the ego

itself. The patient represents his ego to us as worthless, incapable of

any  achievement  and  morally  despicable;  he  reproaches  himself,

vilifies himself and expects to be cast out and punished. He abases

himself before everyone and commiserates with his own relatives for

being connected with anyone so unworthy. He is not of the opinion

that a change has taken place in him, but extends his self-criticism

back over the past; he declares that he was never any better. This

picture  of  a  delusion  of  (mainly  moral)  inferiority  is  completed  by

sleeplessness  and  refusal  to  take  nourishment,  and  -  what  is

psychologically  very  remarkable  -  by  an  overcoming  of  the  instinct

which compels every living thing to cling to life.

 


                              Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3044

 

   It would be equally fruitless from a scientific and a therapeutic point

of view to contradict a patient who brings these accusations againsthis  ego.  He  must  surely  be  right  in  some  way  and  be  describing

something that is as it seems to him to be. Indeed, we must at once

confirm some of his statements without reservation. He really is as

lacking in interest and as incapable of love and achievement as he

says. But that, as we know, is secondary; it is the effect of the internal

work which is consuming his ego work which is unknown to us but

which is comparable to the work of mourning. He also seems to us

justified in certain other self-accusations; it is merely that he has a

keener eye for the truth than other people who are not melancholic.

When in his heightened self-criticism he describes himself as petty,

egoistic, dishonest, lacking in independence, one whose sole aim has

been to hide the weaknesses of his own nature, it may be, so far as

we know, that he has come pretty near to understanding himself; we

only wonder why a man has to be ill before he can be accessible to a

truth of this kind. For there can be no doubt that if anyone holds and

expresses  to  others  an  opinion  of  himself  such  as  this  (an  opinion

which Hamlet held both of himself and of everyone else ¹), he is ill,

whether he is speaking the truth or whether he is being more or less

unfair  to  himself.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  see  that  there  is  no

correspondence, so far as we can judge, between the degree of self-

abasement and its real justification. A good, capable, conscientious

woman will speak no better of herself after she develops melancholia

than one who is in fact worthless; indeed, the former is perhaps more

likely to fall ill of the disease than the latter, of whom we too should

have nothing good to say. Finally, it must strike us that after all the

melancholic does not behave in quite the same way as a person who

is crushed by remorse and self-reproach in a normal fashion. Feelings

of shame in front of other people, which would more than anything

characterize this latter condition, are lacking in the melancholic, or at

least  they  are  not  prominent  in  him.  One  might  emphasize  the

presence  in  him  of  an  almost  opposite  trait  of  insistent

communicativeness which finds satisfaction in self-exposure.

 

   ¹ ‘Use every man after his desert, and who shall scape whipping?’ (Act II, Scene 2).

 


                              Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3045 

      The  essential  thing,  therefore,  is  not  whether  the  melancholic’s

distressing  self-denigration  is  correct,  in  the  sense  that  his  self-

criticism agrees with the opinion of other people. The point must rather

be that he is giving a correct description of his psychological situation.

He has lost his self-respect and he must have good reason for this. It

is  true  that  we  are  then  faced  with  a  contradiction  that  presents  a

problem which is hard to solve. The analogy with mourning led us to

conclude that he had suffered a loss in regard to an object; what he

tells us points to a loss in regard to his ego.

   Before going into this contradiction, let us dwell for a moment on the

view which the melancholic’s disorder affords of the constitution of the

human ego. We see how in him one part of the ego sets itself over

against the other, judges it critically, and, as it were, takes it as its

object. Our suspicion that the critical agency which is here split off

from the ego might also show its independence in other circumstances

will  be  confirmed  by  every  further  observation.  We  shall  really  find

grounds for distinguishing this agency from the rest of the ego. What

we are here becoming acquainted with is the agency commonly called

‘conscience’;  we  shall  count  it,  along  with  the  censorship  of

consciousness and reality-testing, among the major institutions of the

ego, and we shall come upon evidence to show that it can become

diseased on its own account. In the clinical picture of melancholia,

dissatisfaction with the ego on moral grounds is the most outstanding

feature.  The  patient’s  self-evaluation  concerns  itself  much  less

frequently with bodily infirmity, ugliness or weakness, or with social

inferiority; of this category, it is only his fears and asseverations of

becoming poor that occupy a prominent position.

 


                              Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3046

 

   There is one observation, not at all difficult to make, which leads to

the explanation of the contradiction mentioned above. If one listens

patiently to a melancholic’s many and various self-accusations, one

cannot in the end avoid the impression that often the most violent ofthem are hardly at all applicable to the patient himself, but that with

insignificant modifications they do fit someone else, someone whom

the  patient  loves  or  has  loved  or  should  love.  Every  time  one

examines the facts this conjecture is confirmed. So we find the key to

the  clinical  picture:  we  perceive  that  the  self-reproaches  are

reproaches against a loved object which have been shifted away from

it on to the patient’s own ego.

   The woman who loudly pities her husband for being tied to such an

incapable  wife  as  herself  is  really  accusing  her husband  of  being

incapable, in whatever sense she may mean this. There is no need to

be greatly surprised that a few genuine self-reproaches are scattered

among those that have been transposed back. These are allowed to

obtrude  themselves,  since  they  help  to  mask  the  others  and  make

recognition  of  the  true  state  of  affairs  impossible.  Moreover,  they

derive from the pros and cons of the conflict of love that has led to the

loss of love. The behaviour of the patients, too, now becomes much

more intelligible. Their complaints are really ‘plaints’ in the old sense

of the word. They are not ashamed and do not hide themselves, since

everything  derogatory  that  they  say  about  themselves  is  at  bottom

said  about  someone  else.  Moreover,  they  are  far  from  evincing

towards  those  around  them  the  attitude  of  humility  and

submissiveness that would alone befit such worthless people. On the

contrary, they make the greatest nuisance of themselves, and always

seem as though they felt slighted and had been treated with great

injustice. All this is possible only because the reactions expressed in

their  behaviour  still  proceed  from  a  mental  constellation  of  revolt,

which has then, by a certain process, passed over into the crushed

state of melancholia.

 


                              Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3047

 

   There is no difficulty in reconstructing this process. An object choice,

an attachment of the libido to a particular person, had at one time

existed; then, owing to a real slight or disappointment coming from this

loved person, the relationship was shattered. The result was not thenormal  one  of  a  withdrawal  of  the  libido  from  this  object  and  a

displacement of it on to a new one, but something different, for whose

coming about various conditions seem to be necessary. The object-

cathexis proved to have little power of resistance and was brought to

an end. But the free libido was not displaced on to another object; it

was withdrawn into the ego. There, however, it was not employed in

any unspecified way, but served to establish an identification of the

ego with the abandoned object. Thus the shadow of the object fell

upon the ego, and the latter could henceforth be judged by a special

agency, as though it were an object, the forsaken object. In this way

an  object-loss  was  transformed  into  an  ego-loss  and  the  conflict

between the ego and the loved person into a cleavage between the

critical activity of the ego and the ego as altered by identification.

      One  or  two  things  may  be  directly  inferred  with  regard  to  the

preconditions and effects of a process such as this. On the one hand,

a strong fixation to the loved object must have been present; on the

other hand, in contradiction to this, the object-cathexis must have had

little  power  of  resistance.  As  Otto  Rank  has  aptly  remarked,  this

contradiction seems to imply that the object-choice has been effected

on  a  narcissistic  basis,  so  that  the  object-cathexis,  when  obstacles

come  in  its  way,  can  regress  to  narcissism.  The  narcissistic

identification with the object then becomes a substitute for the erotic

cathexis,  the  result  of  which  is  that  in  spite  of  the  conflict  with  the

loved person the love-relation need not be given up. This substitution

of  identification  for  object-love  is  an  important  mechanism  in  the

narcissistic affections; Karl Landauer (1914) has lately been able to

point to it in the process of recovery in a case of schizophrenia. It

represents, of course, a regression from one type of object-choice to

original narcissism. We have elsewhere shown that identification is a

preliminary stage of object-choice, that it is the first way - and one that

is expressed in an ambivalent fashion - in which the ego picks out an

object.  The  ego  wants  to  incorporate  this  object  into  itself,  and,  in

accordance  with  the  oral  or  cannibalistic  phase  of  libidinal

development in which it is, it wants to do so by devouring it. Abraham

is  undoubtedly  right  in  attributing  to  this  connection  the  refusal  of

nourishment met with in severe forms of melancholia.

                               Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3048

 

   The conclusion which our theory would require - namely, that the

disposition to fall ill of melancholia (or some part of that disposition)

lies in the predominance of the narcissistic type of object-choice - has

unfortunately not yet been confirmed by observation. In the opening

remarks  of  this  paper,  I  admitted  that  the  empirical  material  upon

which this study is founded is insufficient for our needs. If we could

assume an agreement between the results of observation and what

we have inferred, we should not hesitate to include this regression

from object-cathexis to the still narcissistic oral phase of the libido in

our characterization of melancholia. Identifications with the object are

by no means rare in the transference neuroses either; indeed, they

are  a  well-known  mechanism  of  symptom-formation,  especially  in

hysteria. The difference, however, between narcissistic and hysterical

identification  may  be  seen  in  this:  that,  whereas  in  the  former  the

object-cathexis is abandoned, in the latter it persists and manifests its

influence, though this is usually confined to certain isolated actions

and  innervations.  In  any  case,  in  the  transference  neuroses,  too,

identification is the expression of there being something in common,

which may signify love. Narcissistic identification is the older of the two

and it paves the way to an understanding of hysterical identification,

which has been less thoroughly studied.

   Melancholia, therefore, borrows some of its features from mourning,

and the others from the process of regression from narcissistic object-

choice to narcissism. It is on the one hand, like mourning, a reaction to

the real loss of a loved object; but over and above this, it is marked by

a determinant which is absent in normal mourning or which, if it is

present, transforms the latter into pathological mourning. The loss of a

love-object  is  an  excellent  opportunity  for  the  ambivalence  in  love-

relationships to make itself effective and come into the open. Where

there  is  a  disposition  to  obsessional  neurosis  the  conflict  due  to

ambivalence gives a pathological cast to mourning and forces it to

express  itself  in  the  form  of  self-reproaches  to  the  effect  that  the

mourner himself is to blame for the loss of the loved object, i.e. that he

has willed it. These obsessional states of depression following uponthe  death  of  a  loved  person  show  us  what  the  conflict  due  to

ambivalence  can  achieve  by  itself  when  there  is  no  regressive

drawing-in of libido as well. In melancholia, the occasions which give

rise to the illness extend for the most part beyond the clear case of a

loss  by  death,  and  include  all  those  situations  of  being  slighted,

neglected or disappointed, which can import opposed feelings of love

and  hate  into  the  relationship  or  reinforce  an  already  existing

ambivalence.  This  conflict  due  to  ambivalence,  which  sometimes

arises  more  from  real  experiences,  sometimes  more  from

constitutional  factors,  must  not  be  overlooked  among  the

preconditions of melancholia. If the love for the object - a love which

cannot be given up though the object itself is given up - takes refuge

in narcissistic identification, then the hate comes into operation on this

substitutive  object,  abusing  it,  debasing  it,  making  it  suffer  and

deriving sadistic satisfaction from its suffering. The self-tormenting in

melancholia, which is without doubt enjoyable, signifies, just like the

corresponding phenomenon in obsessional neurosis, a satisfaction of

trends of sadism and hate ¹ which relate to an object, and which have

been turned round upon the subject’s own self in the ways we have

been discussing. In both disorders the patients usually still succeed,

by  the  circuitous  path  of  self-punishment,  in  taking  revenge  on  the

original object and in tormenting their loved one through their illness,

having resorted to it in order to avoid the need to express their hostility

to him openly. After all, the person who has occasioned the patient’s

emotional disorder, and on whom his illness is centred, is usually to be

found in his immediate environment. The melancholic’s erotic cathexis

in regard to his object has thus undergone a double vicissitude: part of

it  has  regressed  to  identification,  but  the  other  part,  under  the

influence of the conflict due to ‘ambivalence, has been carried back to

the stage of sadism which is nearer to that conflict.

 

   ¹ For the distinction between the two, see my paper on ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’.

 


                              Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3049

 

      It  is  this  sadism  alone  that  solves  the  riddle  of  the  tendency  tosuicide which makes melancholia so interesting - and so dangerous.

So immense is the ego’s self-love, which we have come to recognize

as the primal state from which instinctual life proceeds, and so vast is

the amount of narcissistic libido which we see liberated in the fear that

emerges at a threat to life, that we cannot conceive how that ego can

consent to its own destruction. We have long known, it is true, that no

neurotic harbours thoughts of suicide which he has not turned back

upon himself from murderous impulses against others, but we have

never been able to explain what interplay of forces can carry such a

purpose through to execution. The analysis of melancholia now shows

that the ego can kill itself only if, owing to the return of the object-

cathexis, it can treat itself as an object - if it is able to direct against

itself the hostility which relates to an object and which represents the

ego’s  original  reaction  to  objects  in  the  external  world.¹  Thus  in

regression  from  narcissistic  object-choice  the  object  has,  it  is  true,

been got rid of, but it has nevertheless proved more powerful than the

ego itself. In the two opposed situations of being most intensely in love

and of suicide the ego is overwhelmed by the object, though in totally

different ways.

   As regards one particular striking feature of melancholia that we

have  mentioned,  the  prominence  of  the  fear  of  becoming  poor,  it

seems plausible to suppose that it is derived from anal erotism which

has been torn out of its context and altered in a regressive sense.

   Melancholia confronts us with yet other problems, the answer to

which in part eludes us. The fact that it passes off after a certain time

has elapsed without leaving traces of any gross changes is a feature it

shares  with  mourning.  We  found  by  way  of  explanation  that  in

mourning  time  is  needed  for  the  command  of  reality-testing  to  be

carried out in detail, and that when this work has been accomplished

the ego will have succeeded in freeing its libido from the lost object.

We may imagine that the ego is occupied with analogous work during

the course of a melancholia; in neither case have we any insight into

the  economics  of  the  course  of  events.  The  sleeplessness  in

melancholia testifies to the rigidity of the condition, the impossibility of

effecting the general drawing-in of cathexes necessary for sleep. The

complex of melancholia behaves like an open wound, drawing to itself

cathectic  energies  -  which  in  the  transference  neuroses  we  havecalled ‘anticathexes’ - from all directions, and emptying the ego until it

is totally impoverished. It can easily prove resistant to the ego’s wish

to sleep.

      What  is  probably  a  somatic  factor,  and  one  which  cannot  be

explained  psychogenically,  makes  itself  visible  in  the  regular

amelioration in the condition that takes place towards evening. These

considerations  bring  up  the  question  whether  a  loss  in  the  ego

irrespectively of the object - a purely narcissistic blow to the ego - may

not  suffice  to  produce  the  picture  of  melancholia  and  whether  an

impoverishment of ego-libido directly due to toxins may not be able to

produce certain forms of the disease.

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘Instincts and their Vicissitudes’.

 


                              Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3050

 

 

   The most remarkable characteristic of melancholia, and the one in

most need of explanation, is its tendency to change round into mania -

a state which is the opposite of it in its symptoms. As we know, this

does not happen to every melancholia. Some cases run their course

in  periodic  relapses,  during  the  intervals  between  which  signs  of

mania  may  be  entirely  absent  or  only  very  slight.  Others  show  the

regular alternation of melancholic and manic phases which has led to

the hypothesis of a circular insanity. One would be tempted to regard

these cases as non-psychogenic, if it were not for the fact that the

psycho-analytic method has succeeded in arriving at a solution and

effecting a therapeutic improvement in several cases precisely of this

kind. It is not merely permissible, therefore, but incumbent upon us to

extend an analytic explanation of melancholia to mania as well.

   I cannot promise that this attempt will prove entirely satisfactory. It

hardly carries us much beyond the possibility of taking one’s initial

bearings. We have two things to go upon: the first is a psycho-analytic

impression, and the second what we may perhaps call a matter of

general economic experience. The impression which several psycho-

analytic investigators have already put into words is that the content ofmania is no different from that of melancholia, that both disorders are

wrestling with the same ‘complex’, but that probably in melancholia the

ego has succumbed to the complex whereas in mania it has mastered

it or pushed it aside. Our second pointer is afforded by the observation

that all states such as joy, exultation or triumph, which give us the

normal model for mania, depend on the same economic conditions.

What has happened here is that, as a result of some influence, a large

expenditure  of  psychical  energy,  long  maintained  or  habitually

occurring, has at last become unnecessary, so that it is available for

numerous  applications  and  possibilities  of  discharge  -  when,  for

instance,  some  poor  wretch,  by  winning  a  large  sum  of  money,  is

suddenly relieved from chronic worry about his daily bread, or when a

long and arduous struggle is finally crowned with success, or when a

man  finds  himself  in  a  position  to  throw  off  at  a  single  blow  some

oppressive compulsion, some false position which he has long had to

keep  up,  and  so  on.  All  such  situations  are  characterized  by  high

spirits, by the signs of discharge of joyful emotion and by increased

readiness for all kinds of action - in just the same way as in mania,

and  in  complete  contrast  to  the  depression  and  inhibition  of

melancholia. We may venture to assert that mania is nothing other

than  a  triumph  of  this  sort,  only  that  here  again  what  the  ego  has

surmounted  and  what  it  is  triumphing  over  remain  hidden  from  it.

Alcoholic intoxication, which belongs to the same class of states, may

(in so far as it is an elated one) be explained in the same way; here

there is probably a suspension, produced by toxins, of expenditures of

energy in repression. The popular view likes to assume that a person

in a manic state of this kind finds such delight in movement and action

because he is so ‘cheerful’. This false connection must of course be

put right. The fact is that the economic condition in the subject’s mind

referred to above has been fulfilled, and this is the reason why he is in

such high spirits on the one hand and so uninhibited in action on the

other.

 


                              Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3051

    If we put these two indications together, what we find is this. In

mania,  the  ego  must  have  got  over  the  loss  of  the  object  (or  its

mourning over the loss, or perhaps the object itself), and thereupon

the  whole  quota  of  anticathexis  which  the  painful  suffering  of

melancholia had drawn to itself from the ego and ‘bound’ will have

become available. Moreover, the manic subject plainly demonstrates

his liberation from the object which was the cause of his suffering, by

seeking like a ravenously hungry man for new object-cathexes.

   This explanation certainly sounds plausible, but in the first place it is

too indefinite, and, secondly, it gives rise to more new problems and

doubts than we can answer. We will not evade a discussion of them,

even though we cannot expect it to lead us to a clear understanding.

   In the first place, normal mourning, too, overcomes the loss of the

object, and it, too, while it lasts, absorbs all the energies of the ego.

Why, then, after it has run its course, is there no hint in its case of the

economic  condition  for  a  phase  of  triumph?  I  find  it  impossible  to

answer this objection straight away. It also draws our attention to the

fact  that  we  do  not  even  know  the  economic  means  by  which

mourning carries out its task. Possibly, however, a conjecture will help

us  here.  Each  single  one  of  the  memories  and  situations  of

expectancy  which  demonstrate  the  libido’s  attachment  to  the  lost

object is met by the verdict of reality that the object no longer exists;

and the ego, confronted as it were with the question whether it shall

share  this  fate,  is  persuaded  by  the  sum  of  the  narcissistic

satisfactions it derives from being alive to sever its attachment to the

object that has been abolished. We may perhaps suppose that this

work of severance is so slow and gradual that by the time it has been

finished the expenditure of energy necessary for it is also dissipated.¹

      It  is  tempting  to  go  on  from  this  conjecture  about  the  work  of

mourning and try to give an account of the work of melancholia. Here

we are met at the outset by an uncertainty. So far we have hardly

considered  melancholia  from  the  topographical  point  of  view,  nor

asked ourselves in and between what psychical systems the work of

melancholia  goes  on.  What  part  of  the  mental  processes  of  the

disease still takes place in connection with the unconscious object-

cathexes that have been given up, and what part in connection with

their substitute, by identification, in the ego? 

   ¹ The economic standpoint has hitherto received little attention in psycho-analytic writings. I

would mention as an exception a paper by Victor Tausk (1913) on motives for repression
devalued by recompenses.
 


                              Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3052

 

      The  quick  and  easy  answer  is  that  ‘the  unconscious  (thing-)

presentation  of  the  object  has  been  abandoned  by  the  libido’.  In

reality, however, this presentation is made up of innumerable single

impressions (or unconscious traces of them), and this withdrawal of

libido is not a process that can be accomplished in a moment, but

must  certainly,  as  in  mourning,  be  one  in  which  progress  is  long-

drawn-out and gradual. Whether it begins simultaneously at several

points or follows some sort of fixed sequence is not easy to decide; in

analyses  it  often  becomes  evident  that  first  one  and  then  another

memory is activated, and that the laments which always sound the

same and are wearisome in their monotony nevertheless take their

rise each time in some different unconscious source. If the object does

not  possess  this  great  significance  for  the  ego  -  a  significance

reinforced by a thousand links - then, too, its loss will not be of a kind

to  cause  either  mourning  or  melancholia.  This  characteristic  of

detaching  the  libido  bit  by  bit  is  therefore  to  be  ascribed  alike  to

mourning and to melancholia; it is probably supported by the same

economic situation and serves the same purposes in both.

   As we have seen, however, melancholia contains something more

than normal mourning. In melancholia the relation to the object is no

simple one; it is complicated by the conflict due to ambivalence. The

ambivalence is either constitutional, i.e. is an element of every love-

relation  formed  by  this  particular  ego,  or  else  it  proceeds  precisely

from those experiences that involved the threat of losing the object.

For this reason the exciting causes of melancholia have a much wider

range than those of mourning, which is for the most part occasioned

only  by  a  real  loss  of  the  object,  by  its  death.  In  melancholia,

accordingly,  countless  separate  struggles  are  carried  on  over  the

object, in which hate and love contend with each other; the one seeksto detach the libido from the object, the other to maintain this position

of  the  libido  against  the  assault.  The  location  of  these  separate

struggles cannot be assigned to any system but the Ucs., the region of

the memory-traces of things (as contrasted with word-cathexes).  In

mourning, too, the efforts to detach the libido are made in this same

system;  but  in  it  nothing  hinders  these  processes  from  proceeding

along the normal path through the Pcs. to consciousness. This path is

blocked for the work of melancholia, owing perhaps to a number of

causes or a combination of them. Constitutional ambivalence belongs

by its nature to the repressed; traumatic experiences in connection

with  the  object  may  have  activated  other  repressed  material.  Thus

everything  to  do  with  these  struggles  due  to  ambivalence  remains

withdrawn  from  consciousness,  until  the  outcome  characteristic  of

melancholia has set in. This, as we know, consists in the threatened

libidinal cathexis at length abandoning the object, only, however, to

draw back to the place in the ego from which it had proceeded. So by

taking flight into the ego love escapes extinction. After this regression

of the libido the process can become conscious, and it is represented

to consciousness as a conflict between one part of the ego and the

critical agency.

 


                              Mourning And Melancholia

                                                                                      3053

 

   What consciousness is aware of in the work of melancholia is thus

not the essential part of it, nor is it even the part which we may credit

with an influence in bringing the ailment to an end. We see that the

ego debases itself and rages against itself, and we understand as little

as the patient what this can lead to and how it can change. We can

more readily attribute such a function to the unconscious part of the

work,  because  it  is  not  difficult  to  perceive  an  essential  analogy

between the work of melancholia and of mourning. Just as mourning

impels the ego to give up the object by declaring the object to be dead

and  offering  the  ego  the  inducement  of  continuing  to  live,  so  does

each single struggle of ambivalence loosen the fixation of the libido to

the object by disparaging it, denigrating it and even as it were killing it.It is possible for the process in the Ucs. to come to an end, either after

the fury has spent itself or after the object has been abandoned as

valueless. We cannot tell which of these two possibilities is the regular

or  more  usual  one  in  bringing  melancholia  to  an  end,  nor  what

influence this termination has on the future course of the case. The

ego may enjoy in this the satisfaction of knowing itself as the better of

the two, as superior to the object.

   Even if we accept this view of the work of melancholia, it still does

not supply an explanation of the one point on which we were seeking

light.  It  was  our  expectation  that  the  economic  condition  for  the

emergence of mania after the melancholia has run its course is to be

found in the ambivalence which dominates the latter affection; and in

this we found support from analogies in various other fields. But there

is  one  fact  before  which  that  expectation  must  bow.  Of  the  three

preconditions of melancholia - loss of the object, ambivalence, and

regression of libido into the ego - the first two are also found in the

obsessional  self-reproaches  arising  after  a  death  has  occurred.  In

those cases it is unquestionably the ambivalence which is the motive

force of the conflict, and observation shows that after the conflict has

come to an end there is nothing left over in the nature of the triumph of

a manic state of mind. We are thus led to the third factor as the only

one responsible for the result. The accumulation of cathexis which is

at  first  bound  and  then,  after  the  work  of  melancholia  is  finished,

becomes  free  and  makes  mania  possible  must  be  linked  with

regression  of  the  libido  to  narcissism.  The  conflict  within  the  ego,

which melancholia substitutes for the struggle over the object, must

act  like  a  painful  wound  which  calls  for  an  extraordinarily  high

anticathexis. - But here once again, it will be well to call a halt and to

postpone any further explanation of mania until we have gained some

insight into the economic nature, first, of physical pain, and then of the

mental  pain  which  is  analogous  to  it.  As  we  already  know,  the

interdependence of the complicated problems of the mind forces us to

break  off  every  enquiry  before  it  is  completed  -  till  the  outcome  of

some other enquiry can come to its assistance.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1925:] Cf. a continuation of this discussion of mania in Group Psychology

and the Analysis of the Ego (1921c).                                                                                       3054

 

          A CASE OF PARANOIA RUNNING COUNTER TO THE

                                PSYCHO-ANALYTIC

                            THEORY OF THE DISEASE

                                        (1915)

 


                                                                                      3055

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3056

 

          A CASE OF PARANOIA RUNNING COUNTER TO THE

                                PSYCHO-ANALYTIC

                            THEORY OF THE DISEASE

 

Some  years  ago  a  well-known  lawyer  consulted  me  about  a  case

which had raised some doubts in his mind. A young woman had asked

him to protect her from the molestations of a man who had drawn her

into  a  love-affair.  She  declared  that  this  man  had  abused  her

confidence  by  getting  unseen  witnesses  to  photograph  them  while

they were making love, and that by exhibiting these pictures it was

now in his power to bring disgrace on her and force her to resign the

post  she  occupied.  Her  legal  adviser  was  experienced  enough  to

recognize  the  pathological  stamp  of  this  accusation;  he  remarked,

however,  that,  as  what  appears  to  be  incredible  often  actually

happens,  he  would  appreciate  the  opinion  of  a  psychiatrist  in  the

matter. He promised to call on me again, accompanied by the plaintiff.

   (Before I continue the account, I must confess that I have altered the

milieu  of  the  case  in  order  to  preserve  the  incognito  of  the  people

concerned, but that I have altered nothing else. I consider it a wrong

practice, however excellent the motive may be, to alter any detail in

the presentation of a case. One can never tell what aspect of a case

may be picked out by a reader of independent judgement, and oneruns the risk of leading him astray.)

   Shortly afterwards I met the patient in person She was thirty years

old, a most attractive and handsome girl, who looked much younger

than  her  age  and  was  of  a  distinctly  feminine  type.  She  obviously

resented the interference of a doctor and took no trouble to hide her

distrust. It was clear that only the influence of her legal adviser, who

was present, induced her to tell me the story which follows and which

set me a problem that will be mentioned later. Neither in her manner

nor by any kind of expression of emotion did she betray the slightest

shame or shyness, such as one would have expected her to feel in the

presence of a stranger. She was completely under the spell of the

apprehension brought on by her experience.

 


      A Case Of Paranoia Running Counter To The Psycho-Analytic

                              Theory Of The Disease

                                                                                      3057

 

      For  many  years  she  had  been  on  the  staff  of  a  big  business

concern, in which she held a responsible post. Her work had given her

satisfaction  and  had  been  appreciated  by  her  superiors.  She  had

never sought any love-affairs with men, but had lived quietly with her

old mother, of whom she was the sole support. She had no brothers or

sisters; her father had died many years before. Recently an employee

in  her  office,  a  highly  cultivated  and  attractive  man,  had  paid  her

attentions and she in turn had been drawn towards him. For external

reasons, marriage was out of the question, but the man would not

hear of giving up their relationship on that account. He had pleaded

that it was senseless to sacrifice to social convention all that they both

longed for and had an indisputable right to enjoy, something that could

enrich  their  life  as  nothing  else  could.  As  he  had  promised  not  to

expose her to any risk, she had at last consented to visit him in his

bachelor rooms in the daytime. There they kissed and embraced as

they lay side by side, and he began to admire the charms which were

now  partly  revealed.  In  the  midst  of  this  idyllic  scene  she  was

suddenly frightened by a noise, a kind of knock or click. It came from

the  direction  of  the  writing-desk,  which  was  standing  across  thewindow; the space between desk and window was partly taken up by

a heavy curtain. She had at once asked her friend what this noise

meant, and was told, so she said, that it probably came from the small

clock  on  the  writing-desk.  I  shall  venture,  however,  to  make  a

comment presently on this part of her narrative.

      As  she  was  leaving  the  house  she  had  met  two  men  on  the

staircase, who whispered something to each other when they saw her.

One of the strangers was carrying something which was wrapped up

and  looked  like  a  small  box.  She  was  much  exercised  over  this

meeting,  and  on  her  way  home  she  had  already  put  together  the

following notions: the box might easily have been a camera, and the

man a photographer who had been hidden behind the curtain while

she was in the room; the click had been the noise of the shutter; the

photograph had been taken as soon as he saw her in a particularly

compromising position which he wished to record. From that moment

nothing could abate her suspicion of her lover. She pursued him with

reproaches and pestered him for explanations and reassurances, not

only when they met but also by letter. But it was in vain that he tried to

convince her that his feelings were sincere and that her suspicions

were entirely without foundation. At last she called on the lawyer, told

him of her experience and handed over the letters which the suspect

had written to her about the incident. Later I had an opportunity of

seeing some of these letters. They made a very favourable impression

on  me,  and  consisted  mainly  in  expressions  of  regret  that  such  a

beautiful and tender relationship should have been destroyed by this

‘unfortunate morbid idea’.

 


      A Case Of Paranoia Running Counter To The Psycho-Analytic

                              Theory Of The Disease

                                                                                      3058

 

   I need hardly justify my agreement with this judgement. But the case

had a special interest for me other than a merely diagnostic one. The

view had already been put forward in psycho-analytic literature that

patients  suffering  from  paranoia  are  struggling  against  an

intensification of their homosexual trends - a fact pointing back to anarcissistic object-choice. And a further interpretation had been made:

that the persecutor is at bottom someone whom the patient loves or

has loved in the past. A synthesis of the two propositions would lead

us  to  the  necessary  conclusion  that  the  persecutor  must  be  of  the

same sex as the person persecuted. We did not maintain, it is true, as

universally  and  without  exception  valid  the  thesis  that  paranoia  is

determined  by  homosexuality;  but  this  was  only  because  our

observations were not sufficiently numerous; the thesis was one of

those which in view of certain considerations become important only

when  universal  application  can  be  claimed  for  them.  In  psychiatric

literature  there  is  certainly  no  lack  of  cases  in  which  the  patient

imagines himself persecuted by a person of the opposite sex. It is one

thing, however, to read of such cases, and quite a different thing to

come into personal contact with one of them. My own observations

and analyses and those of my friends had so far confirmed the relation

between  paranoia  and  homosexuality  without  any  difficulty.  But  the

present  case  emphatically  contradicted  it.  The  girl  seemed  to  be

defending herself against love for a man by directly transforming the

lover into a persecutor: there was no sign of the influence of a woman,

no trace of a struggle against a homosexual attachment.

 


      A Case Of Paranoia Running Counter To The Psycho-Analytic

                              Theory Of The Disease

                                                                                      3059

 

      In  these  circumstances  the  simplest  thing  would  have  been  to

abandon  the  theory  that  the  delusion  of  persecution  invariably

depends  on  homosexuality,  and  at  the  same  time  to  abandon

everything that followed from that theory. Either the theory must be

given up or else, in view of this departure from our expectations, we

must  side  with  the  lawyer  and  assume  that  this  was  no  paranoic

combination  but  an  actual  experience  which  had  been  correctly

interpreted. But I saw another way out, by which a final verdict could

for the moment be postponed. I recollected how often wrong views

have been taken about people who are ill psychically, simply because

the physician has not studied them thoroughly enough and has thusnot learnt enough about them. I therefore said that I could not form an

immediate opinion, and asked the patient to call on me a second time,

when she could relate her story again at greater length and add any

subsidiary  details  that  might  have  been  omitted.  Thanks  to  the

lawyer’s influence I secured this promise from the reluctant patient;

and  he  helped  me  in  another  way  by  saying  that  at  our  second

meeting his presence would be unnecessary.

   The story told me by the patient on this second occasion did not

conflict with the previous one, but the additional details she supplied

resolved all doubts and difficulties. To begin with, she had visited the

young man in his rooms not once but twice. It was on the second

occasion that the had been disturbed by the suspicious noise: in her

original story she had suppressed, or omitted to mention, the first visit

because  it  had  no  longer  seemed  of  importance  to  her.  Nothing

noteworthy  had  happened  during  this  first  visit,  but  something  did

happen on the day after it. Her department in the business was under

the direction of an elderly lady whom she described as follows: ‘She

has white hair like my mother.’ This elderly superior had a great liking

for her and treated her with affection, though some times she teased

her; the girl regarded herself as her particular favourite. On the day

after her first visit to the young man’s rooms he appeared in the office

to  discuss  some  business  matter  with  this  elderly  lady.  While  they

were talking in low voices the patient suddenly felt convinced that he

was telling her about their adventure of the previous day - indeed, that

the two of them had for some time been having a love-affair, which

she had hitherto overlooked. The white-haired motherly old lady now

knew everything, and her speech and conduct in the course of the day

confirmed the patient’s suspicion. At the first opportunity she took her

lover  to  task  about  his  betrayal.  He  naturally  protested  vigorously

against what he called a senseless accusation. For the time being, in

fact, he succeeded in freeing her from her delusion, and she regained

enough confidence to repeat her visit to his rooms a short time - I

believe it was a few weeks - afterwards. The rest we know already

from her first narrative.

 


      A Case Of Paranoia Running Counter To The Psycho-Analytic                              Theory Of The Disease

                                                                                      3060

 

   In the first place, this new information removes any doubts as to the

pathological nature of her suspicion. It is easy to see that the white-

haired elderly superior was a substitute for her mother, that in spite of

his youth her lover had been put in the place of her father, and that it

was the strength of her mother-complex which had driven the patient

to  suspect  a  love-relationship  between  these  ill-matched  partners,

however unlikely such a relation might be. Moreover, this disposes of

the  apparent  contradiction  to  the  expectation,  based  on  psycho-

analytic theory, that the development of a delusion of persecution will

turn  out  to  be  determined  by  an  over-powerful  homosexual

attachment. The original persecutor - the agency whose influence the

patient wishes to escape - is here again not a man but a woman. The

superior knew about the girl’s love affairs, disapproved of them, and

showed her disapproval by mysterious hints. The patient’s attachment

to her own sex opposed her attempts to adopt a person of the other

sex  as  a  love-object.  Her  love  for  her  mother  had  become  the

spokesman  of  all  those  tendencies  which,  playing  the  part  of  a

‘conscience’, seek to arrest a girl’s first step along the new road to

normal sexual satisfaction - in many respects a dangerous one; and

indeed it succeeded in disturbing her relation with men.

   When a mother hinders or arrests a daughter’s sexual activity, she is

fulfilling  a  normal  function  whose  lines  are  laid  down  by  events  in

childhood,  which  has  powerful,  unconscious  motives,  and  has

received  the  sanction  of  society.  It  is  the  daughter’s  business  to

emancipate herself from this influence and to decide for herself on

broad and rational grounds what her share of enjoyment or denial of

sexual pleasure shall be. If in the attempt to emancipate herself she

falls a victim to a neurosis it implies the presence of a mother-complex

which  is  as  a  rule  over-powerful,  and  is  certainly  unmastered.  The

conflict between this complex and the new direction taken by the libido

is dealt with in the form of one neurosis or another, according to the

subject’s  disposition.  The  manifestation  of  the  neurotic  reaction  will

always be determined, however, not by her present-day relation to her

actual mother but by her infantile relations to her earliest image of hermother.

 


      A Case Of Paranoia Running Counter To The Psycho-Analytic

                              Theory Of The Disease

                                                                                      3061

 

   We know that our patient had been fatherless for many years: we

may also assume that she would not have kept away from men up to

the  age  of  thirty  if  she  had  not  been  supported  by  a  powerful

emotional attachment to her mother. This support became a heavy

yoke  when  her  libido  began  to  turn  to  a  man  in  response  to  his

insistent wooing. She tried to free herself, to throw off her homosexual

attachment; and her disposition, which need not be discussed here,

enabled this to occur in the form of a paranoic delusion. The mother

thus became the hostile and malevolent watcher and persecutor. As

such she could have been overcome, had it not been that the mother-

complex retained power enough to carry out its purpose of keeping

the patient at a distance from men. Thus, at the end of the first phase

of  the  conflict  the  patient  had  become  estranged  from  her  mother

without having definitely gone over to the man. Indeed, both of them

were plotting against her. Then the man’s vigorous efforts succeeded

in  drawing  her  decisively  to  him.  She  conquered  her  mother’s

opposition in her mind and was willing to grant her lover a second

meeting. In the later developments the mother did not reappear, but

we may safely insist that in this phase the lover had not become the

persecutor directly but via the mother and in virtue of his relationship

to the mother, who had played the leading part in the first delusion.

   One would think that the resistance was now definitely overcome,

that  the  girl  who  until  now  had  been  bound  to  her  mother  had

succeeded in coming to love a man. But after the second visit a new

delusion  appeared,  which,  by  making  ingenious  use  of  some

accidental circumstances, destroyed this love and thus successfully

carried  through  the  purpose  of  the  mother-complex.  It  still  seems

strange that a woman should protect herself against loving a man by

means  of  a  paranoic  delusion;  but  before  examining  this  state  of

things more closely, let us glance at the accidental circumstances thatformed the basis of this second delusion, the one aimed exclusively

against the man.

 


      A Case Of Paranoia Running Counter To The Psycho-Analytic

                              Theory Of The Disease

                                                                                      3062

 

   Lying partly undressed on the sofa beside her lover, she heard a

noise like a click or beat. She did not know its cause, but she arrived

at an interpretation of it after meeting two men on the staircase, one of

whom was carrying something that looked like a covered box. She

became convinced that someone acting on instructions from her lover

had watched and photographed her during their intimate tête à tête. I

do not for a moment imagine, of course, that if the unlucky noise had

not  occurred  the  delusion  would  not  have  been  formed;  on  the

contrary,  something  inevitable  is  to  be  seen  behind  this  accidental

circumstance,  something  which  was  bound  to  assert  itself

compulsively in the patient, just as when she supposed that there was

a liason  between  her  lover  and  the  elderly  superior,  her  mother-

substitute.  Among  the  store  of  unconscious  phantasies  of  all

neurotics,  and  probably  of  all  human  beings,  there  is  one  which  is

seldom absent and which can be disclosed by analysis: this is the

phantasy of watching sexual intercourse between the parents. I call

such phantasies - of the observation of sexual intercourse between

the  parents,  of  seduction,  of  castration,  and  others  -  ‘primal

phantasies’; and I shall discuss in detail elsewhere their origin and

their relation to individual experience. The accidental noise was thus

merely  playing  the  part  of  a  provoking  factor  which  activated  the

typical phantasy of overhearing which is a component of the parental

complex. Indeed, it is doubtful whether we can rightly call the noise

‘accidental’. As Otto Rank has remarked to me, such noises are on

the  contrary  an  indispensible  part  of  the  phantasy  of  listening,  and

they reproduce either the sounds which betray parental intercourse or

those by which the listening child fears to betray itself. But now we

know at once where we stand. The patient’s lover was still her father,

but she herself had taken her mother’s place. The part of the listenerhad then to be allotted to a third person. We can see by what means

the girl had freed herself from her homosexual dependence on her

mother. It was by means of a small piece of regression: instead of

choosing her mother as a love-object, she identified herself with her -

she  herself became  her  mother.  The  possibility  of  this  regression

points to the narcissistic origin of her homosexual object-choice and

thus to the paranoic disposition in her. One might sketch a train of

thought which would bring about the same result as this identification:

‘If my mother does it, I may do it too; I’ve just as good a right as she

has.’

 


      A Case Of Paranoia Running Counter To The Psycho-Analytic

                              Theory Of The Disease

                                                                                      3063

 

   One can go a step further in disproving the accidental nature of the

noise. We do not, however, ask our readers to follow us, since the

absence of any deeper analytic investigation makes it impossible in

this case to go beyond a certain degree of probability. The patient

mentioned  in  her  first  interview  with  me  that  she  had  immediately

demanded an explanation of the noise, and had been told that it was

probably the ticking of the small clock on the writing-desk. I venture,

however, to explain what she told me as a mistaken memory. It seems

to me much more likely that at first she did not react to the noise at all,

and that it became significant only after she met the two men on the

staircase. Her lover, who had probably not even heard the noise, may

have tried, perhaps on some later occasion when she assailed him

with her suspicions, to account for it in this way: ‘I don’t know what

noise  you  can  have  heard.  Perhaps  it  was  the  small  clock;  it

sometimes ticks like that.’ This deferred use of impressions and this

displacement of recollections often occur precisely in paranoia and are

characteristic of it. But as I never met the man and could not continue

the analysis of the woman, my hypothesis cannot be proved.

   I might go still further in the analysis of this ostensibly real ‘accident’.

I do not believe that the clock ever ticked or that there was any noise

to be heard at all. The woman’s situation justified a sensation of aknock or beat in her clitoris. And it was this that she subsequently

projected as a perception of an external object. Just the same sort of

thing can occur in dreams. A hysterical woman patient of mine once

related  to  me  a  short  arousal  dream  to  which  she  could  bring  no

spontaneous associations. She dreamt simply that someone knocked

and then she awoke. Nobody had knocked at the door, but during the

previous nights she had been awakened by distressing sensations of

pollutions: she thus had a motive for awakening as soon as she felt

the first sign of genital excitation. There had been a ‘knock’ in her

clitoris. In the case of our paranoic patient, I should substitute for the

accidental  noise  a  similar  process  of  projection.  I  certainly  cannot

guarantee that in the course of our short acquaintance the patient,

who was reluctantly yielding to compulsion, gave me a truthful account

of all that had taken place during the two meetings of the lovers. But

an  isolated  contraction  of  the  clitoris  would  be  in  keeping  with  her

statement  that  no  contact  of  the  genitals  had  taken  place.  In  her

subsequent  rejection  of  the  man,  lack  of  satisfaction  undoubtedly

played a part as well as ‘conscience’.

 


      A Case Of Paranoia Running Counter To The Psycho-Analytic

                              Theory Of The Disease

                                                                                      3064

 

   Let us consider again the outstanding fact that the patient protected

herself against her love for a man by means of a paranoic delusion.

The key to the understanding of this is to be found in the history of the

development of the delusion. As we might have expected, the latter

was at first aimed against the woman. But now, on this paranoic basis,

the advance from a female to a male object was accomplished. Such

an advance is unusual in paranoia; as a rule we find that the victim of

persecution remains fixated to the same persons, and therefore to the

same  sex  to  which  his  love-objects  belonged  before  the  paranoic

transformation took place. But neurotic disorder does not preclude an

advance  of  this  kind,  and  our  observation  may  be  typical  of  many

others. There are many similar processes occurring outside paranoia

which have not yet been looked at from this point of view, amongstthem  some  which  are  very  familiar.  For  instance,  the  so-called

neurasthenic’s  unconscious  attachment  to  incestuous  love-objects

prevents  him  from  choosing  a  strange  woman  as  his  object  and

restricts  his  sexual  activity  to  phantasy.  But  within  the  limits  of

phantasy  he  achieves  the  progress  which  is  denied  him,  and  he

succeeds in replacing mother and sister by extraneous objects. Since

the  veto  of  the  censorship  does  not  come  into  action  with  these

objects, he can become conscious in his phantasies of his choice of

these substitute-figures.

   These then are phenomena of an attempted advance from the new

ground which has as a rule been regressively acquired; and we may

set alongside them the efforts made in some neuroses to regain a

position  of  the  libido  which  was  once  held  and  subsequently  lost.

Indeed we can hardly draw any conceptual distinction between these

two classes of phenomena. We are too apt to think that the conflict

underlying a neurosis is brought to an end when the symptom has

been formed. In reality the struggle can go on in many ways after this.

Fresh instinctual components arise on both sides, and these prolong

it.  The  symptom  itself  becomes  an  object  of  this  struggle;  certain

trends  anxious  to  preserve  it  conflict  with  others  which  strive  to

remove it and to re-establish the status quo ante. Methods are often

sought of rendering the symptom nugatory by trying to regain along

other lines of approach what has been lost and is now withheld by the

symptom. These facts throw much light on a statement made by C. G.

Jung to the effect that a peculiar ‘psychical inertia’, which opposes

change  and  progress,  is  the  fundamental  precondition  of  neurosis.

This  inertia  is  indeed  most  peculiar;  it  is  not  a  general  one,  but  is

highly specialized; it is not even all-powerful within its own field, but

fights against tendencies towards progress and recovery which remain

active even after the formation of neurotic symptoms. If we search for

the  starting-point  of  this  special  inertia,  we  discover  that  it  is  the

manifestation  of  very  early  linkages  -  linkages  which  it  is  hard  to

resolve - between instincts and impressions and the objects involved

in those impressions. These linkages have the effect of bringing the

development  of  the  instincts  concerned  to  a  standstill.  Or  in  other

words,  this  specialized  ‘psychical  inertia’  is  only  a  different  term,

though  hardly  a  better  one,  for  what  in  psycho-analysis  we  areaccustomed to call a ‘fixation’.

                                                                                       3065

 

            THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES ON WAR AND DEATH

                                        (1915)

 


                                                                                      3066

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3067

 

            THOUGHTS FOR THE TIMES ON WAR AND DEATH

 

                                            I

 

                  THE DISILLUSIONMENT OF THE WAR

 

In the confusion of wartime in which we are caught up, relying as we

must  on  one-sided  information,  standing  too  close  to  the  great

changes  that  have  already  taken  place  or  are  beginning  to,  and

without a glimmering of the future that is being shaped, we ourselves

are at a loss as to the significance of the impressions which press in

upon us and as to the value of the judgements which we form. We

cannot  but  feel  that  no  event  has  ever  destroyed  so  much  that  is

precious in the common possessions of humanity, confused so many

of the clearest intelligences, or so thoroughly debased what is highest.

Science  herself  has  lost  her  passionless  impartiality;  her  deeply

embittered  servants  seek  for  weapons  from  her  with  which  to

contribute towards the struggle with the enemy. Anthropologists feel

driven to declare him inferior and degenerate, psychiatrists issue a

diagnosis  of  his  disease  of  mind  or  spirit.  Probably,  however,  our

sense of these immediate evils is disproportionately strong, and we

are not entitled to compare them with the evils of other times which we

have not experienced.

   The individual who is not himself a combatant - and so a cog in thegigantic  machine  of  war  -  feels  bewildered  in  his  orientation,  and

inhibited in his powers and activities. I believe that he will welcome

any indication, however slight, which will make it easier for him to find

his bearings within himself at least. I propose to pick out two among

the factors which are responsible for the mental distress felt by non-

combatants, against which it is such a heavy task to struggle, and to

treat of them here: the disillusionment which this war has evoked, and

the altered attitude towards death which this - like every other war -

forces upon us.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3068

 

   When I speak of disillusionment, everyone will know at once what I

mean.  One  need  not  be  a  sentimentalist;  one  may  perceive  the

biological and psychological necessity for suffering in the economy of

human life, and yet condemn war both in its means and ends and long

for the cessation of all wars. We have told ourselves, no doubt, that

wars  can  never  cease  so  long  as  nations  live  under  such  widely

differing  conditions,  so  long  as  the  value  of  individual  life  is  so

variously assessed among them, and so long as the animosities which

divide them represent such powerful motive forces in the mind. We

were prepared to find that wars between the primitive and the civilized

peoples, between the races who are divided by the colour of their skin

- wars, even, against and among the nationalities of Europe whose

civilization is little developed or has been lost - would occupy mankind

for  some  time  to  come.  But  we  permitted  ourselves  to  have  other

hopes. We had expected the great world-dominating nations of white

race upon whom the leadership of the human species has fallen, who

were known to have world-wide interests as their concern, to whose

creative powers were due not only our technical advances towards the

control of nature but the artistic and scientific standards of civilization -

we  had  expected  these  peoples  to  succeed  in  discovering  another

way  of  settling  misunderstandings  and  conflicts  of  interest.  Within

each of these nations high norms of moral conduct were laid down for

the individual, to which his manner of life was bound to conform if hedesired to take part in a civilized community. These ordinances, often

too  stringent,  demanded  a  great  deal  of  him  -  much  self-restraint,

much  renunciation  of  instinctual  satisfaction.  He  was  above  all

forbidden to make use of the immense advantages to be gained by

the practice of lying and deception in the competition with his fellow-

men. The civilized states regarded these moral standards as the basis

of  their  existence.  They  took  serious  steps  if  anyone  ventured  to

tamper with them, and often declared it improper even to subject them

to  examination  by  a  critical  intelligence.  It  was  to  be  assumed,

therefore, that the state itself would respect them, and would not think

of undertaking anything against them which would contradict the basis

of its own existence. Observation showed, to be sure, that embedded

in these civilized states there were remnants of certain other peoples,

which  were  universally  unpopular  and  had  therefore  been  only

reluctantly,  and  even  so  not  fully,  admitted  to  participation  in  the

common  work  of  civilization,  for  which  they  had  shown  themselves

suitable enough. But the great nations themselves, it might have been

supposed, would have acquired so much comprehension of what they

had  in  common,  and  so  much  tolerance  for  their  differences,  that

‘foreigner’ and ‘enemy’ could no longer be merged, as they still were

in classical antiquity, into a single concept.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3069

 

   Relying on this unity among the civilized peoples, countless men

and women have exchanged their native home for a foreign one, and

made their existence dependent on the intercommunications between

friendly  nations.  Moreover  anyone  who  was  not  by  stress  of

circumstance confined to one spot could create for himself out of all

the advantages and attractions of these civilized countries a new and

wider fatherland, in which he could move about without hindrance or

suspicion.  In  this  way  he  enjoyed  the  blue  sea  and  the  grey;  the

beauty of snow covered mountains and of green meadow lands; the

magic of northern forests and the splendour of southern vegetation;

the mood evoked by landscapes that recall great historical events, andthe silence of untouched nature. This new fatherland was a museum

for him, too, filled with all the treasures which the artists of civilized

humanity had in the successive centuries created and left behind. As

he wandered from one gallery to another in this museum, he could

recognize with impartial appreciation what varied types of perfection a

mixture of blood, the course of history, and the special quality of their

mother earth had produced among his compatriots in this wider sense.

Here he would find cool, inflexible energy developed to the highest

point; there, the graceful art of beautifying existence; elsewhere, the

feeling for orderliness and law, or others among the qualities which

have made mankind the lords of the earth.

   Nor must we forget that each of these citizens of the civilized world

had created for himself a ‘Parnassus’ and a ‘School of Athens’ of his

own. From among the great thinkers, writers and artists of all nations

he had chosen those to whom he considered he owed the best of

what he had been able to achieve in enjoyment and understanding of

life, and he had venerated them along with the immortal ancients as

well as with the familiar masters of his own tongue. None of these

great men had seemed to him foreign because they spoke another

language - neither the incomparable explorer of human passions, nor

the intoxicated worshipper of beauty, nor the powerful and menacing

prophet, nor the subtle satirist; and he never reproached himself on

that  account  for  being  a  renegade  towards  his  own  nation  and  his

beloved mother-tongue.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3070

 

   The enjoyment of this common civilization was disturbed from time

to  time  by  warning  voices,  which  declared  that  old  traditional

differences  made  wars  inevitable,  even  among  the  members  of  a

community such as this. We refused to believe it; but if such a war

were to happen, how did we picture it? We saw it as an opportunity for

demonstrating the progress of comity among men since the era when

the Greek Amphictyonic Council proclaimed that no city of the league

might be destroyed, nor its olive-groves cut down, nor its water-supplystopped; we pictured it as a chivalrous passage of arms, which would

limit itself to establishing the superiority of one side in the struggle,

while as far as possible avoiding acute suffering that could contribute

nothing  to  the  decision,  and  granting  complete  immunity  for  the

wounded who had to withdraw from the contest, as well as for the

doctors and nurses who devoted themselves to their recovery. There

would, of course, be the utmost consideration for the non-combatant

classes of the population - for women who take no part in war-work,

and for the children who, when they are grown up, should become on

both  sides  one  another’s  friends  and  helpers.  And  again,  all  the

international  undertakings  and  institutions  in  which  the  common

civilization of peace-time had been embodied would be maintained.

      Even  a  war  like  this  would  have  produced  enough  horror  and

suffering; but it would not have interrupted the development of ethical

relations  between  the  collective  individuals  of  mankind  the  peoples

and states.

   Then the war in which we had refused to believe broke out, and it

brought  -  disillusionment.  Not  only  is  it  more  bloody  and  more

destructive than any war of other days, because of the enormously

increased perfection of weapons of attack and defence; it is at least as

cruel,  as  embittered,  as  implacable  as  any  that  has  preceded  it.  It

disregards  all  the  restrictions  known  as  International  Law,  which  in

peace-time the states had bound themselves to observe; it ignores the

prerogatives of the wounded and the medical service, the distinction

between  civil  and  military  sections  of  the  population,  the  claims  of

private property. It tramples in blind fury on all that comes in its way,

as though there were to be no future and no peace among men after it

is over. It cuts all the common bonds between the contending peoples,

and threatens to leave a legacy of embitterment that will make any

renewal of those bonds impossible for a long time to come.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3071

 

   Moreover, it has brought to light an almost incredible phenomenon:

the civilized nations know and understand one another so little thatone can turn against the other with hate and loathing. Indeed, one of

the great civilized nations is so universally unpopular that the attempt

can actually be made to exclude it from the civilized community as

‘barbaric’, although it has long proved its fitness by the magnificent

contributions to that community which it has made. We live in hopes

that the pages of an impartial history will prove that that nation, in

whose language we write and for whose victory our dear ones are

fighting, has been precisely the one which has least transgressed the

laws of civilization. But at such a time who dares to set himself up as

judge in his own cause?

   Peoples are more or less represented by the states which they form,

and these states by the governments which rule them. The individual

citizen  can  with  horror  convince  himself  in  this  war  of  what  would

occasionally  cross  his  mind  in  peace-time  -  that  the  state  has

forbidden to the individual the practice of wrong doing, not because it

desires to abolish it, but because it desires to monopolize it, like salt

and  tobacco.  A  belligerent  state  permits  itself  every  such  misdeed,

every such act of violence, as would disgrace the individual. It makes

use against the enemy not only of the accepted ruses de guerre, but

of  deliberate  lying  and  deception  as  well  -  and  to  a  degree  which

seems  to  exceed  the  usage  of  former  wars.  The  state  exacts  the

utmost degree of obedience and sacrifice from its citizens, but at the

same time it treats them like children by an excess of secrecy and a

censorship upon news and expressions of opinion which leaves the

spirits  of  those  whose  intellects  it  thus  suppresses  defenceless

against every unfavourable turn of events and every sinister rumour. It

absolves itself from the guarantees and treaties by which it was bound

to other states, and confesses shamelessly to its own rapacity and lust

for  power,  which  the  private  individual  has  then  to  sanction  in  the

name of patriotism.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3072

 

   It should not be objected that the state cannot refrain from wrong-

doing,  since  that  would  place  it  at  a  disadvantage.  It  is  no  lessdisadvantageous, as a general rule, for the individual man to conform

to  the  standards  of  morality  and  refrain  from  brutal  and  arbitrary

conduct; and the state seldom proves able to indemnify him for the

sacrifices  it  exacts.  Nor  should  it  be  a  matter  for  surprise  that  this

relaxation  of  all  the  moral  ties  between  the  collective  individuals  of

mankind should have had repercussions on the morality of individuals;

for  our  conscience  is  not  the  inflexible  judge  that  ethical  teachers

declare it, but in its origin is ‘social anxiety’ and nothing else. When

the community no longer raises objections, there is an end, too, to the

suppression of evil passions, and men perpetrate deeds of cruelty,

fraud,  treachery  and  barbarity  so  incompatible  with  their  level  of

civilization that one would have thought them impossible.

   Well may the citizen of the civilized world of whom I have spoken

stand helpless in a world that has grown strange to him - his great

fatherland  disintegrated,  its  common  estates  laid  waste,  his  fellow-

citizens divided and debased!

      There  is  something  to  be  said,  however,  in  criticism  of  his

disappointment. Strictly speaking it is not justified, for it consists in the

destruction of an illusion. We welcome illusions because they spare us

unpleasurable feelings, and enable us to enjoy satisfactions instead.

We must not complain, then, if now and again they come into collision

with some portion of reality, and are shattered against it.

   Two things in this war have aroused our sense of disillusionment:

the  low  morality  shown  externally  by  states  which  in  their  internal

relations pose as the guardians of moral standards, and the brutality

shown  by  individuals  whom,  as  participants  in  the  highest  human

civilization, one would not have thought capable of such behaviour.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3073

 

   Let us begin with the second point and try to formulate, in a few brief

words, the point of view that we wish to criticize. How, in point of fact,

do  we  imagine  the  process  by  which  an  individual  rises  to  a

comparatively high plane of morality? The first answer will no doubt

simply be that he is virtuous and noble from birth - from the very start.We shall not consider this view any further here. A second answer will

suggest that we are concerned with a developmental process, and will

probably assume that the development consists in eradicating his evil

human  tendencies  and,  under  the  influence  of  education  and  a

civilized  environment,  replacing  them  by  good  ones.  If  so,  it  is

nevertheless surprising that evil should re-emerge with such force in

anyone who has been brought up in this way.

      But  this  answer  also  contains  the  thesis  which  we  propose  to

contradict.  In  reality,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  ‘eradicating’  evil.

Psychological  -  or,  more  strictly  speaking,  psycho-analytic  -

investigation shows instead that the deepest essence of human nature

consists  of  instinctual  impulses  which  are  of  an  elementary  nature,

which are similar in all men and which aim at the satisfaction of certain

primal needs. These impulses in themselves are neither good nor bad.

We classify them and their expressions in that way, according to their

relation to the needs and demands of the human community. It must

be granted that all the impulses which society condemns as evil - let

us take as representative the selfish and the cruel ones - are of this

primitive kind.

   These primitive impulses undergo a lengthy process of development

before  they  are  allowed  to  become  active  in  the  adult.  They  are

inhibited, directed towards other aims and fields, become commingled,

alter  their  objects,  and  are  to  some  extent  turned  back  upon  their

possessor.  Reaction-formations  against  certain  instincts  take  the

deceptive form of a change in their content, as though egoism had

changed into altruism, or cruelty into pity. These reaction-formations

are  facilitated  by  the  circumstance  that  some  instinctual  impulses

make their appearance almost from the first in pairs of opposites - a

very  remarkable  phenomenon,  and  one  strange  to  the  lay  public,

which is termed ‘ambivalence of feeling’. The most easily observed

and comprehensible instance of this is the fact that intense love and

intense hatred are so often to be found together in the same person.

Psycho-analysis adds that the two opposed feelings not infrequently

have the same person for their object.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death                                                                                      3074

 

      It  is  not  until  all  these  ‘instinctual  vicissitudes’  have  been

surmounted that what we call a person’s character is formed, and this,

as  we  know,  can  only  very  inadequately  be  classified  as  ‘good’  or

‘bad’. A human being is seldom altogether good or bad; he is usually

‘good’ in one relation and ‘bad’ in another, or ‘good’ in certain external

circumstances and in others decidedly ‘bad’. It is interesting to find

that the pre-existence of strong ‘bad’ impulses in infancy is often the

actual condition for an unmistakable inclination towards ‘good’ in the

adult. Those who as children have been the most pronounced egoists

may well become the most helpful and self-sacrificing members of the

community;  most  of  our  sentimentalists,  friends  of  humanity  and

protectors of animals have been evolved from little sadists and animal-

tormentors.

   The transformation of ‘bad’ instincts is brought about by two factors

working in the same direction, an internal and an external one. The

internal factor consists in the influence exercised on the bad (let us

say, the egoistic) instincts by erotism - that is, by the human need for

love, taken in its widest sense. By the admixture of erotic components

the  egoistic  instincts  are  transformed  into social  ones.  We  learn  to

value being loved as an advantage for which we are willing to sacrifice

other  advantages.  The  external  factor  is  the  force  exercised  by

upbringing, which represents the claims of our cultural environment,

and this is continued later by the direct pressure of that environment.

Civilization has been attained through the renunciation of instinctual

satisfaction,  and  it  demands  the  same  renunciation  from  each

newcomer in turn. Throughout an individual’s life there is a constant

replacement  of  external  by  internal  compulsion.  The  influences  of

civilization cause an ever-increasing transformation of egoistic trends

into altruistic and social ones by an admixture of erotic elements. In

the last resort it may be assumed that every internal compulsion which

makes itself felt in the development of human beings was originally -

that is, in the history of mankind - only an external one. Those who are

born to-day bring with them as an inherited organization some degree

of tendency (disposition) towards the transformation of egoistic into

social instincts, and this disposition is easily stimulated into bringingabout that result. A further portion of this instinctual transformation has

to be accomplished during the life of the individual himself. So the

human  being  is  subject  not  only  to  the  pressure  of  his  immediate

cultural environment, but also to the influence of the cultural history of

his ancestors.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3075

 

   If we give the name of ‘susceptibility to culture’ to a man’s personal

capacity  for  the  transformation  of  the  egoistic  impulses  under  the

influence of erotism, we may further affirm that this susceptibility is

made up of two parts, one innate and the other acquired in the course

of life, and that the relation of the two to each other and to that portion

of the instinctual life which remains untransformed is a very variable

one.

   Generally speaking, we are apt to attach too much importance to the

innate part, and in addition to this we run the risk of over-estimating

the  total  susceptibility  to  culture  in  comparison  with  the  portion  of

instinctual life which has remained primitive - that is, we are misled

into regarding men as ‘ better’ than they actually are. For there is yet

another element which obscures our judgement and falsifies the issue

in a favourable sense.

   The instinctual impulses of other people are of course hidden from

our  observation.  We  infer  them  from  their  actions  and  behaviour,

which we trace back to motives arising from their instinctual life. Such

an inference is bound to be erroneous in many cases. This or that

action  which  is  ‘good’  from  the  cultural  point  of  view  may  in  one

instance  originate  from  a  ‘noble’  motive,  in  another  not.  Ethical

theorists class as ‘good’ actions only those which are the outcome of

good  impulses;  to  the  others  they  refuse  recognition.  But  society,

which  is  practical  in  its  aims,  is  not  on  the  whole  troubled  by  this

distinction; it is content if a man regulates his behaviour and actions

by the precepts of civilization, and is little concerned with his motives.

      We  have  learned  that  the external  compulsion  exercised  on  a

human being by his upbringing and environment produces a furthertransformation towards good in his instinctual life - a further turning

from egoism towards altruism. But this is not the regular or necessary

effect  of  the  external  compulsion.  Upbringing  and  environment  not

only offer benefits in the way of love, but also employ other kinds of

incentive, namely, rewards and punishments. In this way their effect

may turn out to be that a person who is subjected to their influence will

choose to behave well in the cultural sense of the phrase, although no

ennoblement  of  instinct,  no  transformation  of  egoistic  into  altruistic

inclinations, has taken place in him. The result will, roughly speaking,

be  the  same;  only  a  particular  concatenation  of  circumstances  will

reveal that one man always acts in a good way because his instinctual

inclinations compel him to, and the other is good only in so far and for

so long as such cultural behaviour is advantageous for his own selfish

purposes.  But  superficial  acquaintance  with  an  individual  will  not

enable us to distinguish between the two cases, and we are certainly

misled  by  our  optimism  into  grossly  exaggerating  the  number  of

human beings who have been transformed in a cultural sense.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3076

 

   Civilized society, which demands good conduct and does not trouble

itself about the instinctual basis of this conduct, has thus won over to

obedience a great many people who are not in this following their own

natures. Encouraged by this success, society has allowed itself to be

misled  into  tightening  the  moral  standard  to  the  greatest  possible

degree,  and  it  has  thus  forced  its  members  into  a  yet  greater

estrangement from their instinctual disposition. They are consequently

subject  to  an  unceasing  suppression  of  instinct,  and  the  resulting

tension betrays itself in the most remarkable phenomena of reaction

and  compensation.  In  the  domain  of  sexuality,  where  such

suppression  is  most  difficult  to  carry  out,  the  result  is  seen  in  the

reactive phenomena of neurotic disorders. Elsewhere the pressure of

civilization brings in its train no pathological results, it is true, but is

shown in malformations of character, and in the perpetual readiness of

the inhibited instincts to break through to satisfaction at any suitableopportunity. Anyone thus compelled to act continually in accordance

with  precepts  which  are  not  the  expression  of  his  instinctual

inclinations,  is  living,  psychologically  speaking,  beyond  his  means,

and may objectively be described as a hypocrite, whether he is clearly

aware of the incongruity or not. It is undeniable that our contemporary

civilization  favours  the  production  of  this  form  of  hypocrisy  to  an

extraordinary extent. One might venture to say that it is built up on

such  hypocrisy,  and  that  it  would  have  to  submit  to  far-reaching

modifications if people were to undertake to live in accordance with

psychological truth. Thus there are very many more cultural hypocrites

than  truly  civilized  men  -  indeed,  it  is  a  debatable  point  whether  a

certain  degree  of  cultural  hypocrisy  is  not  indispensable  for  the

maintenance of civilization, because the susceptibility to culture which

has hitherto been organized in the minds of present-day men would

perhaps  not  prove  sufficient  for  the  task.  On  the  other  hand,  the

maintenance  of  civilization  even  on  so  dubious  a  basis  offers  the

prospect of paving the way in each new generation for a more far-

reaching  transformation  of  instinct  which  shall  be  the  vehicle  of  a

better civilization.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3077

 

   We may already derive one consolation from this discussion: our

mortification  and  our  painful  disillusionment  on  account  of  the

uncivilized behaviour of our fellow-citizens of the world during this war

were  unjustified.  They  were  based  on  an  illusion  to  which  we  had

given way. In reality our fellow-citizens have not sunk so low as we

feared, because they had never risen so high as we believed. The fact

that  the  collective  individuals  of  mankind,  the  peoples  and  states,

mutually  abrogated  their  moral  restraints  naturally  prompted  these

individual citizens to withdraw for a while from the constant pressure

of  civilization  and  to  grant  a  temporary  satisfaction  to  the  instincts

which  they  had  been  holding  in  check.  This  probably  involved  no

breach in their relative morality within their own nations.

   We may, however, obtain a deeper insight than this into the changebrought about by the war in our former compatriots, and at the same

time  receive  a  warning  against  doing  them  an  injustice.  For  the

development of the mind shows a peculiarity which is present in no

other developmental process. When a village grows into a town or a

child into a man, the village and the child become lost in the town and

the man. Memory alone can trace the old features in the new picture;

and  in  fact  the  old  materials  or  forms  have  been  got  rid  of  and

replaced  by  new  ones.  It  is  otherwise  with  the  development  of  the

mind. Here one can describe the state of affairs, which has nothing to

compare with it, only by saying that in this case every earlier stage of

development persists alongside the later stage which has arisen from

it;  here  succession  also  involves  co-existence,  although  it  is  to  the

same materials that the whole series of transformations has applied.

The earlier mental state may not have manifested itself for years, but

none the less it is so far present that it may at any time again become

the mode of expression of the forces in the mind, and indeed the only

one, as though all later developments had been annulled or undone.

This extraordinary plasticity of mental developments is not unrestricted

as  regards  direction;  it  may  be  described  as  a  special  capacity  for

involution - for regression - since it may well happen that a later and

higher  stage  of  development,  once  abandoned,  cannot  be  reached

again.  But  the  primitive  stages  can  always  be  re-established;  the

primitive mind is, in the fullest meaning of the word, imperishable.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3078

 

   What are called mental diseases inevitably produce an impression in

the layman that intellectual and mental life have been destroyed. In

reality,  the  destruction  only  applies  to  later  acquisitions  and

developments.  The  essence  of  mental  disease  lies  in  a  return  to

earlier states of affective life and of functioning. An excellent example

of the plasticity of mental life is afforded by the state of sleep, which is

our goal every night. Since we have learnt to interpret even absurd

and  confused  dreams,  we  know  that  whenever  we  go  to  sleep  we

throw off our hard-won morality like a garment, and put it on againnext morning. This stripping of ourselves is not, of course, dangerous,

because we are paralysed, condemned to inactivity, by the state of

sleep. It is only dreams that can tell us about the regression of our

emotional  life  to  one  of  the  earliest  stages  of  development.  For

instance, it is noteworthy that all our dreams are governed by purely

egoistic motives. One of my English friends put forward this thesis at a

scientific  meeting  in  America,  whereupon  a  lady  who  was  present

remarked that that might be the case in Austria, but she could assert

as regards herself and her friends that they were altruistic even in their

dreams. My friend, although himself of English race, was obliged to

contradict  the  lady  emphatically  on  the  ground  of  his  personal

experience  in  dream-analysis,  and  to  declare  that  in  their  dreams

high-minded American ladies were quite as egoistic as the Austrians.

   Thus the transformation of instinct, on which our susceptibility to

culture is based, may also be permanently or temporarily undone by

the impacts of life. The influences of war are undoubtedly among the

forces  that  can  bring  about  such  involution;  so  we  need  not  deny

susceptibility to culture to all who are at the present time behaving in

an uncivilized way, and we may anticipate that the ennoblement of

their instincts will be restored in more peaceful times.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3079

 

   There is, however, another symptom in our fellow-citizens of the

world which has perhaps astonished and shocked us no less than the

descent from their ethical heights which has given us so much pain.

What I have in mind is the want of insight shown by the best intellects,

their obduracy, their inaccessibility to the most forcible arguments and

their uncritical credulity towards the most disputable assertions. This

indeed presents a lamentable picture, and I wish to say emphatically

that  in  this  I  am  by  no  means  a  blind  partisan  who  finds  all  the

intellectual shortcomings on one side. But this phenomenon is much

easier to account for and much less disquieting than the one we have

just  considered.  Students  of  human  nature  and  philosophers  have

long taught us that we are mistaken in regarding our intelligence as anindependent  force  and  in  overlooking  its  dependence  on  emotional

life. Our intellect, they teach us, can function reliably only when it is

removed from the influences of strong emotional impulses; otherwise

it  behaves  merely  as  an  instrument  of  the  will  and  delivers  the

inference which the will requires. Thus, in their view, logical arguments

are  impotent  against  affective  interests,  and  that  is  why  disputes

backed  by  reasons,  which  in  Falstaff’s  phrase  are  ‘as  plenty  as

blackberries’, are so unfruitful in the world of interests. Psycho-analytic

experience has, if possible, further confirmed this statement. It can

show every day that the shrewdest people will all of a sudden behave

without  insight,  like  imbeciles,  as  soon  as  the  necessary  insight  is

confronted by an emotional resistance, but that they will completely

regain their understanding once that resistance has been overcome.

The  logical  bedazzlement  which  this  war  has  conjured  up  in  our

fellow-citizens,  many  of  them  the  best  of  their  kind,  is  therefore  a

secondary phenomenon, a consequence of emotional excitement, and

is bound, we may hope, to disappear with it.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3080

 

   Having in this way once more come to understand our fellow citizens

who are now alienated from us, we shall much more easily endure the

disappointment  which  the  nations,  the  collective  individuals  of

mankind,  have  caused  us,  for  the  demands  we  make  upon  these

should  be  far  more  modest.  Perhaps  they  are  recapitulating  the

course  of  individual  development,  and  to-day  still  represent  very

primitive phases in organization and in the formation of higher unities.

It is in agreement with this that the educative factor of an external

compulsion  towards  morality,  which  we  found  was  so  effective  in

individuals,  is  as  yet  barely  discernible  in  them.  We  had  hoped,

certainly,  that  the  extensive  community  of  interests  established  by

commerce  and  production  would  constitute  the  germ  of  such  a

compulsion, but it would seem that nations still obey their passions far

more readily than their interests. Their interests serve them, at most,

as rationalizations for their passions; they put forward their interests inorder to be able to give reasons for satisfying their passions. It is, to

be  sure,  a  mystery  why  the  collective  individuals  should  in  fact

despise,  hate  and  detest  one  another  -  every  nation  against  every

other - and even in times of peace. I cannot tell why that is so. It is just

as though when it becomes a question of a number of people, not to

say millions, all individual moral acquisitions are obliterated, and only

the most primitive, the oldest, the crudest mental attitudes are left. It

may be that only later stages in development will be able to make

some  change  in  this  regrettable  state  of  affairs.  But  a  little  more

truthfulness and honesty on all sides - in the relations of men to one

another and between them and their rulers - should also smooth the

way for this transformation.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3081

 

                                            II

 

                    OUR ATTITUDE TOWARDS DEATH

 

The  second  factor  to  which  I  attribute  our  present  sense  of

estrangement  in  this  once  lovely  and  congenial  world  is  the

disturbance that has taken place in the attitude which we have hitherto

adopted towards death.

   That attitude was far from straightforward. To anyone who listened

to  us  we  were  of  course  prepared  to  maintain  that  death  was  the

necessary outcome of life, that everyone owes nature a death and

must  expect  to  pay  the  debt  -  in  short,  that  death  was  natural,

undeniable and unavoidable. In reality, however, we were accustomed

to  behave  as  if  it  were  otherwise.  We  showed  an  unmistakable

tendency to put death on one side, to eliminate it from life. We tried to

hush it up; indeed we even have a saying [in German]: ‘to think of

something as though it were death’. That is, as though it were our own

death, of course. It is indeed impossible to imagine our own death;

and whenever we attempt to do so we can perceive that we are in fact

still  present  as  spectators.  Hence  the  psycho-analytic  school  couldventure on the assertion that at bottom no one believes in his own

death,  or,  to  put  the  same  thing  in  another  way,  that  in  the

unconscious every one of us is convinced of his own immortality.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3082

 

      When  it  comes  to  someone  else’s  death,  the  civilized  man  will

carefully  avoid  speaking  of  such  a  possibility  in  the  hearing  of  the

person under sentence. Children alone disregard this restriction; they

unashamedly threaten one another with the possibility of dying, and

even go so far as to do the same thing to someone whom they love,

as, for instance: ‘Dear Mummy, when you’re dead I’II do this or that.’

The civilized adult can hardly even entertain the thought of another

person’s  death  without  seeming  to  himself  hard-hearted  or  wicked;

unless, of course, as a doctor or lawyer or something of the kind, he

has to deal with death professionally. Least of all will he allow himself

to think of the other person’s death if some gain to himself in freedom,

property  or  position  is  bound  up  with  it.  This  sensitiveness  of  ours

does not, of course, prevent the occurrence of deaths; when one does

happen, we are always deeply affected, and it is as though we were

badly shaken in our expectations. Our habit is to lay stress on the

fortuitous  causation  of  the  death  -  accident,  disease,  infection,

advanced age; in this way we betray an effort to reduce death from a

necessity to a chance event. A number of simultaneous deaths strikes

us as something extremely terrible. Towards the actual person who

has  died  we  adopt  a  special  attitude  -  something  almost  like

admiration for someone who has accomplished a very difficult task.

We suspend criticism of him, overlook his possible misdeeds, declare

that ‘de mortuis nil nisi bonum’, and think it justifiable to set out all that

is most favourable to his memory in the funeral oration and upon the

tombstone. Consideration for the dead, who, after all, no longer need

it, is more important to us than the truth, and certainly, for most of us,

than consideration for the living.

   The complement to this cultural and conventional attitude towards

death is provided by our complete collapse when death has struckdown someone whom we love - a parent or a partner in marriage, a

brother or sister, a child or a close friend. Our hopes, our desires and

our pleasures lie in the grave with him, we will not be consoled, we will

not fill the lost one’s place. We behave as if we were a kind of Asra,

who die when those they love die.

   But this attitude of ours towards death has a powerful effect on our

lives. Life is impoverished, it loses in interest, where the highest stake

in  the  game  of  living,  life  itself,  may  not  be  risked.  It  becomes  as

shallow and empty as, let us say, an American flirtation, in which it is

understood from the first that nothing is to happen, as contrasted with

a Continental love-affair in which both partners must constantly bear

its serious consequences in mind. Our emotional ties, the unbearable

intensity of our grief, make us disinclined to court danger for ourselves

and for those who belong to us. We dare not contemplate a great

many  undertakings  which  are  dangerous  but  in  fact  indispensable,

such as attempts at artificial flight, expeditions to distant countries or

experiments  with  explosive  substances.  We  are  paralysed  by  the

thought  of  who  is  to  take  the  son’s  place  with  his  mother,  the

husband’s  with  his  wife,  the  father’s  with  his  children,  if  a  disaster

should  occur.  Thus  the  tendency  to  exclude  death  from  our

calculations  in  life  brings  in  its  train  many  other  renunciations  and

exclusions.  Yet  the  motto  of  the  Hanseatic  League  ran:  ‘Navigare

necesse est, vivere non necesse.’ (‘It is necessary to sail the seas, it

is not necessary to live.’)

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3083

 

   It is an inevitable result of all this that we should seek in the world of

fiction, in literature and in the theatre compensation for what has been

lost  in  life.  There  we  still  find  people  who  know  how  to  die  -  who,

indeed,  even  manage  to  kill  someone  else.  There  alone  too  the

condition can be fulfilled which makes it possible for us to reconcile

ourselves with death: namely, that behind all the vicissitudes of life we

should still be able to preserve a life intact. For it is really too sad that

in life it should be as it is in chess, where one false move may force usto resign the game, but with the difference that we can start no second

game, no return-match. In the realm of fiction we find the plurality of

lives  which  we  need.  We  die  with  the  hero  with  whom  we  have

identified ourselves; yet we survive him, and are ready to die again

just as safely with another hero.

   It is evident that war is bound to sweep away this conventional

treatment of death. Death will no longer be denied; we are forced to

believe in it. People really die; and no longer one by one, but many,

often tens of thousands, in a single day. And death is no longer a

chance event. To be sure, it still seems a matter of chance whether a

bullet  hits  this  man  or  that;  but  a  second  bullet  may  well  hit  the

survivor;  and  the  accumulation  of  deaths  puts  an  end  to  the

impression of chance. Life has, indeed, become interesting again; it

has recovered its full content.

   Here a distinction should be made between two groups - those who

themselves risk their lives in battle, and those who have stayed at

home and have only to wait for the loss of one of their dear ones by

wounds, disease or infection. It would be most interesting, no doubt, to

study the changes in the psychology of the combatants, but I know too

little about it. We must restrict ourselves to the second group, to which

we  ourselves  belong.  I  have  said  already  that  in  my  opinion  the

bewilderment and the paralysis of capacity, from which we suffer, are

essentially determined among other things by the circumstance that

we are unable to maintain our former attitude towards death, and have

not yet found a new one. It may assist us to do this if we direct our

psychological enquiry towards two other relations to death - the one

which  we  may  ascribe  to  primaeval,  prehistoric  men,  and  the  one

which still exists in every one of us, but which conceals itself, invisible

to consciousness, in the deeper strata of our mental life.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3084

 

   What the attitude of prehistoric man was towards death is, of course,

only known to us by inferences and constructions, but I believe that

these methods have furnished us with fairly trustworthy conclusions.   Primaeval man took up a very remarkable attitude towards death. It

was far from consistent; it was indeed most contradictory. On the one

hand, he took death seriously, recognized it as the termination of life

and made use of it in that sense; on the other hand, he also denied

death and reduced it to nothing. This contradiction arose from the fact

that he took up radically different attitudes towards the death of other

people, of strangers, of enemies, and towards his own. He had no

objection  to  someone  else’s  death;  it  meant  the  annihilation  of

someone  he  hated,  and  primitive  man  had  no  scruples  against

bringing it about. He was no doubt a very passionate creature and

more cruel and more malignant than other animals. He liked to kill,

and killed as a matter of course. The instinct which is said to restrain

other animals from killing and devouring their own species need not

be attributed to him.

   Hence the primaeval history of mankind is filled with murder. Even

to-day, the history of the world which our children learn at school is

essentially a series of murders of peoples. The obscure sense of guilt

to which mankind has been subject since prehistoric times, and which

in some religions has been condensed into the doctrine of primal guilt,

of original sin, is probably the outcome of a blood-guilt incurred by

prehistoric  man.  In  my  book Totem  and  Taboo  (1912-13)  I  have,

following  clues  given  by  Robertson  Smith,  Atkinson  and  Charles

Darwin, tried to guess the nature of this primal guilt, and I believe, too,

that the Christian doctrine of to-day enables us to deduce it. If the Son

of  God  was  obliged  to  sacrifice  his  life  to  redeem  mankind  from

original sin, then by the law of talion, the requital of like by like, that sin

must have been a killing, a murder. Nothing else could call for the

sacrifice of a life for its expiation. And the original sin was an offence

against God the Father, the primal crime of mankind must have been

a  parricide,  the  killing  of  the  primal  father  of  the  primitive  human

horde, whose mnemic image was later transfigured into a deity.¹

 

   ¹ Cf. Totem and Taboo, Essay IV.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3085

    His own death was certainly just as unimaginable and unreal for

primaeval man as it is for any one of us to-day. But there was for him

one case in which the two opposite attitudes towards death collided

and came into conflict with each other; and this case became highly

important  and  productive  of  far-reaching  consequences.  It  occurred

when  primaeval  man  saw  someone  who  belonged  to  him  die  -  his

wife, his child, his friend - whom he undoubtedly loved as we love

ours, for love cannot be much younger than the lust to kill. Then, in his

pain, he was forced to learn that one can die, too, oneself, and his

whole being revolted against the admission; for each of these loved

ones was, after all, a part of his own beloved ego. But, on the other

hand, deaths such as these pleased him as well, since in each of the

loved persons there was also something of the stranger. The law of

ambivalence  of  feeling,  which  to  this  day  governs  our  emotional

relations with those whom we love most, certainly had a very much

wider validity in primaeval times. Thus these beloved dead had also

been enemies and strangers who had aroused in him some degree of

hostile feeling.¹

   Philosophers have declared that the intellectual enigma presented to

primaeval man by the picture of death forced him to reflection, and

thus became the starting-point of all speculation. I believe that here

the philosophers are thinking too philosophically, and giving too little

consideration to the motives that were primarily operative. I should like

therefore  to  limit  and  correct  their  assertion.  In  my  view,  primaeval

man must have triumphed beside the body of his slain enemy, without

being led to rack his brains about the enigma of life and death. What

released the spirit of enquiry in man was not the intellectual enigma,

and not every death, but the conflict of feeling at the death of loved yet

alien and hated persons. Of this conflict of feeling psychology was the

first offspring. Man could no longer keep death at a distance, for he

had  tasted  it  in  his  pain  about  the  dead;  but  he  was  nevertheless

unwilling to acknowledge it, for he could not conceive of himself as

dead. So he devised a compromise: he conceded the fact of his own

death  as  well,  but  denied  it  the  significance  of  annihilation  -  a

significance which he had had no motive for denying where the death

of his enemy was concerned. It was beside the dead body of someone

he  loved  that  he  invented  spirits,  and  his  sense  of  guilt  at  thesatisfaction mingled with his sorrow turned these new-born spirits into

evil demons that had to be dreaded. The changes brought about by

death suggested to him the division of the individual into a body and a

soul  -  originally  several  souls.  In  this  way  his  train  of  thought  ran

parallel with the process of disintegration which sets in with death. His

persisting memory of the dead became the basis for assuming other

forms of existence and gave him the conception of a life continuing

after apparent death.

 

   ¹ Ibid., Essay II.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3086

 

      These  subsequent  existences  were  at  first  no  more  than

appendages to the existence which death had brought to a close -

shadowy, empty of content, and valued at little until later times; they

still  bore  the  character  of  wretched  makeshifts.  We  may  recall  the

answer made to Odysseus by the soul of Achilles:

 

   ‘For of old, when thou wast alive, we Argives honoured thee even as the gods, and now that
thou art here, thou rulest mightily over the dead. Wherefore grieve not at all that thou art dead,
Achilles.’
   So I spoke, and he straightway made answer and said: ‘Nay, seek not to speak soothingly
to me of death, glorious Odysseus. I should choose, so I might live on earth, to serve as the
hireling off another, of some portionless man whose livelihood was but small, rather than to be
lord over all the dead that have perished.’¹

 

Or in Heine’s powerful and bitter parody:

 

                                                Der kleinste lebendige Philister
                                                Zu Stuckert am Neckar
                                                Viel glücklicher ist er
                                                Als ich, der Pelide, der tote Held,

                                                Der Schattenfürst in der Unterwelt.²

 

   ¹ Odyssey, XI, 484-91.

   ² [Literally: ‘The smallest living Philistine at Stuckert-am-Neckar is far happier than I, the

son of Peleus, the dead hero, the shadow-prince in the underworld.’]
                   Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3087

 

   It was only later that religions succeeded in representing this after-

life as the more desirable, the truly valid one, and in reducing the life

which is ended by death to a mere preparation. After this, it was no

more than consistent to extend life backwards into the past, to form

the notion of earlier existences, of the transmigration of souls and of

reincarnation, all with the purpose of depriving death of its meaning as

the termination of life. So early did the denial of death, which we have

described as a ‘conventional and cultural attitude’, have its origin.

   What came into existence beside the dead body of the loved one

was not only the doctrine of the soul, the belief in immortality and a

powerful source of man’s sense of guilt, but also the earliest ethical

commandments. The first and most important prohibition made by the

awakening conscience was: ‘Thou shalt not kill.’ It was acquired in

relation  to  dead  people  who  were  loved,  as  a  reaction  against  the

satisfaction of the hatred hidden behind the grief for them; and it was

gradually extended to strangers who were not loved, and finally even

to enemies.

   This final extension of the commandment is no longer experienced

by civilized man. When the furious struggle of the present war has

been  decided,  each  one  of  the  victorious  fighters  will  return  home

joyfully  to  his  wife  and  children,  unchecked  and  undisturbed  by

thoughts of the enemies he has killed whether at close quarters or at

long  range.  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  primitive  races  which  still

survive  in  the  world,  and  are  undoubtedly  closer  than  we  are  to

primaeval man, act differently in this respect, or did until they came

under  the  influence  of  our  civilization.  Savages  -  Australians,

Bushmen,  Tierra  del  Fuegans  -  are  far  from  being  remorseless

murderers; when they return victorious from the war-path they may not

set foot in their villages or touch their wives till they have atoned for

the murders they committed in war by penances which are often long

and tedious. It is easy, of course, to attribute this to their superstition:

the savage still goes in fear of the avenging spirits of the slain. But the

spirits of his slain enemy are nothing but the expression of his bad

conscience  about  his  blood-guilt;  behind  this  superstition  there  liesconcealed a vein of ethical sensitiveness which has been lost by us

civilized men.¹

 

   ¹ Cf. Totem and Taboo (1912-13).

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3088

 

   Pious souls, no doubt, who would like to believe that our nature is

remote from any contact with what is evil and base, will not fail to use

the  early  appearance  and  the  urgency  of  the  prohibition  against

murder as the basis for gratifying conclusions as to the strength of the

ethical impulses which must have been implanted in us. Unfortunately

this argument proves even more for the opposite view. So powerful a

prohibition can only be directed against an equally powerful impulse.

What no human soul desires stands in no need of prohibition;¹ it is

excluded automatically. The very emphasis laid on the commandment

‘Thou shalt not kill’ makes it certain that we spring from an endless

series of generations of murderers, who had the lust for killing in their

blood,  as,  perhaps,  we  ourselves  have  to-day.  Mankind’s  ethical

strivings, whose strength and significance we need not in the least

depreciate, were acquired in the course of man’s history; since then

they  have  become,  though  unfortunately  only  in  a  very  variable

amount, the inherited property of contemporary men.

   Let us now leave primaeval man, and turn to the unconscious in our

own mental life. Here we depend entirely upon the psycho-analytic

method of investigation, the only one which reaches to such depths.

What, we ask, is the attitude of our unconscious towards the problem

of death? The answer must be: almost exactly the same as that of

primaeval  man.  In  this  respect,  as  in  many  others,  the  man  of

prehistoric  times  survives  unchanged  in  our  unconscious.  Our

unconscious, then, does not believe in its own death; it behaves as if it

were immortal. What we call our ‘unconscious’ - the deepest strata of

our minds, made up of instinctual impulses - knows nothing that is

negative,  and  no  negation;  in  it  contradictories  coincide.  For  that

reason it does not know its own death, for to that we can give only a

negative  content.  Thus  there  is  nothing  instinctual  in  us  whichresponds to a belief in death. This may even be the secret of heroism.

The  rational  grounds  for  heroism  rest  on  a  judgement  that  the

subject’s  own  life  cannot  be  so  precious  as  certain  abstract  and

general goods. But more frequent, in my view, is the instinctive and

impulsive heroism which knows no such reasons, and flouts danger in

the spirit of Anzengruber’s Steinklopferhans: ‘Nothing can happen to

me’. Or else those reasons only serve to clear away the hesitations

which  might  hold  back  the  heroic  reaction  that  corresponds  to  the

unconscious. The fear of death, which dominates us oftener than we

know, is on the other hand something secondary, and is usually the

outcome of a sense of guilt.

 

   ¹ Cf. Frazer’s brilliant argument quoted in Totem and Taboo.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3089

 

      On  the  other  hand,  for  strangers  and  for  enemies  we  do

acknowledge  death,  and  consign  them  to  it  quite  as  readily  and

unhesitatingly as did primaeval man. There is, it is true, a distinction

here which will be pronounced decisive so far as real life is concerned.

Our unconscious does not carry out the killing; it merely thinks it and

wishes  it.  But  it  would  be  wrong  so  completely  to  undervalue  this

psychical reality as compared with factual reality. It is significant and

momentous enough. In our unconscious impulses we daily and hourly

get rid of anyone who stands in our way, of anyone who has offended

or injured us. The expression ‘Devil take him!’, which so often comes

to people’s lips in joking anger and which really means ‘Death take

him!’,  is  in  our  unconscious  a  serious  and  powerful  death-wish.

Indeed, our unconscious will murder even for trifles; like the ancient

Athenian code of Draco, it knows no other punishment for crime than

death.  And  this  has  a  certain  consistency,  for  every  injury  to  our

almighty and autocratic ego is at bottom a crime of lèse-majesté.

   And so, if we are to be judged by our unconscious wishful impulses,

we  ourselves  are,  like  primaeval  man,  a  gang  of  murderers.  It  is

fortunate that all these wishes do not possess the potency that was

attributed  to  them  in  primaeval  times;¹  in  the  cross-fire  of  mutualcurses mankind would long since have perished, the best and wisest

of men and the loveliest and fairest of women with the rest.

 

   ¹ See Totem and Taboo, Essay IV.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3090

 

      Psycho-analysis  finds  as  a  rule  no  credence  among  laymen  for

assertions such as these. They reject them as calumnies which are

confuted by conscious experience, and they adroitly overlook the faint

indications by which even the unconscious is apt to betray itself to

consciousness. It is therefore relevant to point out that many thinkers

who could not have been influenced by psycho-analysis have quite

definitely accused our unspoken thoughts of being ready, heedless of

the prohibition against murder, to get rid of anything which stands in

our  way.  From  many  examples  of  this  I  will  choose  one  that  has

become famous:

   In Le Père Goriot, Balzac alludes to a passage in the works of J. J.

Rousseau where that author asks the reader what he would do if -

without  leaving  Paris  and  of  course  without  being  discovered  -  he

could kill, with great profit to himself, an old mandarin in Peking by a

mere act of will. Rousseau implies that he would not give much for the

life  of  that  dignitary.  ‘Tuer  son  mandarin’  has  become  a  proverbial

phrase for this secret readiness, present even in modern man.

      There  are  also  a  whole  number  of  cynical  jokes  and  anecdotes

which reveal the same tendency - such, for instance, as the words

attributed to a husband: ‘If one of us two dies, I shall move to Paris.’

Such cynical jokes would not be possible unless they contained an

unacknowledged  truth  which  could  not  be  admitted  if  it  were

expressed seriously and without disguise. In jest - it is well known -

one may even tell the truth.

   Just as for primaeval man, so also for our unconscious, there is one

case in which the two opposing attitudes towards death, the one which

acknowledges it as the annihilation of life and the other which denies it

as unreal, collide and come into conflict. This case is the same as in

primal ages: the death, or the risk of death, of someone we love, aparent or a partner in marriage, a brother or sister, a child or a dear

friend. These loved ones are on the one hand an inner possession,

components of our own ego; but on the other hand they are partly

strangers,  even  enemies.  With  the  exception  of  only  a  very  few

situations,  there  adheres  to  the  tenderest  and  most  intimate  of  our

love-relations  a  small  portion  of  hostility  which  can  excite  an

unconscious death-wish. But this conflict due to ambivalence does not

now, as it did then, lead to the doctrine of the soul and to ethics, but to

neurosis, which affords us deep insight into normal mental life as well.

How often have physicians who practise psycho-analysis had to deal

with  the  symptom  of  an  exaggerated  worry  over  the  well-being  of

relatives, or with entirely unfounded self-reproaches after the death of

a loved person. The study of such phenomena has left them in no

doubt about the extent and importance of unconscious death-wishes.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3091

 

   The layman feels an extraordinary horror at the possibility of such

feelings, and takes this aversion as a legitimate ground for disbelief in

the assertions of psycho-analysis. Mistakenly, I think. No depreciation

of feelings of love is intended, and there is in fact none. It is indeed

foreign to our intelligence as well as to our feelings thus to couple love

and  hate;  but  Nature,  by  making  use  of  this  pair  of  opposites,

contrives to keep love ever vigilant and fresh, so as to guard it against

the hate which lurks behind it. It might be said that we owe the fairest

flowerings of our love to the reaction against the hostile impulse which

we sense within us.

   To sum up: our unconscious is just as inaccessible to the idea of our

own  death,  just  as  murderously  inclined  towards  strangers,  just  as

divided (that is, ambivalent) towards those we love, as was primaeval

man.  But  how  far  we  have  moved  from  this  primal  state  in  our

conventional and cultural attitude towards death!

   It is easy to see how war impinges on this dichotomy. It strips us of

the  later  accretions  of  civilization,  and  lays  bare  the  primal  man  in

each of us. It compels us once more to be heroes who cannot believein their own death; it stamps strangers as enemies, whose death is to

be brought about or desired; it tells us to disregard the death of those

we love. But war cannot be abolished; so long as the conditions of

existence among nations are so different and their mutual repulsion so

violent, there are bound to be wars. The question then arises: Is it not

we who should give in, who should adapt ourselves to war? Should

we not confess that in our civilized attitude towards death we are once

again  living  psychologically  beyond  our  means,  and  should  we  not

rather turn back and recognize the truth? Would it not be better to give

death the place in reality and in our thoughts which is its due, and to

give  a  little  more  prominence  to  the  unconscious  attitude  towards

death which we have hitherto so carefully suppressed? This hardly

seems an advance to higher achievement, but rather in some respects

a backward step - a regression; but it has the advantage of taking the

truth more into account, and of making life more tolerable for us once

again.  To  tolerate  life  remains,  after  all,  the  first  duty  of  all  living

beings. Illusion becomes valueless if it makes this harder for us.

   We recall the old saying: Si vis pacem, para bellum. If you want to

preserve peace, arm for war.

   It would be in keeping with the times to alter it: Si vis vitam, para

mortem. If you want to endure life, prepare yourself for death.

 


                  Thoughts For The Times On War And Death

                                                                                      3092

 

                                      APPENDIX

 

                    LETTER TO FREDERIK VAN EEDEN 

 

                                                      Vienna, December 28, 1914.

Dear Dr. van Eeden,

   I venture, under the impact of the war, to remind you of two theses

which  have  been  put  forward  by  psycho-analysis  and  which  have

undoubtedly contributed to its unpopularity.

   Psycho-analysis has inferred from the dreams and parapraxes of

healthy people, as well as from the symptoms of neurotics, that theprimitive, savage and evil impulses of mankind have not vanished in

any  of  its  individual  members  but  persist,  although  in  a  repressed

state, in the unconscious (to use our technical terms), and lie wait for

opportunities of becoming active once more. It has further taught us

that our intellect is a feeble and dependent thing, a plaything and tool

of our instincts and affects, and that we are all compelled to behave

cleverly or stupidly according to the commands of our attitudes and

internal resistances.

   If you will now observe what is happening in the war - the cruelties

and injustices for which the most civilized nations are responsible, the

different way in which they judge their own lies and wrong-doings and

those of their enemies, and the general lack of insight which prevails -

you will have to admit that psycho-analysis has been right in both its

theses.

   It may not have been entirely original in this; many thinkers and

students of mankind have made similar assertions. But our science

has worked out both of them in detail and has employed them to throw

light on many psychological puzzles. I hope we shall meet again in

happier times.

                                                                Yours very sincerely,

                                                                            Sigm. Freud

 

   ¹ [Written by Freud at the end of 1914]

                                                                                       3093

 

                                  ON TRANSIENCE

                                        (1916)

 


                                                                                      3094

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3095

 

                                  ON TRANSIENCE

 

Not long ago I went on a summer walk through a smiling countryside

in the company of a taciturn friend and of a young but already famous

poet. The poet admired the beauty of the scene around us but felt no

joy in it. He was disturbed by the thought that all this beauty was fated

to extinction, that it would vanish when winter came, like all human

beauty and all the beauty and splendour that men have created or

may  create.  All  that  he  would  otherwise  have  loved  and  admired

seemed to him to be shorn of its worth by the transience which was its

doom.

   The proneness to decay of all that is beautiful and perfect can, as

we  know,  give  rise  to  two  different  impulses  in  the  mind.  The  one

leads  to  the  aching  despondency  felt  by  the  young  poet,  while  the

other leads to rebellion against the fact asserted. No! it is impossible

that all this loveliness of Nature and Art, of the world of our sensations

and of the world outside, will really fade away into nothing. It would be

too senseless and too presumptuous to believe it. Somehow or other

this loveliness must be able to persist and to escape all the powers of

destruction.

      But  this  demand  for  immortality  is  a  product  of  our  wishes  too

unmistakable to lay claim to reality: what is painful may none the less

be true. I could not see my way to dispute the transience of all things,

nor could I insist upon an exception in favour of what is beautiful andperfect.  But  I  did  dispute  the  pessimistic  poet’s  view  that  the

transience of what is beautiful involves any loss in its worth.

   On the contrary, an increase! Transience value is scarcity value in

time. Limitation in the possibility of an enjoyment raises the value of

the enjoyment. It was incomprehensible, I declared, that the thought of

the transience of beauty should interfere with our joy in it. As regards

the  beauty  of  Nature,  each  time  it  is  destroyed  by  winter  it  comes

again next year, so that in relation to the length of our lives it can in

fact be regarded as eternal. The beauty of the human form and face

vanish for ever in the course of our own lives, but their evanescence

only  lends  them  a  fresh  charm.  A  flower  that  blossoms  only  for  a

single night does not seem to us on that account less lovely. Nor can I

understand any better why the beauty and perfection of a work of art

or of an intellectual achievement should lose its worth because of its

temporal limitation. A time may indeed come when the pictures and

statues which we admire to-day will crumble to dust, or a race of men

may follow us who no longer understand the works of our poets and

thinkers, or a geological epoch may even arrive when all animate life

upon  the  earth  ceases;  but  since  the  value  of  all  this  beauty  and

perfection is determined only by its significance for our own emotional

lives, it has no need to survive us and is therefore independent of

absolute duration.

 


                                    On Transience

                                                                                      3096

 

   These considerations appeared to me incontestable; but I noticed

that I had made no impression either upon the poet or upon my friend.

My failure led me to infer that some powerful emotional factor was at

work which was disturbing their judgement, and I believed later that I

had  discovered  what  it  was.  What  spoilt  their  enjoyment  of  beauty

must have been a revolt in their minds against mourning. The idea

that all this beauty was transient was giving these two sensitive minds

a  foretaste  of  mourning  over  its  decease;  and,  since  the  mind

instinctively  recoils  from  anything  that  is  painful,  they  felt  their

enjoyment of beauty interfered with by thoughts of its transience.   Mourning over the loss of something that we have loved or admired

seems so natural to the layman that he regards it as self-evident. But

to psychologists mourning is a great riddle, one of those phenomena

which cannot themselves be explained but to which other obscurities

can be traced back. We possess, as it seems, a certain amount of

capacity for love - what we call libido - which in the earliest stages of

development is directed towards our own ego. Later, though still at a

very early time, this libido is diverted from the ego on to objects, which

are thus in a sense taken into our ego. If the objects are destroyed or

if they are lost to us, our capacity for love (our libido) is once more

liberated;  and  it  can  then  either  take  other  objects  instead  or  can

temporarily return to the ego. But why it is that this detachment of

libido from its objects should be such a painful process is a mystery to

us and we have not hitherto been able to frame any hypothesis to

account for it. We only see that libido clings to its objects and will not

renounce  those  that  are  lost  even  when  a  substitute  lies  ready  to

hand. Such then is mourning.

 


                                    On Transience

                                                                                      3097

 

 

   My conversation with the poet took place in the summer before the

war.  A  year  later  the  war  broke  out  and  robbed  the  world  of  its

beauties. It destroyed not only the beauty of the countrysides through

which it passed and the works of art which it met with on its path but it

also shattered our pride in the achievements of our civilization, our

admiration for many philosophers and artists and our hopes of a final

triumph over the differences between nations and races. It tarnished

the lofty impartiality of our science, it revealed our instincts in all their

nakedness and let loose the evil spirits within us which we thought

had been tamed for ever by centuries of continuous education by the

noblest minds. It made our country small again and made the rest of

the world far remote. It robbed us of very much that we had loved, and

showed us how ephemeral were many things that we had regarded as

changeless.   We cannot be surprised that our libido, thus bereft of so many of its

objects, has clung with all the greater intensity to what is left to us, that

our love of our country, our affection for those nearest us and our

pride  in  what  is  common  to  us  have  suddenly  grown  stronger.  But

have those other possessions, which we have now lost, really ceased

to have any worth for us because they have proved so perishable and

so unresistant? To many of us this seems to be so, but once more

wrongly, in my view. I believe that those who think thus, and seem

ready to make a permanent renunciation because what was precious

has proved not to be lasting, are simply in a state of mourning for what

is Lost. Mourning, as we know, however painful it may becomes to a

spontaneous end. When it has renounced everything that has been

lost, then it has consumed itself, and our libido is once more free (in

so far as we are still young and active) to replace the lost objects by

fresh ones equally or still more precious. It is to be hoped that the

same will be true of the losses caused by this war. When once the

mourning is over, it will be found that our high opinion of the riches of

civilization  has  lost  nothing  from  our  discovery  of  their  fragility.  We

shall build up again all that war has destroyed, and perhaps on firmer

ground and more lastingly than before.

                                                                                       3098

 

    SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHO-ANALYTIC

                                        WORK

                                        (1916)

 


                                                                                      3099

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3100

 

    SOME CHARACTER-TYPES MET WITH IN PSYCHO-ANALYTIC

                                        WORK

 

When a doctor carries out the psycho-analytic treatment of a neurotic,

his interest is by no means directed in the first instance to the patient’s

character.  He  would  much  rather  know  what  the  symptoms  mean,

what instinctual impulses are concealed behind them and are satisfied

by them, and what course was followed by the mysterious path that

has led from the instinctual wishes to the symptoms. But the technique

which he is obliged to follow soon compels him to direct his immediate

curiosity towards other objectives. He observes that his investigation

is threatened by resistances set up against him by the patient, and

these resistances he may justly count as part of the latter’s character.

This now acquires the first claim on his interest.

      What  opposes  the  doctor’s  efforts  is  not  always  those  traits  of

character  which  the  patient  recognizes  in  himself  and  which  are

attributed to him by people round him. Peculiarities in him which he

had seemed to possess only to a modest degree are often brought to

light in surprisingly increased intensity, or attitudes reveal themselves

in  him  which  had  not  been  betrayed  in  other  relations  of  life.  The

pages which follow will be devoted to describing and tracing back a

few of these surprising traits of character.

                                             I

 

                                THE ‘EXCEPTIONS’

 

Psycho-analytic  work  is  continually  confronted  with  the  task  of

inducing the patient to renounce an immediate and directly attainable

yield of pleasure. He is not asked to renounce all pleasure; that could

not, perhaps, be expected of any human being, and even religion is

obliged to support its demand that earthly pleasure shall be set aside

by  promising  that  it  will  provide  instead  an  incomparably  greater

amount of superior pleasure in another world. No, the patient is only

asked  to  renounce  such  satisfactions  as  will  inevitably  have

detrimental consequences. His privation is only to be temporary; he

has only to learn to exchange an immediate yield of pleasure for a

better  assured,  even  though  a  postponed  one.  Or,  in  other  words,

under the doctor’s guidance he is asked to make the advance from the

pleasure principle to the reality principle by which the mature human

being is distinguished from the child. In this educative process, the

doctor’s clearer insight can hardly be said to play a decisive part; as a

rule, he can only tell his patient what the latter’s own reason can tell

him. But it is not the same to know a thing in one’s own mind and to

hear  it  from  someone  outside.  The  doctor  plays  the  part  of  this

effective outsider; he makes use of the influence which one human

being  exercises  over  another.  Or  -  recalling  that  it  is  the  habit  of

psycho-analysis to replace what is derivative and etiolated by what is

original and basic - let us say that the doctor, in his educative work,

makes use of one of the components of love. In this work of after-

education,  he  is  probably  doing  no  more  than  repeat  the  process

which made education of any kind possible in the first instance. Side

by side with the exigencies of life, love is the great educator; and it is

by the love of those nearest him that the incomplete human being is

induced to respect the decrees of necessity and to spare himself the

punishment that follows any infringement of them.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3101 

      When  in  this  way  one  asks  the  patient  to  make  a  provisional

renunciation of some pleasurable satisfaction, to make a sacrifice, to

show his readiness to accept some temporary suffering for the sake of

a  better  end,  or  even  merely  to  make  up  his  mind  to  submit  to  a

necessity which applies to everyone, one comes upon individuals who

resist such an appeal on a special ground. They say that they have

renounced  enough  and  suffered  enough,  and  have  a  claim  to  be

spared  any  further  demands;  they  will  submit  no  longer  to  any

disagreeable necessity, for they are exceptions and, moreover, intend

to  remain  so.  In  one  such  patient  this  claim  was  magnified  into  a

conviction that a special providence watched over him, which would

protect  him  from  any  painful  sacrifices  of  the  sort.  The  doctor’s

arguments  will  achieve  nothing  against  an  inner  confidence  which

expresses  itself  as  strongly  as  this;  even his  influence,  indeed,  is

powerless at first, and it becomes clear to him that he must discover

the sources from which this damaging prepossession is being fed.

   Now it is no doubt true that everyone would like to consider himself

an ‘exception’ and claim privileges over others. But precisely because

of  this  there  must  be  a  particular  reason,  and  one  not  universally

present,  if  someone  actually  proclaims  himself  an  exception  and

behaves as such. This reason may be of more than one kind; in the

cases I investigated I succeeded in discovering a common peculiarity

in the earlier experiences of these patients’ lives. Their neuroses were

connected with some experience or suffering to which they had been

subjected in their earliest childhood, one in respect of which they knew

themselves  to  be  guiltless,  and  which  they  could  look  upon  as  an

unjust  disadvantage  imposed  upon  them.  The  privileges  that  they

claimed  as  a  result  of  this  injustice,  and  the  rebelliousness  it

engendered,  had  contributed  not  a  little  to  intensifying  the  conflicts

leading to the outbreak of their neurosis. In one of these patients, a

woman,  the  attitude  towards  life  which  I  am  discussing  came  to  a

head  when  she  learnt  that  a  painful  organic  trouble,  which  had

hindered her from attaining her aims in life, was of congenital origin.

So long as she looked upon this trouble as an accidental and late

acquisition, she bore it patiently; as soon as she found that it was part

of an innate inheritance, she became rebellious. The young man whobelieved that he was watched over by a special providence had in his

infancy been the victim of an accidental infection from his wet-nurse,

and had spent his whole later life making claims for compensation, an

accident  pension,  as  it  were,  without  having  any  idea  on  what  he

based those claims. In his case the analysis, which constructed this

event  out  of  obscure  mnemic  residues  and  interpretations  of  the

symptoms, was confirmed objectively by information from his family.

   For reasons which will be easily understood I cannot communicate

very much about these or other case histories. Nor do I propose to go

into the obvious analogy between deformities of character resulting

from  protracted  sickliness  in  childhood  and  the  behaviour  of  whole

nations  whose  past  history  has  been  full  of  suffering.  Instead,

however, I will take the opportunity of pointing to a figure created by

the greatest of poets - a figure in whose character the claim to be an

exception  is  closely  bound  up  with  and  is  motivated  by  the

circumstance of congenital disadvantage.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3102

 

   In the opening soliloquy to Shakespeare’s Richard III, Gloucester,

who subsequently becomes King, says:

 

                                                But I, that am not shaped for sportive tricks,
                                                Nor made to court an amorous looking-glass;
                                                I that am rudely stamp’d, and want love’s majesty
                                                To strut before a wanton ambling nymph;
                                                I, that am curtail’d of this fair proportion,
                                                Cheated of feature by dissembling Nature,
                                                Deform’d, unfinish’d, sent before my time
                                                Into this breathing world, scarce half made up,
                                                And that so lamely and unfashionable,
                                                That dogs bark at me as I halt by them;
 
                                                                *      *      *      *      *
                                                And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover,
                                                To entertain these fair well-spoken days,
                                                I am determined to prove a villain,
                                                And hate the idle pleasures of these days.

    At a first glance this tirade may perhaps seem unrelated to our

present theme. Richard seems to say nothing more than: ‘I find these

idle times tedious, and I want to enjoy myself. As I cannot play the

lover on account of my deformity, I will play the villain; I will intrigue,

murder and do anything else I please.’ Such a frivolous motivation

could not but stifle any stirring of sympathy in the audience, if it were

not a screen for something much more serious. Otherwise the play

would be psychologically impossible, for the writer must know how to

furnish us with a secret background of sympathy for his hero, if we are

to  admire  his  boldness  and  adroitness  without  inward  protest;  and

such sympathy can only be based on understanding or on a sense of

a possible inner fellow-feeling for him.

   I think, therefore, that Richard’s soliloquy does not say everything; it

merely gives a hint, and leaves us to fill in what it hints at. When we

do so, however, the appearance of frivolity vanishes, the bitterness

and minuteness with which Richard has depicted his deformity make

their  full  effect,  and  we  clearly  perceive  the  fellow-feeling  which

compels our sympathy even with a villain like him. What the soliloquy

thus means is: ‘nature has done me a grievous wrong in denying me

the beauty of form which wins human love. Life owes me reparation

for this, and I will see that I get it. I have a right to be an exception, to

disregard the scruples by which others let themselves be held back. I

may do wrong myself, since wrong has been done to me.’ And now

we feel that we ourselves might become like Richard, that on a small

scale,  indeed,  we  are  already  like  him.  Richard  is  an  enormous

magnification of something we find in ourselves as well. We all think

we have reason to reproach Nature and our destiny for congenital and

infantile disadvantages; we all demand reparation for early wounds to

our narcissism, our self-love. Why did not Nature give us the golden

curls of Balder or the strength of Siegfried or the lofty brow of genius

or the noble profile of aristocracy? Why were we born in a middle-

class home instead of in a royal palace? We could carry off beauty

and distinction quite as well as any of those whom we are now obliged

to envy for these qualities.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work                                                                                      3103

 

   It is, however, a subtle economy of art in the poet that he does not

permit his hero to give open and complete expression to all his secret

motives.  By  this  means  he  obliges  us  to  supplement  them;  he

engages our intellectual activity, diverts it from critical reflection and

keeps us firmly identified with his hero. A bungler in his place would

give conscious expression to all that he wishes to reveal to us, and

would  then  find  himself  confronted  by  our  cool,  untrammelled

intelligence, which would preclude any deepening of the illusion.

   Before leaving the ‘exceptions’, however, we may point out that the

claim of women to privileges and to exemption from so many of the

importunities of life rests upon the same foundation. As we learn from

psycho-analytic  work,  women  regard  themselves  as  having  been

damaged  in  infancy,  as  having  been  undeservedly  cut  short  of

something  and  unfairly  treated;  and  the  embitterment  of  so  many

daughters against their mother derives, ultimately, from the reproach

against her of having brought them into the world as women instead of

as men.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3104

 

                                            II

 

                      THOSE WRECKED BY SUCCESS

 

Psycho-analytic work has furnished us with the thesis that people fall

ill  of  a  neurosis  as  a  result  of frustration.  What  is  meant  is  the

frustration  of  the  satisfaction  of  their  libidinal  wishes,  and  some

digression is necessary in order to make the thesis intelligible. For a

neurosis to be generated there must be a conflict between a person’s

libidinal wishes and the part of his personality we call his ego, which is

the  expression  of  his  instinct  of  self-preservation  and  which  also

includes his ideals of his personality. A pathogenic conflict of this kind

takes place only when the libido tries to follow paths and aims which

the ego has long since overcome and condemned and has thereforeprohibited forever; and this the libido only does if it is deprived of the

possibility  of  an  ideal  ego-syntonic  satisfaction.  Hence  privation,

frustration of a real satisfaction, is the first condition for the generation

of a neurosis, although, indeed, it is far from being the only one.

      So  much  the  more  surprising,  and  indeed  bewildering,  must  it

appear  when  as  a  doctor  one  makes  the  discovery  that  people

occasionally fall ill precisely when a deeply-rooted and long-cherished

wish has come to fulfilment. It seems then as though they were not

able to tolerate their happiness; for there can be no question that there

is a causal connection between their success and their falling ill.

   I had an opportunity of obtaining an insight into a woman’s history,

which I propose to describe as typical of these tragic occurrences.

She was of good birth and well brought-up, but as quite a young girl

she could not restrain her zest for life; she ran away from home and

roved  about  the  world  in  search  of  adventures,  till  she  made  the

acquaintance of an artist who could appreciate her feminine charms

but  could  also  divine,  in  spite  of  what  she  had  fallen  to,  the  finer

qualities she possessed. He took her to live with him, and she proved

a  faithful  companion  to  him,  and  seemed  only  to  need  social

rehabilitation to achieve complete happiness. After many years of life

together, he succeeded in getting his family reconciled to her, and was

then prepared to make her his legal wife. At that moment she began to

go to pieces. She neglected the house of which she was now about to

become  the  rightful  mistress,  imagined  herself  persecuted  by  his

relatives, who wanted to take her into the family, debarred her lover,

through her senseless jealousy, from all social intercourse, hindered

him in his artistic work, and soon succumbed to an incurable mental

illness.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3105

 

   On another occasion I came across the case of a most respectable

man who, himself an academic teacher, had for many years cherished

the natural wish to succeed the master who had initiated him into his

own studies. When this older man retired, and his colleagues informedhim  that  it  was  he  who  was  chosen  as  successor,  he  began  to

hesitate, depreciated his merits, declared himself unworthy to fill the

position designed for him, and fell into a melancholia which unfitted

him for all activity for some years.

   Different as these two cases are in other respects, they yet agree in

this one point: the illness followed close upon the fulfilment of a wish

and put an end to all enjoyment of it.

   The contradiction between such experiences and the rule that what

induces illness is frustration is not insoluble. It disappears if we make

a  distinction  between  an external  and  an internal  frustration.  If  the

object in which the libido can find its satisfaction is withheld in reality,

this is an external frustration. In itself it is inoperative, not pathogenic,

until an internal frustration is joined to it. This latter must proceed from

the ego, and must dispute the access by the libido to other objects,

which it now seeks to get hold of. Only then does a conflict arise, and

the possibility of a neurotic illness, i.e. of a substitutive satisfaction

reached  circuitously  by  way  of  the  repressed  unconscious.  Internal

frustration is potentially present, therefore, in every case, only it does

not come into operation until external, real frustration has prepared the

ground for it. In those exceptional cases in which people are made ill

by success, the internal frustration has operated by itself; indeed it has

only  made  its  appearance  after  an  external  frustration  has  been

replaced  by  fulfilment  of  a  wish.  At  first  sight  there  is  something

strange about this; but on closer consideration we shall reflect that it is

not at all unusual for the ego to tolerate a wish as harmless so long as

it exists in phantasy alone and seems remote from fulfilment, whereas

the  ego  will  defend  itself  hotly  against  such  a  wish  as  soon  as  it

approaches  fulfilment  and  threatens  to  become  a  reality.  The

distinction between this and familiar situations in neurosis-formation is

merely  that  ordinarily  it  is  internal  intensifications  of  the  libidinal

cathexis that turn the phantasy, which has hitherto been thought little

of and tolerated, into a dreaded opponent; while in these cases of ours

the  signal  for  the  outbreak  of  conflict  is  given  by  a  real  external

change.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work                                                                                      3106

 

      Analytic  work  has  no  difficulty  in  showing  us  that  it  is  forces  of

conscience  which  forbid  the  subject  to  gain  the  long  hoped  for

advantage from the fortunate change in reality. It is a difficult task,

however,  to  discover  the  essence  and  origin  of  these  judging  and

punishing trends, which so often surprise us by their existence where

we  do  not  expect  to  find  them.  For  the  usual  reasons  I  shall  not

discuss what we know or conjecture on the point in relation to cases of

clinical observation, but in relation to figures which great writers have

created from the wealth of their knowledge of the mind.

 

   We may take as an example of a person who collapses on reaching

success, after striving for it with single-minded energy, the figure of

Shakespeare’s Lady Macbeth. Beforehand there is no hesitation, no

sign  of  any  internal  conflict  in  her,  no  endeavour  but  that  of

overcoming  the  scruples  of  her  ambitious  and  yet  tender-minded

husband.  She  is  ready  to  sacrifice  even  her  womanliness  to  her

murderous intention, without reflecting on the decisive part which this

womanliness  must  play  where  the  question  afterwards  arises  of

preserving the aim of her ambition, which has been attained through a

crime.

 

                                                                                Come, you spirits
                                That tend on mortal thoughts, unsex me here
                                . . . Come to my woman’s breasts,
                                And take my milk for gall, you murdering ministers!
                                                                                                                (Act I, Sc. 5.)
 
                                . . . I have given suck, and know
                                How tender ‘tis to love the babe that milks me:
                                I would, while it was smiling in my face,
                                Have pluck’d my nipple from his boneless gums,
                                And dashed the brains out, had I so sworn as you
                                Have done to this.
                                                                                                                (Act I, Sc. 7.)

 

   One solitary faint stirring of reluctance comes over her before the

deed:

 

                                . . . Had he not resembled                                My father as he slept, I had done it . . .
                                                                                                                (Act I, Sc. 2.)

 

   Then, when she has become Queen through the murder of Duncan,

she betrays for a moment something like disappointment, something

like disillusionment. We cannot tell why.

 

                                . . . Nought’s had, all’s spent,
                                Where our desire is got without content:
                                ‘Tis safer to be that which we destroy,
                                Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy.
                                                                                                                (Act III, Sc. 2.)

 

   Nevertheless, she holds out. In the banqueting scene which follows

on  these  words,  she  alone  keeps  her  head,  cloaks  her  husband’s

state of confusion and finds a pretext for dismissing the guests. And

then she disappears from view. We next see her n the sleep-walking

scene in the last Act, fixated to the impressions of the night of the

murder. Once again, as then, she seeks to put heart into her husband:

 

                                ‘Fie, my lord, fie! a soldier, and afeard? What need we fear who
                                knows it, when none can call our power to account?’
                                                                                                                (Act V, Sc. 1.)

 

   She hears the knocking at the door, which terrified her husband after

the deed. But at the same time she strives to ‘undo the deed which

cannot be undone’. She washes her hands, which are blood-stained

and smell of blood, and is conscious of the futility of the attempt. She

who had seemed so remorseless seems to have been borne down by

remorse. When she dies, Macbeth, who meanwhile has become as

inexorable as she had been in the beginning, can only find a brief

epitaph for her:

 

                                She should have died hereafter;
                                There would have been a time for such a word.
                                                                                                                (Act V, Sc. 5.)
 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3107

    And now we ask ourselves what it was that broke this character

which  had  seemed  forged  from  the  toughest  metal?  Is  it  only

disillusionment - the different aspect shown by the accomplished deed

- and are we to infer that even in Lady Macbeth an originally gentle

and womanly nature had been worked up to a concentration and high

tension which could not endure for long, or ought we to seek for signs

of a deeper motivation which will make this collapse more humanly

intelligible to us?

   It seems to me impossible to come to any decision. Shakespeare’s

Macbeth is a pièce d’occasion, written for the accession of James,

who had hitherto been King of Scotland. The plot was ready-made,

and  had  been  handled  by  other  contemporary  writers,  whose  work

Shakespeare  probably  made  use  of  in  his  customary  manner.  It

offered  remarkable  analogies  to  the  actual  situation.  The  ‘virginal’

Elizabeth, of whom it was rumoured that she had never been capable

of  child-bearing  and  who  had  once  described  herself  as  ‘a  barren

stock’,¹  in  an  anguished  outcry  at  the  news  of  James’s  birth,  was

obliged by this very childlessness of hers to make the Scottish king

her  successor.  And  he  was  the  son  of  the  Mary  Stuart  whose

execution she, even though reluctantly, had ordered, and who, in spite

of  the  clouding  of  their  relations  by  political  concerns,  was

nevertheless of her blood and might be called her guest.

   The accession of James I was like a demonstration of the curse of

unfruitfulness  and  the  blessings  of  continuous  generation.  And  the

action of Shakespeare’s Macbeth is based on this same contrast.

   The Weird Sisters assured Macbeth that he himself should be king,

but to Banquo they promised that his children should succeed to the

crown.  Macbeth  is  incensed  by  this  decree  of  destiny.  He  is  not

content with the satisfaction of his own ambition. He wants to found a

dynasty - not to have murdered for the benefit of strangers. This point

is overlooked if Shakespeare’s play is regarded only as a tragedy of

ambition. It is clear that Macbeth cannot live for ever, and thus there is

but  one  way  for  him  to  invalidate  the  part  of  the  prophecy  which

opposes him - namely, to have children himself who can succeed him.

And he seems to expect them from his indomitable wife:

 

                                                                Bring forth men-children only!
                                                                For thy undaunted mettle should compose                                                                Nothing but males . . .  .
                                                                                                                (Act I, Sc. 7.)

 

   ¹ Cf. Macbeth, Act III, Sc. 1:

 
                Upon my head they placed a fruitless crown,
                And put a barren sceptre in my gripe,
                Thence to be wrenched with an unlineal hand,
                No son of mine succeeding . . .
 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3108

 

   And equally it is clear that if he is deceived in this expectation he

must submit to destiny; otherwise his actions lose all purpose and are

transformed into the blind fury of one doomed to destruction, who is

resolved  to  destroy  beforehand  all  that  he  can  reach.  We  watch

Macbeth  pass  through  this  development,  and  at  the  height  of  the

tragedy we hear Macduff’s shattering cry, which has so often been

recognized to be ambiguous and which may perhaps contain the key

to the change in Macbeth:

 

                                                                He has no children!
                                                                                                                (Act IV, Sc. 3.)

 

There  is  no  doubt  that  this  means:  ‘Only  because  he  is  himself

childless could he murder my children.’ But more may be implied in it,

and  above  all  it  might  lay  bare  the  deepest  motive  which  not  only

forces Macbeth to go far beyond his own nature, but also touches the

hard character of his wife at its only weak point. If one surveys the

whole play from the summit marked by these words of Macduff’s, one

sees that it is sown with references to the father-children relation. The

murder of the kindly Dun can is little else than parricide; in Banquo’s

case,  Macbeth  kills  the  father  while  the  son  escapes  him;  and  in

Macduff’s, he kills the children because the father has fled from him. A

bloody child, and then a crowned one, are shown him by the witches

in the apparition scene; the armed head which is seen earlier is no

doubt Macbeth himself. But in the background rises the sinister form

of the avenger, Macduff, who is himself an exception to the laws ofgeneration, since he was not born of his mother but ripp’d from her

womb.

   It would be a perfect example of poetic justice in the manner of the

talion if the childlessness of Macbeth and the barrenness of his Lady

were the punishment for their crimes against the sanctity of generation

-  if  Macbeth  could  not  become  a  father  because  he  had  robbed

children  of  their  father  and  a  father  of  his  children,  and  if  Lady

Macbeth  suffered  the  unsexing  she  had  demanded  of  the  sprits  of

murder.  I  believe  Lady  Macbeth’s  illness,  the  transformation  of  her

callousness into penitence, could be explained directly as a reaction to

her childlessness, by which she is convinced of her impotence against

the decrees of nature, and at the same time reminded that it is through

her own fault if her crime has been robbed of the better part of its

fruits.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3109

 

   In Holinshed’s Chronicle (1577), from which Shakespeare took the

plot  of Macbeth,  Lady  Macbeth  is  only  once  mentioned  as  the

ambitious wife who instigates her husband to murder in order that she

may herself become queen. There is no mention of her subsequent

fate and of the development of her character. On the other hand, it

would seem that the change of Macbeth’s character into a bloodthirsty

tyrant is ascribed to the same motives as we have suggested here.

For  in  Holinshed ten  years  pass  between  the  murder  of  Duncan,

through which Macbeth becomes king, and his further misdeeds; and

in these ten years he is shown as a stern but just ruler. It is not until

after  this  lapse  of  time  that  the  change  begins  in  him,  under  the

influence of the tormenting fear that the prophecy to Banquo may be

fulfilled just as the prophecy of his own destiny has been. Only then

does he contrive the murder of Banquo, and, as in Shakespeare, is

driven  from  one  crime  to  another.  It  is  not  expressly  stated  in

Holinshed  that  it  was  his  childlessness  which  urged  him  to  these

courses, but enough time and room is given for that plausible motive.

Not  so  in  Shakespeare.  Events  crowd  upon  us  in  the  tragedy  withbreathless  haste  so  that,  to  judge  by  the  statements  made  by  the

characters in it, the course of its action covers about one week.¹ This

acceleration takes the ground from under all our constructions of the

motives  for  the  change  in  the  characters  of  Macbeth  and  his  wife.

There is no time for a long drawn-out disappointment of their hopes of

offspring to break the woman down and drive the man to defiant rage;

and  the  contradiction  remains  that  though  so  many  subtle

interrelations in the plot, and between it and its occasion, point to a

common origin of them in the theme of childlessness, nevertheless the

economy of time in the tragedy expressly precludes a development of

character from any motives but those inherent in the action itself.

 

   ¹ Darmesteter (1881, lxxv).

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3110

 

   What, however, these motives can have been which in so short a

space  of  time  could  turn  the  hesitating,  ambitious  man  into  an

unbridled tyrant, and his steely-hearted instigator into a sick woman

gnawed by remorse, it is, in my view, impossible to guess. We must, I

think, give up any hope of penetrating the triple layer of obscurity into

which the bad preservation of the text, the unknown intention of the

dramatist,  and  the  hidden  purport  of  the  legend  have  become

condensed.  But  I  should  not  subscribe  to  the  objection  that

investigations like these are idle in face of the powerful effect which

the tragedy has upon the spectator. The dramatist can indeed, during

the representation, overwhelm us by his art and paralyse our powers

of reflection; but he cannot prevent us from attempting subsequently,

to grasp its effect by studying its psychological mechanism. Nor does

the contention that a dramatist is at liberty to shorten at will the natural

chronology of the events he brings before us, if by the sacrifice of

common probability he can enhance the dramatic effect, seem to me

relevant in this instance. For such a sacrifice is justified only when it

merely interferes with probability,¹ and not when it breaks the causal

connection; moreover, the dramatic effect would hardly have suffered

if the passage of time had been left indeterminate, instead of beingexpressly limited to a few days.

   One is so unwilling to dismiss a problem like that of Macbeth as

insoluble that I will venture to bring up a fresh point, which may offer

another  way  out  of  the  difficulty.  Ludwig  Jekels,  in  a  recent

Shakespearean study, thinks he has discovered a particular technique

of  the  poet’s,  and  this  might  apply  to Macbeth.  He  believes  that

Shakespeare often splits a character up into two personages, which,

taken  separately,  are  not  completely  understandable  and  do  not

become so until they are brought together once more into a unity. This

might be so with Macbeth and Lady Macbeth. In that case it would of

course be pointless to regard her as an independent character and

seek to discover the motives for her change, without considering the

Macbeth who completes her. I shall not follow this clue any further, but

I  should,  nevertheless,  like  to  point  out  something  which  strikingly

confirms this view: the germs of fear which break out in Macbeth on

the night of the murder do not develop further in him but in her.² It is

he who has the hallucination of the dagger before the crime; but it is

she who afterwards falls ill of a mental disorder. It is he who after the

murder hears the cry in the house: ‘Sleep no more! Macbeth does

murder sleep . . .’ and so ‘Macbeth shall sleep no more’; but we never

hear that he slept no more, while the Queen, as we see, rises from her

bed and, talking in her sleep, betrays her guilt. It is he who stands

helpless with bloody hands, lamenting that ‘all great Neptune’s ocean’

will not wash them clean, while she comforts him: ‘A little water clears

us of this deed’; but later it is she who washes her hands for a quarter

of an hour and cannot get rid of the bloodstains: ‘All the perfumes of

Arabia will not sweeten this little hand.’ Thus what he feared in his

pangs of conscience is fulfilled in her; she becomes all remorse and

he all defiance. Together they exhaust the possibilities of reaction to

the crime, like two disunited parts of a single psychical individuality,

and it may be that they are both copied from a single prototype.

 

   ¹ As in Richard III’s wooing of Anne beside the bier of the King whom he has murdered.

   ² Cf. Darmesteter (1881, lxxv).

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3111 

 

   If we have been unable to give any answer to the question why Lady

Macbeth should collapse after her success, we may perhaps have a

better chance when we turn to the creation of another great dramatist,

who  loves  to  pursue  problems  of  psychological  responsibility  with

unrelenting rigour.

   Rebecca Gamvik, the daughter of a midwife, has been brought up

by her adopted father, Dr. West, to be a freethinker and to despise the

restrictions  which  a  morality  founded  on  religious  belief  seeks  to

impose  on  the  desires  of  life.  After  the  doctor’s  death  she  finds  a

position  at  Rosmersholm,  the  home  for  many  generations  of  an

ancient  family  whose  members  know  nothing  of  laughter  and  have

sacrificed joy to a rigid fulfilment of duty. Its occupants are Johannes

Rosmer,  a  former  pastor,  and  his  invalid  wife,  the  childless  Beata.

Overcome by ‘a wild, uncontrollable passion’ for the love of the high-

born Rosmer, Rebecca resolves to remove the wife who stands in her

way, and to this end makes use of her ‘fearless, free’ will, which is

restrained  by  no  scruples.  She  contrives  that  Beata  shall  read  a

medical book in which the aim of marriage is represented to by the

begetting  of  offspring,  so  that  the  poor  woman  begins  to  doubt

whether  her  own  marriage  is  justifiable.  Rebecca  then  hints  that

Rosmer, whose studies and ideas she shares, is about to abandon the

old faith and join the ‘party of enlightenment’; and after she has thus

shaken the wife’s confidence in her husband’s moral integrity, gives

her finally to understand that she, Rebecca, will soon leave the house

in  order  to  conceal  the  consequences  of  her  illicit  intercourse  with

Rosmer.  The  criminal  scheme  succeeds.  The  poor  wife,  who  has

passed for depressed and irresponsible, throws herself from the path

beside the mill into the mill-race, possessed by the sense of her own

worthlessness and wishing no longer to stand between her beloved

husband and his happiness.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3112

    For more than a year Rebecca and Rosmer have been living alone

at  Rosmersholm  in  a  relationship  which  he  wishes  to  regard  as  a

purely  intellectual  and  ideal  friendship.  But  when  this  relationship

begins to be darkened from outside by the first shadow of gossip, and

at the same time tormenting doubts arise in Rosmer about the motives

for which his wife put an end to herself, he begs Rebecca to become

his second wife, so that they may counter the unhappy past with a

new living reality (Act II). For an instant she exclaims with joy at his

proposal, but immediately afterwards declares that it can never be,

and  that  if  he  urges  her  further  she  will  ‘go  the  way  Beata  went’.

Rosmer cannot understand this rejection; and still less can we, who

know more of Rebecca’s actions and designs. All we can be certain of

is that her ‘no’ is meant in earnest.

   How could it come about that the adventuress with the ‘fearless, free

will’, who forged her way ruthlessly to her desired goal, should now

refuse  to  pluck  the  fruit  of  success  when  it  is  offered  to  her?  She

herself gives us the explanation in the fourth Act: ‘This is the terrible

part of it: that now, when all life’s happiness is within my grasp - my

heart is changed and my own past cuts me off from it.’ That is to say,

she has in the meantime become a different being; her conscience

has awakened, she has acquired a sense of guilt which debars her

from enjoyment.

      And  what  has  awakened  her  conscience?  Let  us  listen  to  her

herself, and then consider whether we can believe her entirely. ‘It is

the Rosmer view of life - or your view of life at any rate - that has

infected my will. . . . And made it sick. Enslaved it to laws that had no

power over me before. You - life with you has ennobled my mind.’

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3113

 

      This  influence,  we  are  further  to  understand,  has  only  become

effective since she has been able to live alone with Rosmer: ‘In quiet -

in solitude - when you showed me all your thoughts without reserve -

every tender and delicate feeling, just as it came to you - then the

great change came over me.’   Shortly before this she has lamented the other aspect of the change:

‘Because Rosmersholm has sapped my strength. My old fearless will

has had its wings clipped here. It is crippled! The time is past when I

had courage for anything in the world. I have lost the power of action,

Rosmer.’

   Rebecca makes this declaration after she had revealed herself as a

criminal  in  a  voluntary  confession  to  Rosmer  and  Rector  Kroll,  the

brother of the woman she has got rid of. Ibsen has made it clear by

small touches of masterly subtlety that Rebecca does not actually tell

lies, but is never entirely straightforward. Just as, in spite of all her

freedom from prejudices, she has understated her age by a year, so

her confession to the two men is incomplete, and as a result of Kroll’s

insistence it is supplemented on some important points. Hence it is

open  to  us  to  suppose  that  her  explanation  of  her  renunciation

exposes one motive only to conceal another.

   Certainly, we have no reason to disbelieve her when she declares

that  the  atmosphere  of  Rosmersholm  and  her  association  with  the

high-minded Rosmer have ennobled - and crippled - her. She is here

expressing what she knows and has felt. But this is not necessarily all

that has happened in her, nor need she have understood all that has

happened.  Rosmer’s  influence  may  only  have  been  a  cloak,  which

concealed  another  influence  that  was  operative,  and  a  remarkable

indication points in this other direction.

   Even after her confession, Rosmer, in their last conversation which

brings the play to an end, again beseeches her to be his wife. He

forgives her the crime she has committed for love of him. And now she

does not answer, as she should, that no forgiveness can rid her of the

feeling of guilt she has incurred from her malignant deception of poor

Beata; but she charges herself with another reproach which affects us

as  coming  strangely  from  this  freethinking  woman,  and  is  far  from

deserving the importance which Rebecca attaches to it: ‘Dear - never

speak of this again! It is impossible! For you must know, Rosmer, I

have a - a past behind me.’ She means, of course, that she has had

sexual relations with another man; and we do not fail to observe that

these  relations,  which  occurred  at  a  time  when  she  was  free  and

accountable to nobody, seem to her a greater hindrance to the union

with Rosmer than her truly criminal behaviour to his wife. 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3114

 

   Rosmer refuses to hear anything about this past. We can guess

what it was, though everything that refers to it in the play is, so to

speak, subterranean and has to be pieced together from hints. But

nevertheless they are hints inserted with such art that it is impossible

to misunderstand them.

      Between  Rebecca’s  first  refusal  and  her  confession  something

occurs which has a decisive influence on her future destiny. Rector

Kroll arrives one day at the house on purpose to humiliate Rebecca by

telling her that he knows she is an illegitimate child, the daughter of

the very Dr. West who adopted her after her mother’s death. Hate has

sharpened his perceptions, yet he does not suppose that this is any

news  to  her.  ‘I  really  did  not  suppose  you  were  ignorant  of  this,

otherwise it would have been very odd that you should have let Dr.

West adopt you . . .’ ‘And then he takes you into his house - as soon

as your mother dies. He treats you harshly. And yet you stay with him.

You know that he won’t leave you a halfpenny - as a matter of fact you

got only a case of books - and yet you stay on; you bear with him; you

nurse him to the last.’ . . .  ‘I attribute your care for him to the natural

filial instinct of a daughter. Indeed, I believe your whole conduct is a

natural result of your origin.’

   But Kroll is mistaken. Rebecca had no idea at all that she could be

Dr. West’s daughter. When Kroll began with dark hints at her past, she

must have thought he was referring to something else. After she has

gathered  what  he  means,  she  can  still  retain  her  composure  for  a

while,  for  she  is  able  to  suppose  that  her  enemy  is  basing  his

calculations on her age, which she had given falsely on an earlier visit

of his. But Kroll demolishes this objection by saying: ‘Well, so be it, but

my calculation may be right, none the less; for Dr. West was up there

on a short visit the year before he got the appointment.’ After this new

information, she loses her self-possession. ‘It is not true!’ She walks

about wringing her hands. ‘It is impossible. You want to cheat me into

believing it. This can never, never be true. It cannot be true. Never inthis world! - Her agitation is so extreme that Kroll cannot attribute it to

his information alone.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3115

 

   ‘KROLL: But, my dear Miss West - why in Heaven’s name are you so

terribly excited? You quite frighten me. What am I to think - to believe-

-?

   ‘REBECCA: Nothing. You are to think and believe nothing.

   ‘KROLL: Then you must really tell me how you can take this affair -

this possibility - so terribly to heart.

   ‘REBECCA (controlling herself): It is perfectly simple, Rector Kroll. I

have no wish to be taken for an illegitimate child.’

      The  enigma  of  Rebecca’s  behaviour  is  susceptible  of  only  one

solution. The news that Dr. West was her father is the heaviest blow

that can befall her, for she was not only his adopted daughter, but had

been his mistress. When Kroll began to speak, she thought that he

was hinting at these relations, the truth of which she would probably

have admitted and justified by her emancipated ideas. But this was far

from the Rector’s intention; he knew nothing of the love-affair with Dr.

West, just as she knew nothing of Dr. West’s being her father. She

cannot have had anything else in her mind but this love-affair when

she accounted for her final rejection of Rosmer on the ground that she

had a past which made her unworthy to be his wife. And probably, if

Rosmer  had  consented  to  hear  of  that  past,  she  would  have

confessed  half  her  secret  only  and  have  kept  silence  on  the  more

serious part of it.

   But now we understand, of course, that this past must seem to her

the more serious obstacle to their union - the more serious crime.

   After she has learnt that she has been the mistress of her own

father, she surrenders herself wholly to her now overmastering sense

of guilt. She makes the confession to Rosmer and Kroll which stamps

her as a murderess; she rejects for ever the happiness to which she

has paved the way by crime, and prepares for departure. But the true

motive of her sense of guilt, which results in her being wrecked bysuccess, remains a secret. As we have seen, it is something quite

other than the atmosphere of Rosmersholm and the refining influence

of Rosmer.

   At this point no one who has followed us will fail to bring forward an

objection  which  may  justify  some  doubts.  Rebecca’s  first  refusal  of

Rosmer occurs before Kroll’s second visit, and therefore before his

exposure  of  her  illegitimate  origin  and  at  a  time  when  she  as  yet

knows  nothing  of  her  incest  -  if  we  have  rightly  understood  the

dramatist. Yet this first refusal is energetic and seriously meant. The

sense of guilt which bids her renounce the fruit of her actions is thus

effective before she knows anything of her cardinal crime; and if we

grant so much, we ought perhaps entirely to set aside her incest as a

source of that sense of guilt.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3116

 

   So far we have treated Rebecca West as if she were a living person

and not a creation of Ibsen’s imagination, which is always directed by

the most critical intelligence. We may therefore attempt to maintain the

same position in dealing with the objection that has been raised. The

objection is valid: before the knowledge of her incest, conscience was

already in part awakened in Rebecca; and there is nothing to prevent

our  making  the  influence  which  is  acknowledged  and  blamed  by

Rebecca herself responsible for this change. But this does not exempt

us from recognizing the second motive. Rebecca’s behaviour when

she  hears  what  Kroll  has  to  tell  her,  the  confession  which  is  her

immediate reaction, leave no doubt that then only does the stronger

and decisive motive for renunciation begin to take effect. It is in fact a

case of multiple motivation, in which a deeper motive comes into view

behind the more superficial one. Laws of poetic economy necessitate

this way of presenting the situation, for this deeper motive could not

be  explicitly  enunciated.  It  had  to  remain  concealed,  kept  from  the

easy  perception  of  the  spectator  or  the  reader;  otherwise  serious

resistances,  based  on  the  most  distressing  emotions,  would  have

arisen, which might have imperilled the effect of the drama.   We have, however, a right to demand that the explicit motive shall

not be without an internal connection with the concealed one, but shall

appear as a mitigation of, and a derivation from, the latter. And if we

may  rely  on  the  fact  that  the  dramatist’s  conscious  creative

combination arose logically from unconscious premisses, we may now

make an attempt to show that he has fulfilled this demand. Rebecca’s

feeling of guilt has its source in the reproach of incest, even before

Kroll, with analytical perspicacity, has made her conscious of it. If we

reconstruct her past, expanding and filling in the author’s hints, we

may feel sure that she cannot have been without some inkling of the

intimate relation between her mother and Dr. West. It must have made

a great impression on her when she became her mother’s successor

with  this  man.  She  stood  under  the  domination  of  the  Oedipus

complex, even though she did not know that this universal phantasy

had in her case become a reality. When she came to Rosmersholm,

the inner force of this first experience drove her into bringing about, by

vigorous action, the same situation which had been realized in the

original instance through no doing of hers - into getting rid of the wife

and mother, so that she might take her place with the husband and

father. She describes with a convincing insistence how, against her

will,  she  was  obliged  to  proceed,  step  by  step,  to  the  removal  of

Beata.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3117

 

   ‘You think then that I was cool and calculating and self-possessed

all the time! I was not the same woman then that I am now, as I stand

here telling it all. Besides, there are two sorts of will in us, I believe! I

wanted  Beata  away,  by  one  means  or  another;  but  I  never  really

believed that it would come to pass. As I felt my way forward, at each

step I ventured, I seemed to hear something within me cry out: No

farther! Not a step farther! And yet I could not stop, I had to venture

the least little bit farther. And only one hair’s-breadth more. And then

one more - and always one more. And then it happened. - That is the

way such things come about.’      That  is  not  an  embellishment,  but  an  authentic  description.

Everything that happened to her at Rosmersholm, her falling in love

with  Rosmer  and  her  hostility  to  his  wife,  was  from  the  first  a

consequence of the Oedipus complex - an inevitable replica of her

relations with her mother and Dr. West.

   And so the sense of guilt which first causes her to reject Rosmer’s

proposal is at bottom no different from the greater one which drives

her  to  her  confession  after  Kroll  has  opened  her  eyes.  But  just  as

under the influence of Dr. West she had become a freethinker and

despiser of religious morality, so she is transformed by her love for

Rosmer  into  a  being  of  conscience  and  nobility.  This  much  of  the

mental processes within her she herself understands, and so she is

justified in describing Rosmer’s influence as the motive for her change

- the motive that had become accessible to her.

   The practising psycho-analytic physician knows how frequently, or

how invariably, a girl who enters a household as servant, companion

or governess, will consciously or unconsciously weave a day-dream,

which derives from the Oedipus complex, of the mistress of the house

disappearing and the master taking the newcomer as his wife in her

place. Rosmersholm is the greatest work of art of the class that treats

of this common phantasy in girls. What makes it into a tragic drama is

the  extra  circumstance  that  the  heroine’s  day-dream  had  been

preceded in her childhood by a precisely corresponding reality.¹

 

      After  this  long  digression  into  literature,  let  us  return  to  clinical

experience  -  but  only  to  establish  in  a  few  words  the  complete

agreement  between  them.  Psycho-analytic  work  teaches  that  the

forces of conscience which induce illness in consequence of success,

instead  of,  as  normally,  in  consequence  of  frustration,  are  closely

connected with the Oedipus complex, the relation to father and mother

- as perhaps, indeed, is our sense of guilt in general.

 

   ¹ The presence of the theme of incest in Rosmersholm has already been demonstrated by

the same arguments as mine in Otto Rank’s extremely comprehensive Das Inzest-Motiv in
Dichtung und Sage (1912).
 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work                                                                                      3118

 

                                            III

 

                  CRIMINALS FROM A SENSE OF GUILT

 

In  telling  me  about  their  early  youth,  particularly  before  puberty,

people  who  have  afterwards  often  become  very  respectable  have

informed me of forbidden actions which they committed at that time -

such as thefts, frauds and even arson. I was in the habit of dismissing

these  statements  with  the  comment  that  we  are  familiar  with  the

weakness of moral inhibitions at that period of life, and I made no

attempt to find a place for them in any more significant context. But

eventually I was led to make a more thorough study of such incidents

by some glaring and more accessible cases in which the misdeeds

were committed while the patients were actually under my treatment,

and  were  no  longer  so  youthful.  Analytic  work  then  brought  the

surprising discovery that such deeds were done principally because

they were forbidden, and because their execution was accompanied

by mental relief for their doer. He was suffering from an oppressive

feeling of guilt, of which he did not know the origin, and after he had

committed a misdeed this oppression was mitigated. His sense of guilt

was at least attached to something.

   Paradoxical as it may sound, I must maintain that the sense of guilt

was  present  before  the  misdeed,  that  it  did  not  arise  from  it,  but

conversely - the misdeed arose from the sense of guilt. These people

might justly be described as criminals from a sense of guilt. The pre-

existence of the guilty feeling had of course been demonstrated by a

whole set of other manifestations and effects.

   But scientific work is not satisfied with the establishment of a curious

fact. There are two further questions to answer: what is the origin of

this obscure sense of guilt before the deed, and is it probable that this

kind of causation plays any considerable part in human crime?

   An examination of the first question held out the promise of bringing

us information about the source of mankind’s sense of guilt in general.

The invariable outcome of analytic work was to show that this obscure

sense of guilt derived from the Oedipus complex and was a reaction tothe two great criminal intentions of killing the father and having sexual

relations with the mother. In comparison with these two, the crimes

committed in order to fix the sense of guilt to something came as a

relief  to  the  sufferers.  We  must  remember  in  this  connection  that

parricide and incest with the mother are the two great human crimes,

the only ones which, as such, are pursued and abhorred in primitive

communities.  And  we  must  remember,  too,  how  close  other

investigations have brought us to the hypothesis that the conscience

of  mankind,  which  now  appears  as  an  inherited  mental  force,  was

acquired in connection with the Oedipus complex.

 


        Some Character-Types Met With In Psycho-Analytic Work

                                                                                      3119

 

   In order to answer the second question we must go beyond the

scope of psycho-analytic work. With children it is easy to observe that

they are often ‘naughty’ on purpose to provoke punishment, and are

quiet  and  contented  after  they  have  been  punished.  Later  analytic

investigation can often put us on the track of the guilty feeling which

induced them to seek punishment. Among adult criminals we must no

doubt except those who commit crimes without any sense of guilt, who

have either developed no moral inhibitions or who, in their conflict with

society, consider themselves justified in their action. But as regards

the majority of other criminals, those for whom punitive measures are

really designed, such a motivation for crime might very well be taken

into consideration; it might throw light on some obscure points in the

psychology  of  the  criminal,  and  furnish  punishment  with  a  new

psychological basis.

   A friend has since called my attention to the fact that the ‘criminal

from a sense of guilt’ was known to Nietzsche too. The pre-existence

of  the  feeling  of  guilt,  and  the  utilization  of  a  deed  in  order  to

rationalize this feeling, glimmer before us in Zarathustra’s sayings ‘On

the Pale Criminal’. Let us leave it to future research to decide how

many criminals are to be reckoned among these ‘pale’ ones.

                                                                                       3120

 

      A MYTHOLOGICAL PARALLEL TO A VISUAL OBSESSION

                                        (1916)

 

In  a  patient  of  about  twenty-one  years  of  age  the  products  of

unconscious mental activity became conscious not only in obsessive

thoughts  but  also  in  obsessive  images.  The  two  could  accompany

each other or appear independently. At one particular time, whenever

he saw his father entering the room, there came into his mind in close

connection  an  obsessive  word  and  an  obsessive  image.  The  word

was ‘Vaterarsch’ [‘father-arse’]; the accompanying image represented

his father as the naked lower part of a body, provided with arms and

legs,  but  without  the  head  or  upper  part.  The  genitals  were  not

indicated, and the facial features were painted on the abdomen.

   It will help to explain this more than usually absurd symptom if I

mention that the patient, who was a man of fully developed intellect

and  high  moral  ideals,  manifested  a  very  lively  anal  erotism  in  the

most various ways until after his tenth year. After this had been got

over, his sexual life was once again forced back to the preliminary

anal stage by his later struggle against genital erotism. He loved and

respected his father greatly, and also feared him not a little; judged by

his own high standards in regard to asceticism and the suppression of

the instincts, however, his father seemed to him a person who stood

for debauchery and the pursuit of enjoyment in material things.

   ‘Father-arse’ was soon explained as a jocular Teutonizing of the

honorific  title  of  ‘patriarch’.  The  obsessive  image  is  an  obvious

caricature.  It  recalls  other  representations  which,  with  a  derogatory

end in view, replace a whole person by one of his organs, e.g. his

genitals; it reminds us, too, of unconscious phantasies which lead to

the identification of the genitals with the whole person, and also of

joking figures of speech, such as ‘I am all ears’.

 


                A Mythological Parallel To A Visual Obsession

                                                                                      3121

    The placing of the facial features on the abdomen of the caricature

struck me at first as very strange. But I soon remembered having seen

the  same  thing  in  French  caricatures.¹  Chance  then  brought  to  my

notice  an  antique  representation,  which  tallied  exactly  with  my

patient’s obsessive image.

   According to the Greek legend, Demeter came to Eleusis in search

of her daughter after she had been abducted, and was given lodging

by Dysaules and his wife Baubo; but in her great sorrow she refused

to touch food or drink. Thereupon her hostess Baubo made her laugh

by suddenly lifting up her dress and exposing her body. A discussion

of  this  anecdote,  which  was  probably  intended  to  explain  a  magic

ceremonial  which  was  no  longer  understood,  is  to  be  found  in  the

fourth volume of Salomon Reinach’s work, Culte, Mythes, et Religions,

1912.  In  the  same  passage  the  author  mentions  that  during  the

excavations  at  Priene  in  Asia  Minor  some  terracottas  were  found

which represented Baubo. They show the body of a woman without a

head or chest and with a face drawn on the abdomen: the lifted dress

frames this face like a crown of hair (ibid., 117).

 





 

     ¹ Cf.  ‘L’impudique  Albion’,  a  caricature  of  England  drawn  in  1901  by  Jean  Véber,

reproduced in Fuchs, 1908.

                                                                                       3122

 

      A CONNECTION BETWEEN A SYMBOL AND A SYMPTOM

                                        (1916)

 

Experience in the analysis of dreams has sufficiently well established

the hat as a symbol of the genital organ, most frequently of the male

organ. It cannot be said, however, that the symbol is an intelligible

one. In phantasies and in numerous symptoms the head too appears

as a symbol of the male genitals, or, if one prefers to put it so, as

something standing for them. It will sometimes have been noticed that

patients suffering from obsessions express an amount of abhorrence

of and indignation against punishment by beheading far greater than

they do in the case of any other form of death; and in such cases the

analyst  may  be  led  to  explain  to  them  that  they  are  treating  being

beheaded as a substitute for being castrated. Instances have often

been analysed and published of dreams dreamt by young people or

reported as having occurred in youth, which concerned the subject of

castration, and in which a round ball was mentioned which could only

be interpreted as the head of the dreamer’s father. I was recently able

to solve a ceremonial performed by a woman patient before going to

sleep, in which she had to lay her small top pillow diamond-wise on

the other ones and to rest her head exactly in the long diameter of the

diamond-shape. The diamond had the meaning that is familiar to us

from drawings on walls [graffiti]; the head was supposed to represent

a male organ.

   It may be that the symbolic meaning of the hat is derived from that of

the head, in so far as a hat can be regarded as a prolonged, though

detachable head. In this connection I am reminded of a symptom by

means of which obsessional neurotics succeed in causing themselves

continual torments. When they are in the street they are constantly on

the look-out to see whether some acquaintance will greet them first by

taking  of  his  hat,  or  whether  he  seems  to  be  waiting  for their

salutation;  and  they  give  up  a  number  of  their  acquaintances  after

discovering that they no longer greet them or do not return their own

salutation  properly.  There  is  no  end  to  their  difficulties  in  thisconnection;  they  find  them  everywhere  as  their  mood  and  fancy

dictate. It makes no difference to their behaviour when we tell them,

what they all know already, that a salutation by taking off the hat has

the  meaning  of  an  abasement  before  the  person  saluted  -  that  a

Spanish  grandee,  for  example,  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  remaining

covered in the king’s presence - and that their own sensitiveness on

the subject of greeting therefore means that they are unwilling to show

themselves  less  important  than  the  other  person  thinks  he  is.  The

resistance of their sensitiveness to explanations such as this suggests

that a motive less familiar to consciousness is at work; and the source

of this excess of feeling might easily be found in its relation to the

castration complex.

                                                                                       3123

 

            LETTER TO DR. HERMINE VON HUG-HELLMUTH

                                    (1919 [1915])

 

   The diary is a little gem. I really believe it has never before been

possible  to  obtain  such  a  clear  and  truthful  view  of  the  mental

impulses that characterize the development of a girl in our social and

cultural stratum during the years before puberty. We are shown how

her  feelings  grow  up  out  of  a  childish  egoism  till  they  reach  social

maturity; we learn what form is first assumed by her relations with her

parents and with her brothers and sisters and how they gradually gain

in  seriousness  and  inward  feeling;  how  friendships  are  made  and

broken; how her affection feels its way towards her first objects; and,

above  all,  how  the  secret  of  sexual  life  begins  to  dawn  on  her

indistinctly and then takes complete possession of the child’s mind;

how, in the consciousness of her secret knowledge, she at first suffers

hurt, but little by little overcomes it. All of this is so charmingly, so

naturally, and so gravely expressed in these artless notes that they

cannot  fail  to  arouse  the  greatest  interest  in  educators  and

psychologists  .  .  .  It  is  your  duty,  I  think,  to  publish  the  diary.  My

readers will be grateful to you for it.

                                                                                       3124

 

          INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1916-17)

 


                                                                                      3125

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3126

 

                                      PREFACE

 

What  I  am  here  offering  the  public  as  an  ‘Introduction  to  Psycho-

Analysis’ is not designed to compete in any way with such general

accounts of this field of knowledge as are already in existence, e.g.

those of Hitschmann (1913), Pfister (1913), Kaplan (1914), Régis and

Hesnard  (1914)  and  Meijer  (1915).  This  volume  is  a  faithful

reproduction of the lectures which I delivered during the two Winter

Terms  1915/16  and  1916/17  before  an  audience  of  doctors  and

laymen of both sexes.

      Any  peculiarities  of  this  book  which  may  strike  its  readers  are

accounted  for  by  the  conditions  in  which  it  originated.  It  was  not

possible  in  my  presentation  to  preserve  the  unruffled  calm  of  a

scientific  treatise.  On  the  contrary,  the  lecturer  had  to  make  it  his

business  to  prevent  his  audience’s  attention  from  lapsing  during  a

session lasting for almost two hours. The necessities of the moment

often  made  it  impossible  to  avoid  repetitions  in  treating  some

particular subject - it might emerge once, for instance, in connection

with dream-interpretation and then again later on in connection with

the problems of the neuroses. As a result, too, of the way in which the

material was arranged, some important topics (the unconscious, for

instance) could not be exhaustively treated at a single point, but had

to  be  taken  up  repeatedly  and  then  dropped  again  until  a  freshopportunity arose for adding some further information about it.

   Those who are familiar with psycho-analytic literature will find little in

this  ‘Introduction’  that  could  not  have  been  known  to  them  already

from other much more detailed publications. Nevertheless, the need

for  rounding-off  and  summarizing  the  subject-matter  has  compelled

the  author  at  certain  points  (the  aetiology  of  anxiety  and  hysterical

phantasies) to bring forward material that he has hitherto held back.

                                                                                    FREUD

VIENNA, Spring 1917

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3127

 

                PREFACE TO THE HEBREW TRANSLATION

 

These lectures were delivered in 1916 and 1917; they gave a fairly

accurate account of the position of the young science at that period

and they contained more than their title indicated. They provided not

only an introduction to psycho-analysis but covered the greater part of

its subject-matter. This is naturally no longer true. Advances have in

the meantime taken place in its theory and important additions have

been made to it, such as the division of the personality into an ego, a

super-ego and an id, a radical alteration in the theory of the instincts,

and discoveries concerning the origin of conscience and the sense of

guilt. These lectures have thus become to a large extent incomplete; it

is in fact only now that they have become truly ‘introductory’. But in

another  sense,  even  to-day  they  have  not  been  superseded  or

become obsolete. What they contain is still believed and taught, apart

from a few modifications, in psycho-analytic training schools.

      Readers  of  Hebrew  and  especially  young  people  eager  for

knowledge are presented in this volume with psycho-analysis clothed

in the ancient language which has been awakened to a new life by the

will  of  the  Jewish  people.  The  author  can  well  picture  the  problem

which  this  has  set  its  translator.  Nor  need  he  suppress  his  doubt

whether  Moses  and  the  Prophets  would  have  found  these  Hebrew

lectures intelligible. But he begs their descendants (among whom he

himself is numbered), for whom this book is designed, not to react tooquickly  to  their  first  impulses  of  criticism  and  dislike  by  rejecting  it.

Psycho-analysis brings forward so much that is new, and among it so

much that contradicts traditional opinions and wounds deeply rooted

feelings,  that  it  is  bound  at  first  to  provoke  denial.  A  reader  who

suspends  his  judgement  and  allows  psycho-analysis  as  a  whole  to

make its impression on him will perhaps become open to a conviction

that even this undesired novelty is worth knowing and is indispensable

for anyone who wishes to understand the mind and human life.

 

VIENNA, December 1930

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3128

 

                                        PART I

 

                                    PARAPRAXES

 

                                        (1916)

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3129

 

                                        LECTURE I

 

                                    INTRODUCTION

 

LADIES  AND  GENTLEMEN,  -  I  cannot  tell  how  much  knowledge  about

psycho-analysis each one of you has already acquired from what you

have  read  or  from  hearsay.  But  the  wording  of  my  prospectus  -

‘Elementary Introduction to Psycho-Analysis’ - obliges me to treat you

as though you knew nothing and stood in need of some preliminary

information.

   I can, however, assume this much - that you know that psycho-

analysis is a procedure for the medical treatment of neurotic patients.

And here I can at once give you an instance of how in this field anumber of things take place in a different way - often, indeed, in an

opposite  way  -  from  what  they  do  elsewhere  in  medical  practice.

When elsewhere we introduce a patient to a medical technique which

is new to him, we usually minimize its inconveniences and give him

confident assurances of the success of the treatment. I think we are

justified in this, since by doing so we are increasing the probability of

success.  But  when  we  take  a  neurotic  patient  into  psycho-analytic

treatment, we act differently. We point out the difficulties of the method

to him, its long duration, the efforts and sacrifices it calls for; and as

regards its success, we tell him we cannot promise it with certainty,

that it depends on his own conduct, his understanding, his adaptability

and his perseverance. We have good reasons, of course, for such

apparently  wrong-headed  behaviour,  as  you  will  perhaps  come  to

appreciate later on.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3130

 

   Do not be annoyed, then, if I begin by treating you in the same way

as  these  neurotic  patients.  I  seriously  advise  you  not  to  join  my

audience a second time. To support this advice, I will explain to you

how incomplete any instruction in psycho-analysis must necessarily

be and what difficulties stand in the way of your forming a judgement

of  your  own  upon  it.  I  will  show  you  how  the  whole  trend  of  your

previous education and all your habits of thought are inevitably bound

to make you into opponents of psycho-analysis, and how much you

would have to overcome in yourselves in order to get the better of this

instinctive  opposition.  I  cannot,  of  course,  foretell  how  much

understanding of psycho-analysis you will obtain from the information I

give you, but I can promise you this: that by listening to it you will not

have learnt how to set about a psycho-analytic investigation or how to

carry a treatment through. If, however, there should actually turn out to

be one of you who did not feel satisfied by a fleeting acquaintance

with  psycho-analysis  but  was  inclined  to  enter  into  a  permanent

relationship to it, I should not merely dissuade him from doing so but

actively warn him against it. As things stand at present, such a choiceof profession would ruin any chance he might have of success at a

University, and, if he started in life as a practising physician, he would

find himself in a society which did not understand his efforts, which

regarded him with distrust and hostility, and unleashed upon him all

the evil spirits lurking within it. And the phenomena accompanying the

war that is now raging in Europe will perhaps give you some notion of

what legions of these evil spirits there may be.

   Nevertheless, there are quite a number of people for whom, in spite

of  these  inconveniences,  something  that  promises  to  bring  them  a

fresh piece of knowledge still has its attraction. If a few of you should

be of this sort and in spite of my warnings appear here again for my

next lecture, you will be welcome. All of you, however, have a right to

learn the nature of the difficulties of psycho-analysis to which I have

alluded.

 

   I will begin with those connected with instruction, with training in

psycho-analysis.  In  medical  training  you  are  accustomed  to see

things.  You  see  an  anatomical  preparation,  the  precipitate  of  a

chemical  reaction,  the  shortening  of  a  muscle  as  a  result  of  the

stimulation of its nerves. Later on, patients are demonstrated before

your  senses  -  the  symptoms  of  their  illness,  the  products  of  the

pathological process and even in many cases the agent of the disease

in  isolation.  In  the  surgical  departments  you  are  witnesses  of  the

active  measures  taken  to  bring  help  to  patients,  and  you  may

yourselves  attempt  to  put  them  into  effect.  Even  in  psychiatry  the

demonstration  of  patients  with  their  altered  facial  expressions,  their

mode  of  speech  and  their  behaviour,  affords  you  plenty  of

observations which leave a deep impression on you. Thus a medical

teacher  plays  in  the  main  the  part  of  a  leader  and  interpreter  who

accompanies you through a museum, while you gain a direct contact

with  the  objects  exhibited  and  feel  yourselves  convinced  of  the

existence of the new facts through your own perception.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3131

    In psycho-analysis, alas, everything is different. Nothing takes place

in a psycho-analytic treatment but an interchange of words between

the  patient  and  the  analyst.  The  patient  talks,  tells  of  his  past

experiences  and  present  impressions,  complains,  confesses  to  his

wishes and his emotional impulses. The doctor listens, tries to direct

the  patient’s  processes  of  thought,  exhorts,  forces  his  attention  in

certain directions, gives him explanations and observes the reactions

of understanding or rejection which he in this way provokes in him.

The uninstructed relatives of our patients, who are only impressed by

visible and tangible things - preferably by actions of the sort that are to

be  witnessed  at  the  cinema  -  never  fail  to  express  their  doubts

whether  ‘anything  can  be  done  about  the  illness  by  mere  talking’.

That,  of  course,  is  both  a  short-sighted  and  an  inconsistent  line  of

thought. These are the same people who are so certain that patients

are ‘simply imagining’ their symptoms. Words were originally magic

and to this day words have retained much of their ancient magical

power. By words one person can make another blissfully happy or

drive him to despair, by words the teacher conveys his knowledge to

his  pupils,  by  words  the  orator  carries  his  audience  with  him  and

determines  their  judgements  and  decisions.  Words  provoke  affects

and are in general the means of mutual influence among men. Thus

we shall not depreciate the use of words in psychotherapy and we

shall be pleased if we can listen to the words that pass between the

analyst and his patient.

      But  we  cannot  do  that  either.  The  talk  of  which  psycho-analytic

treatment consists brooks no listener; it cannot be demonstrated. A

neurasthenic  or  hysterical  patient  can  of  course,  like  any  other,  be

introduced to students in a psychiatric lecture. He will give an account

of his complaints and symptoms, but of nothing else. The information

required  by  analysis  will  be  given  by  him  only  on  condition  of  his

having  a  special  emotional  attachment  to  the  doctor;  he  would

become silent as soon as he observed a single witness to whom he

felt indifferent. For this information concerns what is most intimate in

his mental life, everything that, as a socially independent person, he

must conceal from other people, and, beyond that, everything that, as

a homogeneous personality, he will not admit to himself.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3132

 

   Thus you cannot be present as an audience at a psycho-analytic

treatment. You can only be told about it; and, in the strictest sense of

the  word,  it  is  only  by  hearsay  that  you  will  get  to  know  psycho-

analysis. As a result of receiving your instruction at second hand, as it

were, you find yourselves under quite unusual conditions for forming a

judgement. That will obviously depend for the most part on how much

credence you can give to your informant.

   Let us assume for a moment that you were attending a lecture not

on psychiatry but on history, and that the lecturer was telling you of

the  life  and  military  deeds  of  Alexander  the  Great.  What  grounds

would you have for believing in the truth of what he reported? At a first

glance the position would seem to be even more unfavourable than in

the case of psycho-analysis, for the Professor of History no more took

part in Alexander’s campaigns than you did. The psycho-analyst does

at least report things in which he himself played a part. But in due

course we come to the things that confirm what the historian has told

you. He could refer you to the reports given by ancient writers, who

were either themselves contemporary with the events under question

or, at any rate, were comparatively close to them - he could refer you,

that is to say, to the works of Diodorus, Plutarch, Arrian, and so on. He

could put reproductions before, you of coins and statues of the king

which have survived and he could hand round to you a photograph of

the  Pompeian  mosaic  of  the  battle  of  Issus.  Strictly  speaking,

however,  all  these  documents  only  prove  that  earlier  generations

already  believed  in  Alexander’s  existence  and  in  the  reality  of  his

deeds, and your criticism might start afresh at that point. You would

then  discover  that  not  all  that  has  been  reported  about  Alexander

deserves credence or can be confirmed in its details; but nevertheless

I cannot think that you would leave the lecture-room in doubts of the

reality  of  Alexander  the  Great.  Your  decision  would  be  determined

essentially  by  two  considerations:  first,  that  the  lecturer  had  no

conceivable  motive  for  assuring  you  of  the  reality  of  something  he

himself did not think real, and secondly, that all the available history

books describe the events in approximately similar terms. If you wenton to examine the older sources, you would take the same factors into

account the possible motives of the informants and the conformity of

the witnesses to one another. The outcome of your examination would

undoubtedly  be  reassuring  in  the  case  of  Alexander,  but  would

probably be different where figures such as Moses or Nimrod were

concerned. Later opportunities will bring to light clearly enough what

doubts  you  may  feel  about  the  credibility  of  your  psycho-analytic

informant.

   But you will have a right to ask another question. If there is no

objective  verification  of  psycho-analysis,  and  no  possibility  of

demonstrating  it,  how  can  one  learn  psycho-analysis  at  all,  and

convince oneself of the truth of its assertions? It is true that psycho-

analysis cannot easily be learnt and there are not many people who

have learnt it properly. But of course there is a practicable method

none  the  less.  One  learns  psycho-analysis  on  oneself,  by  studying

one’s  own  personality.  This  is  not  quite  the  same  thing  as  what  is

called self-observation, but it can, if necessary, be subsumed under it.

There  are  a  whole  number  of  very  common  and  generally  familiar

mental phenomena which, after a little instruction in technique, can be

made the subject of analysis upon oneself. In that way one acquires

the  desired  sense  of  conviction  of  the  reality  of  the  processes

described  by  analysis  and  of  the  correctness  of  its  views.

Nevertheless, there are definite limits to progress by this method. One

advances  much  further  if  one  is  analysed  oneself  by  a  practised

analyst  and  experiences  the  effects  of  analysis  on  one’s  own  self,

making use of the opportunity of picking up the subtler technique of

the process from one’s analyst. This excellent method is, of course,

applicable only to a single person and never to a whole lecture room

of students together.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3133

 

 

   Psycho-analysis is not to be blamed for a second difficulty in your

relation to it; I must make you yourselves responsible for it, Ladies andGentlemen, at least in so far as you have been students of medicine.

Your earlier education has given a particular direction to your thinking,

which leads far away from psycho-analysis. You have been trained to

find an anatomical basis for the functions of the organism and their

disorders, to explain them chemically and physically and to view them

biologically.  But  no  portion  of  your  interest  has  been  directed  to

psychical life, in which, after all, the achievement of this marvellously

complex  organism  reaches  its  peak.  For  that  reason  psychological

modes  of  thought  have  remained  foreign  to  you.  You  have  grown

accustomed  to  regarding  them  with  suspicion,  to  denying  them  the

attribute  of  being  scientific,  and  to  handing  them  over  to  laymen,

poets,  natural  philosophers  and  mystics.  This  limitation  is  without

doubt detrimental to your medical activity, since, as is the rule in all

human relationships, your patients will begin by presenting you with

their  mental façade,  and  I  fear  that  you  will  be  obliged  as  a

punishment  to  leave  a  part  of  the  therapeutic  influence  you  are

seeking to the lay practitioners, nature curers and mystics whom you

so much despise.

   I am not unaware of the excuse that we have to accept for this

defect  in  your  education.  No  philosophical  auxiliary  science  exists

which could be made of service for your medical purposes. Neither

speculative philosophy, nor descriptive psychology, nor what is called

experimental psychology (which is closely allied to the physiology of

the  sense-organs),  as  they  are  taught  in  the  Universities,  are  in  a

position to tell you anything serviceable of the relation between body

and  mind  or  to  provide  you  with  the  key  to  an  understanding  of

possible disturbances of the mental functions. It is true that psychiatry,

as a part of medicine, sets about describing the mental disorders it

observes and collecting them into clinical entities; but at favourable

moments the psychiatrists themselves have doubts of whether their

purely descriptive hypotheses deserve the name of a science. Nothing

is known of the origin, the mechanism or the mutual relations of the

symptoms  of  which  these  clinical  entities  are  composed;  there  are

either no observable changes in the anatomical organ of the mind to

correspond  to  them,  or  changes  which  throw  no  light  upon  them.

These mental disorders are only accessible to therapeutic influence

when  they  can  be  recognized  as  subsidiary  effects  of  what  isotherwise an organic illness.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3134

 

   This is the gap which psycho-analysis seeks to fill. It tries to give

psychiatry its missing psychological foundation. It hopes to discover

the common ground on the basis of which the convergence of physical

and  mental  disorder  will  become  intelligible.  With  this  aim  in  view,

psycho-analysis must keep itself free from any hypothesis that is alien

to it, whether of an anatomical, chemical or physiological kind, and

must operate entirely with purely psychological auxiliary ideas; and for

that very reason, I fear, it will seem strange to you to begin with.

 

      I  shall  not  hold  you,  your  education  or  your  attitude  of  mind

responsible for the next difficulty. Two of the hypotheses of psycho-

analysis are an insult to the entire world and have earned its dislike.

One  of  them  offends  against  an  intellectual  prejudice,  the  other

against  an  aesthetic  and  moral  one.  We  must  not  be  too

contemptuous  of  these  prejudices;  they  are  powerful  things,

precipitates  of  human  developments  that  were  useful  and  indeed

essential.  They  are  kept  in  existence  by  emotional  forces  and  the

struggle against them is hard.

   The first of these unpopular assertions made by psycho-analysis

declares that mental processes are in themselves unconscious and

that of all mental life it is only certain individual acts and portions that

are conscious. You know that on the contrary we are in the habit of

identifying  what  is  psychical  with  what  is  conscious.  We  look  upon

consciousness  as  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the defining

characteristic  of  the  psychical,  and  psychology  as  the  study  of  the

contents of consciousness. Indeed it seems to us so much a matter of

course to equate them in this way that any contradiction of the idea

strikes  us  as  obvious  nonsense.  Yet  psycho-analysis  cannot  avoid

raising this contradiction; it cannot accept the identity of the conscious

and  the  mental.  It  defines  what  is  mental  as  processes  such  as

feeling, thinking and willing, and it is obliged to maintain that there isunconscious thinking and unapprehended willing. In saying this it has

from  the  start  frivolously  forfeited  the  sympathy  of  every  friend  of

sober scientific thought, and laid itself open to the suspicion of being a

fantastic  esoteric  doctrine  eager  to  make  mysteries  and  fish  in

troubled  waters.  But  you,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  naturally  cannot

understand  as  yet  what  right  I  have  to  describe  as  a  prejudice  a

statement of so abstract a nature as ‘what is mental is conscious’. Nor

can  you  guess  what  development  can  have  led  to  a  denial  of  the

unconscious - should such a thing exist - and what advantage there

may have been in that denial. The question whether we are to make

the psychical coincide with the conscious or make it extend further

sounds like an empty dispute about words; yet I can assure you that

the hypothesis of there being unconscious mental processes paves

the way to a decisive new orientation in the world and in science.

   You cannot have any notion, either, of what an intimate connection

there is between this first piece of audacity on the part of psycho-

analysis  and  the  second  one,  which  I  must  now  tell  you  of.  This

second  thesis,  which  psycho-analysis  puts  forward  as  one  of  its

findings, is an assertion that instinctual impulses which can only be

described  as  sexual,  both  in  the  narrower  and  wider  sense  of  the

word, play an extremely large and never hitherto appreciated part in

the causation of nervous and mental diseases. It asserts further that

these same sexual impulses also make contributions that must not be

underestimated to the highest cultural, artistic and social creations of

the human spirit.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3135

 

      In  my  experience  antipathy  to  this  outcome  of  psycho-analytic

research is the most important source of resistance which it has met

with. Would you like to hear how we explain that fact? We believe that

civilization has been created under the pressure of the exigencies of

life  at  the  cost  of  satisfaction  of  the  instincts;(and  we  believe  that

civilization is to a large extent being constantly created anew, since

each individual who makes a fresh entry into human society repeatsthis  sacrifice  of  instinctual  satisfaction  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole

community. Among the instinctual forces which are put to this use the

sexual  impulses  play  an  important  part;  in  this  process  they  are

sublimated - that is to say, they are diverted from their sexual aims

and directed to others that are socially higher and no longer sexual.

But this arrangement is unstable; the sexual instincts are imperfectly

tamed, and, in the case of every individual who is supposed to join in

the work of civilization, there is a risk that his sexual instincts may

refuse to be put to that use. Society believes that no greater threat to

its  civilization  could  arise  than  if  the  sexual  instincts  were  to  be

liberated and returned to their original aims. For this reason society

does  not  wish  to  be  reminded  of  this  precarious  portion  of  its

foundations. It has no interest in the recognition of the strength of the

sexual instincts or in the demonstration of the importance of sexual life

to the individual. On the contrary, with an educational aim in view, it

has set about diverting attention from that whole field of ideas. That is

why it will not tolerate this outcome of psycho-analytic research and

far prefers to stamp it as something aesthetically repulsive and morally

reprehensible, or as something dangerous. But objections of this sort

are ineffective against what claims to be an objective outcome of a

piece of scientific work; if the contradiction is to come into the open it

must  be  restated  in  intellectual  terms.  Now  it  is  inherent  in  human

nature to have an inclination to consider a thing untrue if one does not

like  it,  and  after  that  it  is  easy  to  find  arguments  against  it.  Thus

society makes what is disagreeable into what is untrue. It disputes the

truths of psycho-analysis with logical and factual arguments; but these

arise  from  emotional  sources  and  it  maintains  these  objections  as

prejudices, against every attempt to counter them.

   We, however, Ladies and Gentlemen, can claim that in asserting

this controversial thesis we have had no tendentious aim in view. We

have merely wished to give expression to a matter of fact which we

believe we have established by our painstaking labours. We claim,

too, the right to reject without qualification any interference by practical

considerations  in  scientific  work,  even  before  we  have  enquired

whether the fear which seeks to impose these considerations on us is

justified or not.

    Such, then, are a few of the difficulties that stand in the way of your

interest in psycho-analysis. They are perhaps more than enough for a

start. But if you are able to overcome the impression they make on

you, we will proceed.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3136

 

                                        LECTURE II

 

                                    PARAPRAXES

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - We will not start with postulates but with an

investigation. Let us choose as its subject certain phenomena which

are very common and very familiar but which have been very little

examined,  and  which,  since  they  can  be  observed  in  any  healthy

person, have nothing to do with illnesses. They are what are known as

‘parapraxes’, to which everyone is liable. It may happen, for instance,

that a person who intends to say something may use another word

instead (a slip of the tongue [Versprechen]), or he may do the same

thing in writing, and may or may not notice what he has done. Or a

person may read something, whether in print or manuscript, different

from what is actually before his eyes (a misreading [Verlesen]), or he

may hear wrongly something that has been said to him (a mishearing

[Verhören]) - on the assumption, of course, that there is no organic

disturbance  of  his  powers  of  hearing.  Another  group  of  these

phenomena has as its basis forgetting [Vergessen] - not, however, a

permanent forgetting but only a temporary one. Thus a person may be

unable to get hold of a name which he nevertheless knows and which

he  recognizes  at  once,  or  he  may  forget  to  carry  out  an intention,

though he remembers it later and has thus only forgotten it at that

particular moment. In a third group the temporary character is absent -

for instance in the case of mislaying [Verlegen], when a person has

put something somewhere and cannot find it again or in the precisely

analogous case of losing [Verlieren]. Here we have a forgetting which

we treat differently from other kinds of forgetting, one at which we are

surprised or annoyed instead of finding it understandable. In additionto all this there are particular sorts of errors [Irrtümer], in which the

temporary  character  is  present  once  more;  for  in  their  instance  we

believe for a time that something is the case which both before and

afterwards we know is not so. And there are a number of other similar

phenomena known by various names.

   All these are occurrences whose internal affinity with one another is

expressed  in  the  fact  that  [in  German]  they  begin  with  the  syllable

‘ver’. They are almost all of an unimportant kind, most of them are

very transitory, and they are without much significance in human life.

Only rarely does one of them, such as losing an object, attain some

degree of practical importance. For that reason, too, they attract little

attention, give rise to no more than feeble emotions, and so on.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3137

 

 

   It is to these phenomena, then, that I now propose to draw your

attention.  But  you  will  protest  with  some  annoyance:  ‘There  are  so

many  vast  problems  in  the  wide  universe,  as  well  as  within  the

narrower confines of our minds, so many marvels in the field of mental

disorders, which require and deserve to have light thrown upon them,

that  it  does  really  seem  gratuitous  to  waste  labour  and  interest  on

such trivialities. If you could make us understand why a person with

sound eyes and ears can see and hear in broad daylight things that

are  not  there,  why  another  person  suddenly  thinks  he  is  being

persecuted by the people of whom he has hitherto been most fond, or

puts forward the cleverest arguments in support of delusional beliefs

which  any  child  could  see  were  nonsensical,  then  we  should  have

some opinion of psycho-analysis. But if it can do no more than ask us

to consider why a speaker at a banquet uses one word instead of

another or why a housewife has mislaid her keys, and similar futilities,

then we shall know how to put our time and interest to better uses.’

   I should reply: Patience, Ladies and Gentlemen! I think your criticism

has gone astray. It is true that psycho-analysis cannot boast that it has

never concerned itself with trivialities. On the contrary, the material forits  observations  is  usually  provided  by  the  inconsiderable  events

which  have  been  put  aside  by  the  other  sciences  as  being  too

unimportant - the dregs, one might say, of the world of phenomena.

But  are  you  not  making  a  confusion  in  your  criticism  between  the

vastness of the problems and the conspicuousness of what points to

them?  Are  there  not  very  important  things  which  can  only  reveal

themselves,  under  certain  conditions  and  at  certain  times,  by  quite

feeble  indications?  I  should  find  no  difficulty  in  giving  you  several

examples of such situations. If you are a young man, for instance, will

it not be from small pointers that you will conclude that you have won

a girl’s favour? Would you wait for an express declaration of love or a

passionate embrace? Or would not a glance, scarcely noticed by other

people, be enough? a slight movement, the lengthening by a second

of the pressure of a hand? And if you were a detective engaged in

tracing a murder, would you expect to find that the murderer had left

his  photograph  behind  at  the  place  of  the  crime,  with  his  address

attached?  or  would  you  not  necessarily  have  to  be  satisfied  with

comparatively  slight  and  obscure  traces  of  the  person  you  were  in

search of? So do not let us under-estimate small indications; by their

help  we  may  succeed  in  getting  on  the  track  of  something  bigger.

Furthermore, I think like you that the great problems of the universe

and of science have the first claim on our interest. But it is as a rule of

very  little  use  to  form  an  express  intention  of  devoting  oneself  to

research into this or that great problem. One is then often at a loss to

know the first step to take. It is more promising in scientific work to

attack whatever is immediately before one and offers an opportunity

for research. If one does so really thoroughly and without prejudice or

preconception, and if one has luck, then, since everything is related to

everything, including small things to great, one may gain access even

from such unpretentious work to a study of the great problems. That is

what I should say in order to retain your interest, when we deal with

such apparent trivialities as the parapraxes of healthy people.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3138

  

   Let us now call in someone who knows nothing of psycho-analysis,

and  ask  him  how  he  explains  such  occurrences.  His  first  reply  will

certainly be: ‘Oh! that’s not worth explaining: they’re just small chance

events.’ What does the fellow mean by this? Is he maintaining that

there are occurrences, however small, which drop out of the universal

concatenation of events - occurrences which might just as well not

happen  as  happen?  If  anyone  makes  a  breach  of  this  kind  in  the

determinism of natural events at a single point, it means that he has

thrown  overboard  the  whole Weltanschauung  of  science.  Even  the

Weltanschauung of religion, we may remind him, behaves much more

consistently, since it gives an explicit assurance that no sparrow falls

from the roof without God’s special will. I think our friend will hesitate

to draw the logical conclusion from his first reply; he will change his

mind and say that after all when he comes to study these things he

can find explanations of them. What is in question are small failures of

functioning, imperfections in mental activity, whose determinants can

be assigned. A man who can usually speak correctly may make a slip

of  the  tongue  (1)  if  he  is  slightly  indisposed  and  tired,  (2)  if  he  is

excited and (3) if he is too much occupied with other things. It is easy

to confirm these statements. Slips of the tongue do really occur with

particular  frequency  when  one  is  tired,  has  a  headache  or  is

threatened with migraine. In the same circumstances proper names

are easily forgotten. Some people are accustomed to recognize the

approach of an attack of migraine when proper names escape them in

this  way.  When  we  are  excited,  too,  we  often  make  mistakes  over

words  -  and  over things  as  well,  and  a  ‘bungled  action’  follows.

Intentions are forgotten and a quantity of other undesigned actions

become  noticeable  if  we  are  absent-minded  -  that  is,  properly

speaking,  if  we  are  concentrated  on  something  else.  A  familiar

example  of  this  absent-mindedness  is  the  Professor  in Fliegende

Blätter  who  leaves  his  umbrella  behind  and  takes  the  wrong  hat

because he is thinking about the problems he is going to deal with in

his next book. All of us can recall from our own experience instances

of how we can forget intentions we have formed and promises we

have made because in the meantime we have had some absorbing

experience. 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3139

 

   This sounds quite reasonable and seems safe from contradiction,

though  it  may  not  be  very  interesting,  perhaps,  and  not  what  we

expected.  Let  us  look  at  these  explanations  of  parapraxes  more

closely.  The  alleged  preconditions  for  the  occurrence  of  these

phenomena are not all of the same kind. Being ill and disturbances of

the  circulation  provide  a  physiological  reason  for  the  impairment  of

normal functioning; excitement, fatigue and distraction are factors of

another  sort,  which  might  be  described  as  psycho-physiological.

These  last  admit  of  easy  translation  into  theory.  Both  fatigue  and

distraction,  and  perhaps  also  general  excitement,  bring  about  a

division  of  attention  which  may  result  in  insufficient  attention  being

directed to the function in question. If so, the function can be disturbed

with  especial  ease,  or  carried  out  inaccurately.  Slight  illness  or

changes in the blood-supply to the central nervous organ can have the

same  effect,  by  influencing  the  determining  factor,  the  division  of

attention, in a similar manner. In all these cases, therefore, it would be

a question of the effects of a disturbance of attention, whether from

organic or psychical causes.

      This  does  not  appear  to  promise  much  for  our  psycho-analytic

interest. We might feel tempted to drop the subject. If, however, we

examine the observations more closely, what we find does not tally

entirely with this attention theory of parapraxes, or at least does not

follow from it naturally. We discover that parapraxes of this kind and

forgetting of this kind occur in people who are not fatigued or absent-

minded or excited, but who are in all respects in their normal state -

unless we choose to ascribe ex post facto to the people concerned,

purely on account of their parapraxis, an excitement which, however,

they themselves do not admit to. Nor can it be simply the case that a

function is ensured by an increase in the attention directed upon it and

endangered if that attention is reduced. There are a large number of

procedures that one carries out purely automatically, with very little

attention, but nevertheless performs with complete security. A walker,who scarcely knows where he is going, keeps to the right path for all

that,  and  stops  at  his  destination  without  having gone  astray

[vergangen]. Or at all events this is so as a rule. An expert pianist

strikes the right keys without thinking. He may, of course, make an

occasional mistake; but if automatic playing increased the danger of

bungling, that danger would be at its greatest for a virtuoso, whose

playing,  as  a  result  of  prolonged  practice,  has  become entirely

automatic.  We  know,  on  the  contrary,  that  many  procedures  are

carried out with quite particular certainty if they are not the object of a

specially high degree of attention, and that the mishap of a parapraxis

is liable to occur precisely if special importance is attached to correct

functioning and there has therefore certainly been no distraction of the

necessary  attention.  It  could  be  argued  that  this  is  the  result  of

‘excitement’, but it is difficult to see why the excitement should not on

the contrary increase  the  attention  directed  to  what  is  so  earnestly

intended. If by a slip of the tongue someone says the opposite of what

he  intends  in  an  important  speech  or  oral  communication,  it  can

scarcely be explained by the psycho-physiological or attention theory.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3140

 

   There are, moreover, a number of small subsidiary phenomena in

the case of parapraxes, which we do not understand and on which the

explanations  so  far  given  shed  no  light.  For  instance,  if  we  have

temporarily forgotten a name, we are annoyed about it, do all we can

to  remember  it  and  cannot  leave  the  business  alone.  Why  in  such

cases do we so extremely seldom succeed in directing our attention,

as we are after all anxious to do, to the word which (as we say) is ‘on

the tip of our tongue’ and which we recognize at once when we are

told it? Or again: there are cases in which the parapraxes multiply,

form chains, and replace one another. On a first occasion one has

missed an appointment. On the next occasion, when one has firmly

decided not to forget this time, it turns out that one has made a note of

the  wrong  hour.  Or  one  tries  to  arrive  at  a  forgotten  word  by

roundabout ways and thereupon a second name escapes one whichmight have helped one to find the first. If one searches for this second

name, a third disappears, and so on. As is well known, the same thing

can  happen  with  misprints,  which  are  to  be  regarded  as  the

parapraxes of the compositor. An obstinate misprint of this kind, so it

is said, once slipped into a social-democrat newspaper. Its report of

some ceremonial included the words: ‘Among those present was to be

noticed His Highness the Kornprinz.’ Next day an attempt was made

at a correction. The paper apologized and said: ‘We should of course

have said "the Knorprinz".’¹ People speak in such cases of a ‘demon

of misprints’ or a ‘type-setting fiend’ - terms which at least go beyond

any psycho-physiological theory of misprints.

 

   ¹ [What was intended was the ‘Kronprinz (Crown Prince)'. ‘Korn’ means ‘corn’ and ‘Knorr’

‘protuberance’.]
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3141

 

   Perhaps you are familiar, too, with the fact that it is possible to

provoke  slips  of  the  tongue,  to  produce  them,  as  it  were,  by

suggestion. An anecdote illustrates this. A stage neophyte had been

cast  for  the  important  part  in Die  Jungfrau  von  Orleans  of  the

messenger who announces to the King that ‘der Connétable schickt

sein Schwert zurück [the Constable sends back his sword]’. A leading

actor amused himself during the rehearsal by repeatedly inducing the

nervous  young  man  to  say,  instead  of  the  words  of  the  text:  ‘der

Komfortabel schickt sein Pferd zurück [the cab-driver sends back his

horse].’ He achieved his aim: the wretched beginner actually made his

debut at the performance with the corrupt version, in spite of having

been warned against it, or perhaps because he had been warned.

 

   No light is thrown on these small features of parapraxes by the

theory of withdrawal of attention. The theory need not on that account

be  wrong,  however;  it  may  merely  lack  something,  some  addition,

before it is entirely satisfying. But some of the parapraxes, too, can

themselves be looked at from another point of view.

      Let  us  take slips  of  the  tongue  as  the  most  suitable  sort  ofparapraxis  for  our  purpose  -  though  we  might  equally  well  have

chosen slips of the pen or misreading. We must bear in mind that so

far we have only asked when - under what conditions - people make

slips of the tongue, and it is only to that question that we have had an

answer. But we might direct our interest elsewhere and enquire why it

is that the slip occurred in this particular way and no other; and we

might take into account what it is that emerges in the slip itself. You

will observe that, so long as this question is unanswered and no light

thrown on the product of the slip, the phenomenon remains a chance

event from the psychological point of view, even though it may have

been given a physiological explanation. If I make a slip of the tongue, I

might obviously do so in an infinite number of ways, the right word

might be replaced by any of a thousand others, it might be distorted in

countless different directions. Is there something, then, that compels

me in the particular case to make the slip in one special way, or does

it remain a matter of chance, of arbitrary choice, and is the question

perhaps one to which no sensible answer at all can be given?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3142

 

   Two writers, Meringer and Mayer (a philologist and a psychiatrist), in

fact  made  an  attempt  in  1895  to  attack  the  problem  of  parapraxes

from this angle. They collected examples and began by treating them

in a purely descriptive way. This, of course, provides no explanation

as  yet,  though  it  might  pave  the  way  to  one.  They  distinguish  the

various  kinds  of  distortions  imposed  by  the  slip  on  the  intended

speech  as  ‘transpositions’,  pre-sonances’,  ‘post-sonances’,  ‘fusions

(contaminations)'  and  ‘replacements  (substitutions)'.  I  will  give  you

some examples of these main groups proposed by the authors. An

instance of transposition would be to say ‘the Milo of Venus’ instead of

‘the  Venus  of  Milo’  (a  transposition  of  the  order  of  the  words);  an

instance of a pre-sonance would be: ‘es war mir auf der Schwest . . .

auf der Brust so schwer’;¹ and a post-sonance would be exemplified

by the well-known toast that went wrong: ‘Ich fordere Sie auf, auf das

Wohl unseres Chefs aufzustossen’ [instead of anzustossen].² Thesethree forms of slip of the tongue are not exactly common. You will

come  on  much  more  numerous  examples  in  which  the  slip  results

from contraction or fusion. Thus, for instance, a gentleman addressed

a  lady  in  the  street  in  the  following  words:  ‘If  you  will  permit  me,

madam, I should like to begleit-digen you.’ The composite word,³ in

addition to the ‘begleiten [to accompany]’, evidently has concealed in it

‘beleidigen [to insult]’. (Incidentally, the young man was not likely to

have much success with the lady.) As an example of a substitution

Meringer and Mayer give the case of someone saying: ‘Ich gebe die

                                                                    4
Präparate in den Briefkasten’ instead of ‘Brütkasten’.

 

   ¹ [The phrase intended was: ‘it lay on my breast so heavily.’ The meaningless ‘Schwest’

was a distortion of ‘Brust (breast)' owing to an anticipation of the ‘schw’ of ‘schwer (heavily)'.]

   ² [‘I call on you to hiccough’ (instead of ‘drink to’) ‘the health of our Chief.’]

   ³ [A meaningless one.]

4
    [‘I put the preparation into the letter-box’ instead of ‘incubator’, literally, ‘hatching-box’.]

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3143

 

      The  attempted  explanation  which  these  authors  base  on  their

collection of instances is quite peculiarly inadequate. They believe that

the sounds and syllables of a word have a particular ‘valency’ and that

the innervation of an element of high valency may have a disturbing

influence  on  one  that  is  less  valent.  Here  they  are  clearly  basing

themselves on the far from common cases of pre-sonance and post-

sonance; these preferences of some sounds over others (if they in fact

exist) can have no bearing at all on other effects of slips of the tongue.

After  all,  the  commonest  slips  of  the  tongue  are  when,  instead  of

saying one word, we say another very much like it; and this similarity

is for many people a sufficient explanation of such slips. For instance,

a  Professor  declared  in  his  inaugural  lecture:  ‘I  am  not  ‘geneigt

[inclined]’ (instead of ‘geeignet [qualified]’) to appreciate the services

of my highly esteemed predecessor.’ Or another Professor remarked:

‘In the case of the female genitals, in spite of many Versuchungen

[temptations] - I beg your pardon, Versuche [experiments]. . . .’

   The most usual, and at the same time the most striking kind of slipsof  the  tongue,  however,  are  those  in  which  one  says  the  precise

opposite of what one intended to say. Here, of course, we are very

remote from relations between sounds and the effects of similarity;

and instead we can appeal to the fact that contraries have a strong

conceptual kinship with each other and stand in a particularly close

psychological  association  with  each  other.  There  are  historical

examples of such occurrences. A President of the Lower House of our

Parliament once opened the sitting with the words: ‘Gentlemen, I take

notice that a full quorum of members is present and herewith declare

the sitting closed.’)

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3144

 

   Any other familiar association can act in the same insidious fashion

as a contrary one, and can emerge in quite unsuitable circumstances.

Thus, on the occasion of a celebration in honour of the marriage of a

child of Hermann von Helmholtz to a child of Werner von Siemens, the

well-known  inventor  and  industrialist,  it  is  said  that  the  duty  of

proposing the young couple’s health fell to the famous physiologist Du

Bois-Reymond. No doubt he made a brilliant speech, but he ended

with the words: ‘So, long life to the new firm of Siemens and Halske!’

That was, of course, the name of the old firm. The juxtaposition of the

two names must have been as familiar to a Berliner as Fortnum and

Mason would be to a Londoner.¹

   We must therefore include among the causes of parapraxes not only

relations between sounds and verbal similarity, but the influence of

word-associations as well. But that is not all. In a number of cases it

seems impossible to explain a slip of the tongue unless we take into

account something that had been said, or even merely thought, in an

earlier  sentence.  Once  again,  then,  we  have  here  a  case  of

perseveration,  like  those  insisted  upon  by  Meringer,  but  of  more

distant origin. - I must confess that I feel on the whole as though after

all  this  we  were  further  than  ever  from  understanding  slips  of  the

tongue.

    ¹ [In the original: ‘as Riedel and Beutel would be to a Viennese’. This last was a well-known

outfitter’s  shop  in  Vienna.  Siemens  and  Halske  were,  of  course,  the  great  electrical
engineers.]
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3145

 

 

   Nevertheless I hope I am not mistaken in saying that during this last

enquiry we have all of us formed a fresh impression of these instances

of slips of the tongue, and that it may be worth while to consider that

impression  further.  We  examined  the  conditions  under  which  in

general slips of the tongue occur, and afterwards the influences which

determine the kind of distortion which the slip produces. But we have

so far paid no attention whatever to the product of the slip considered

by itself, without reference to its origin. If we decide to do so, we are

bound in the end to find the courage to say that in a few examples

what results from the slip of the tongue has a sense of its own. What

do  we  mean  by  ‘has  a  sense’?  That  the  product  of  the  slip  of  the

tongue may perhaps itself have a right to be regarded as a completely

valid psychical act, pursuing an aim of its own, as a statement with a

content  and  significance.  So  far  we  have  always  spoken  of

‘parapraxes’, but it seems now as though sometimes the faulty act

was itself quite a normal act, which merely took the place of the other

act which was the one expected or intended.

      The  fact  of  the  parapraxis  having  a  sense  of  its  own  seems  in

certain cases evident and unmistakable. When the President of the

Lower House with his first words closed the sitting instead of opening

it, we feel inclined, in view of our knowledge of the circumstances in

which the slip of the tongue occurred, to recognize that the parapraxis

had a sense. The President expected nothing good of the sitting and

would have been glad if he could have brought it to an immediate end.

We have no difficulty in pointing to the sense of this slip of the tongue,

or, in other words, in interpreting it. Or, let us suppose that one lady

says to another in tones of apparent admiration: ‘That smart new hat -

I suppose you aufgepatzt [a non-existent word instead of aufgeputzt

(trimmed)]  it  yourself?’  Then  no  amount  of  scientific  propriety  willsucceed in preventing our seeing behind this slip of the tongue the

words: ‘This hat is a Patzerei [botched-up affair].’ Or, once more, we

are told that a lady who was well-known for her energy remarked on

one occasion: ‘My husband asked his doctor what diet he ought to

follow; but the doctor told him he had no need to diet: he could eat and

drink  what  I  want.’  Here  again  the  slip  of  the  tongue  has  an

unmistakable other side to it: it was giving expression to a consistently

planned programme.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3146

 

   If it turned out, Ladies and Gentlemen, that not only a few instances

of slips of the tongue and of parapraxes in general have a sense, but

a considerable number of them, the sense of parapraxes, of which we

have  so  far  heard  nothing,  would  inevitably  become  their  most

interesting feature and would push every other consideration into the

background.  We  should  then  be  able  to  leave  all  physiological  or

psycho-physiological  factors  on  one  side  and  devote  ourselves  to

purely  psychological  investigations  into  the  sense  -  that  is,  the

meaning or purpose - of parapraxes. We shall therefore make it our

business  to  test  this  expectation  on  a  considerable  number  of

observations.

 

   But before carrying out this intention I should like to invite you to

follow  me  along  another  track.  It  has  repeatedly  happened  that  a

creative writer has made use of a slip of the tongue or some other

parapraxis as an instrument for producing an imaginative effect. This

fact alone must prove to us that he regards the parapraxis - the slip of

the tongue, for instance - as having a sense, since he has produced it

deliberately. For what has happened is not that the author has made

an accidental slip of the pen and has then allowed it to be used by one

of his characters as a slip of the tongue; he intends to bring something

to our notice by means of the slip of the tongue and we can enquire

what that something is - whether perhaps he wants to suggest that the

character  in  question  is  absent-minded  and  fatigued  or  is  going  tohave an attack of migraine. If the author uses the slip as though it had

a sense, we have no wish, of course, to exaggerate the importance of

this.  After  all,  a  slip  might  in  fact  be  without  a  sense,  a  chance

psychical event, or it might have a sense in only quite rare cases, but

the author would still retain his right to intellectualize it by furnishing it

with a sense so as to employ it for his own purposes. Nor would it be

surprising  if  we  had  more  to  learn  about  slips  of  the  tongue  from

creative writers than from philologists and psychiatrists.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3147

 

   An example of this kind is to be found in Wallenstein (Piccolomini,

Act I, Scene 5). In the preceding scene Max Piccolomini has ardently

espoused  the  Duke’s  cause,  and  has  been  passionately  describing

the blessings of peace, of which he has become aware in the course

of a journey while escorting Wallenstein’s daughter to the camp. As he

leaves the stage, his father and Questenberg, the emissary from the

Court, are plunged in consternation. Scene 5 continues:

 

QUESTENBERG       Alas, alas! and stands it so?

                                What, friend! and do we let him go away
                                In this delusion - let him go away?
                                Not call him back immediately, not open
                                His eyes upon the spot?

OCTAVIO (recovering himself out of a deep study) He now has open’d mine,

                                And I see more than pleases me.
QUEST.                                                                    What is it?
OCT.                        Curse on this journey!
QUEST.                                                    But why so? What is it?
OCT.                        Come, come along friend! I must follow up
                                The ominous track immediately. Mine eyes
                                Are open’d now, and I must use them. Come!
                                                                (Draws Q. on with him.)
QUEST.                    What now? Where go you then?
OCT.                                                                        To her  . . .
QUEST.                                                                                    To -
OCT. (correcting himself) To the Duke. Come let us go.

 

Octavio had meant to say ‘to him’, to the Duke. But he makes a slip ofthe tongue, and, by saying ‘to her’ he betrays to us at least that he has

clearly recognized the influence that has made the young warrior into

an enthusiast for peace.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3148

 

   A still more impressive example has been discovered by Otto Rank

in  Shakespeare.  It  is  from The  Merchant  of  Venice,  in  the  famous

scene in which the fortunate lover chooses between the three caskets,

and perhaps I cannot do better than read you Rank’s short account of

it:

   ‘A slip of the tongue occurs in Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice

(Act III, Scene 2), which is from the dramatic point of view extremely

subtly motivated and which is put to brilliant technical use. Like the slip

in Wallenstein  to  which  Freud  has  drawn  attention,  it  shows  that

dramatists have a clear understanding of the mechanism and meaning

of this kind of parapraxis and assume that the same is true of their

audience.  Portia,  who  by  her  father’s  will  has  been  bound  to  the

choice of a husband by lot, has so far escaped all her unwelcome

suitors by a fortunate chance. Having at last found in Bassanio the

suitor  who  is  to  her  liking,  she  has  cause  to  fear  that  he  too  will

choose the wrong casket. She would very much like to tell him that

even so he could rest assured of her love; but she is prevented by her

vow. In this internal conflict the poet makes her say to the suitor she

favours:

 

                                                I pray you tarry; pause a day or two
                                                Before you hazard: for, in choosing wrong,
                                                I lose your company; therefore forbear a while:
                                                There’s something tells me (but it is not love)
                                                I would not lose you . . . .
                                                                                                . . . . I could teach you
                                                How to choose right, but then I am forsworn;
                                                So will I never be; so may you miss me;
                                                But if you do you’ll make me wish a sin,
                                                That I have been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes,
                                                They have o’erlooked me, and divided me;
                                                One half of me is yours, the other half is yours, -
                                                Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours,                                                And so all yours.

 

The thing of which she wanted to give him only a very subtle hint,

because she should have concealed it from him altogether, namely,

that even before he made his choice she was wholly his and loved him

-  it  is  precisely  this  that  the  poet,  with  a  wonderful  psychological

sensitivity, causes to break through openly in her slip of the tongue;

and by this artistic device he succeeds in relieving both the lover’s

unbearable uncertainty and the suspense of the sympathetic audience

over the outcome of his choice.’

      Observe,  too,  how  skilfully  Portia  in  the  end  reconciles  the  two

statements contained in her slip of the tongue, how she solves the

contradiction between them and yet finally shows that it was the slip

that was in the right:

 

                                                                                ‘But if mine, then yours,
                                                And so all yours.’

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3149
 

   It has occasionally happened that a thinker whose field lies outside

medicine  has,  by  something  he  says,  revealed  the  sense  of  a

parapraxis and anticipated our efforts at explaining them. You all know

of  the  witty  satirist  Lichtenberg  (1742-99),  of  whom  Goethe  said:

‘Where he makes a jest a problem lies concealed.’ Sometimes the jest

brings the solution  of  the  problem  to  light  as  well.  In  Lichtenberg’s

Witzige und Satirische Einfälle [Witty and Satirical Thoughts] we find

this: ‘He had read so much Homer that he always read "Agamemnon"

instead of "angenommen [supposed]".’ Here we have the whole theory

of misreading.

   We must see next time whether we can go along with these writers

in their view of parapraxes.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3150

                                         LECTURE III

 

                            PARAPRAXES (continued)

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - We arrived last time at the idea of considering

parapraxes  not  in  relation  to  the  intended  function  which  they

disturbed but on their own account; and we formed an impression that

in particular cases they seemed to be betraying a sense of their own.

We then reflected that if confirmation could be obtained on a wider

scale that parapraxes have a sense, their sense would soon become

more interesting than the investigation of the circumstances in which

they come about.

      Let  us  once  more  reach  an  agreement  upon  what  is  to  be

understood by the ‘sense’ of a psychical process. We mean nothing

other by it than the intention it serves and its position in a psychical

continuity.  In  most  of  our  researches  we  can  replace  ‘sense’  by

‘intention’ or ‘purpose’. Was it, then, merely a deceptive illusion or a

poetic exaltation of parapraxes when we thought we recognized an

intention in them?

   We will continue to take slips of the tongue as our examples. If we

now look through a considerable number of observations of that kind,

we  shall  find  whole  categories  of  cases  in  which  the  intention,  the

sense, of the slip is plainly visible. Above all there are those in which

what was intended is replaced by its contrary. The President of the

Lower House said in his opening speech: ‘I declare the sitting closed.’

That is quite unambiguous. The sense and intention of his slip was

that  he  wanted  to  close  the  sitting.  ‘Er  sagt  es  ja  selbst’¹  we  are

tempted to quote: we need only take him at his word. Do not interrupt

me at this point by objecting that that is impossible, that we know that

he did not want to close the sitting but to open it, and that he himself,

whom we have just recognized as the supreme court of appeal, could

confirm the fact that he wanted to open it. You are forgetting that we

have  come  to  an  agreement  that  we  will  begin  by  regarding

parapraxes on their own account; their relation to the intention which

they have disturbed is not to be discussed till later. Otherwise you will

be guilty of a logical error by simply evading the problem that is under

discussion - by what is called in English ‘begging the question’. 

   ¹ [‘He says so himself.’]

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3151

 

   In other cases, where the slip does not express the precise contrary,

an opposite sense can nevertheless be brought out by it. ‘I am not

geneigt  [inclined]  to  appreciate  the  services  of  my  predecessor’.

Geneigt  is  not  the  contrary  of geeignet  [qualified],  but  it  expresses

openly something which contrasts sharply with the situation in which

the speech was to be made,

   In yet other cases the slip of the tongue merely adds a second

sense  to  the  one  intended.  The  sentence  then  sounds  like  a

contraction, abbreviation or condensation of several sentences. Thus,

when the energetic lady said: ‘He can eat and drink what I want’, it

was just as though she had said: ‘He can eat and drink what he wants;

but what has he to do with wanting? I will want instead of him.’ A slip

of the tongue often gives the impression of being an abbreviation of

this sort. For instance, a Professor of Anatomy at the end of a lecture

on  the  nasal  cavities  asked  whether  his  audience  had  understood

what he said and, after general assent, went on: ‘I can hardly believe

that,  since  even  in  a  city  with  millions  of  inhabitants,  those  who

understand the nasal cavities can be counted on one finger. . . . I beg

your pardon, on the fingers of one hand.’ The abbreviated phrase has

a sense too - namely, that there is only one person who understands

them.

   In contrast to these groups of cases, in which the parapraxis itself

brings  its  sense  to  light,  there  are  others  in  which  the  parapraxis

produces nothing that has any sense of its own, and which therefore

sharply contradict our expectations. If someone twists a proper name

about by a slip of the tongue or puts an abnormal series of sounds

together, these very common events alone seem to give a negative

reply to our question whether all parapraxes have some sort of sense.

Closer  examination  of  such  instances,  however,  shows  that  these

distortions are easily understood and that there is by no means so

great a distinction between these more obscure cases and the earlierstraightforward ones.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3152

 

   A man who was asked about the health of his horse replied: ‘Well, it

draut  [a  meaningless  word]  .  .  .  it dauert  [will  last]  another  month

perhaps.’ When he was asked what he had really meant to say, he

explained  that  he  had  thought  it  was  a  ‘traurige  [sad]’  story.  The

combination of ‘dauert’ and ‘traurig’ had produced ‘draut’.¹

   Another man, speaking of some occurrences he disapproved of,

went on: ‘But then facts came to Vorschwein [a non-existent word,

instead of Vorschein (light)]. . . .’ In reply to enquiries he confirmed the

fact  that  he  had  thought  these  occurrences  ‘Schweinereien

[‘disgusting’,  literally  ‘piggish’].  ‘Vorschein’  and  ‘Schweinereien’

combined to produce the strange word ‘Vorschwein.²

   You will recall the case of the young man who asked the unknown

lady if he might ‘begleitigden’ her. We ventured to divide up this verbal

form into ‘begleiten [accompany]’ and ‘beleidigen [insult]’, and we felt

certain enough of this interpretation not to need any confirmation of it.

You will see from these examples that even these obscurer cases of

slips  of  the  tongue  can  be  explained  by  a  convergence,  a  mutual

‘interference’,  between  two  different  intended  speeches;  the

differences between these cases of slips arise merely from the fact

that  on  some  occasions  one  intention  takes  the  place  of  the  other

completely (becomes a substitute for it), as in slips of the tongue that

express the contrary, whereas on other occasions the one intention

has  to  be  satisfied  with  distorting  or  modifying  the  other,  so  that

composite structures are produced, which make sense, to a greater or

lesser degree, on their own account.

 

   ¹ Meringer and Mayer.

   ² Meringer and Mayer.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3153 

   We seem now to have grasped the secret of a large number of slips

of the tongue. If we bear this discovery in mind, we shall be able to

understand other groups as well which have puzzled us hitherto. In

cases of distortion of names, for instance, we cannot suppose that it is

always  a  matter  of  competition  between  two  similar  but  different

names. It is not difficult, however to guess the second intention. The

distortion  of  a  name  occurs  often  enough  apart  from  slips  of  the

tongue; it seeks to give the name an offensive sound or to make it

sound  like  something  inferior,  and  it  is  a  familiar  practice  (or

malpractice) designed as an insult, which civilized people soon learn

to abandon, but which they are reluctant to abandon. It is still often

permitted as a ‘joke’, though a pretty poor one. As a blatant and ugly

example of this way of distorting names, I may mention that in these

days the name of the President of the French Republic, Poincaré, has

been  changed  into  ‘Schweinskarré.¹  It  is  therefore  plausible  to

suppose that the same insulting intention is present in these slips of

the tongue and is trying to find expression in the distortion of a name.

Similar  explanations  suggest  themselves  along  the  same  lines  for

certain instances of slips of the tongue with comic or absurd results. ‘I

call on you to hiccough [aufzustossen] to the health of our Chief.’ Here

a ceremonial atmosphere is unexpectedly disturbed by the intrusion of

a word which calls up an unsavoury idea, and, on the model of certain

insulting  and  offensive  phrases,  we  can  scarcely  avoid  a  suspicion

that  a  purpose  was  trying  to  find  expression  which  was  in  violent

contradiction to the ostensibly respectful words. What the slip seems

to have been saying was something like: ‘Don’t you believe it! I don’t

mean this seriously! I don’t care a rap for the fellow!’ Just the same

thing  applies  to  slips  of  the  tongue  which  turn  innocent  words  into

indecent  or  obscene  ones:  thus,  ‘Apopos’  for  ‘à  propos’  or

‘Eischeissweibschen’ for ‘Eiweissscheibchen’.²

   Many people, as we know, derive some pleasure from a habit like

this of deliberately distorting innocent words into obscene ones; such

distortions are regarded as funny, and when we hear one we must in

fact first enquire from the speaker whether he muttered it intentionally

as a joke or whether it happened as a slip of the tongue.

    ¹ [The Viennese term for a pork chop.]

   ² Both from Meringer and Mayer. [In the first of these untranslatable examples ‘Apopos’ is a

non-existent  word;  but  ‘Popo’  is  a  nursery  word  for  ‘bottom’.  In  the  second  example  the
nonsense word means literally ‘egg-shit-female’, while the intended word means ‘small slices
of white of egg.’]
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3154

 

 

      Well,  it  looks  now  as  though  we  have  solved  the  problem  of

parapraxes, and with very little trouble! They are not chance events

but  serious  mental  acts;  they  have  a  sense;  they  arise  from  the

concurrent action - or perhaps rather, the mutually opposing action - of

two different intentions. But now I see too that you are preparing to

overwhelm me with a mass of questions and doubts which will have to

be answered and dealt with before we can enjoy this first outcome of

our work. I certainly have no desire to force hasty decisions upon you.

Let us take them all in due order, one after the other, and give them

cool consideration.

   What is it you want to ask me? Do I think that this explanation

applies to all parapraxes or only to a certain number? Can this same

point of view be extended to the many other kinds of parapraxis, to

misreading,  slips  of  the  pen,  forgetting,  bungled  actions,  mislaying,

and  so  on?  In  view  of  the  psychical  nature  of  parapraxes,  what

significance  remains  for  the  factors  of  fatigue,  excitement,  absent-

mindedness  and  interference  with  the  attention?  Further,  it  is  clear

that  of  the  two  competing  purposes  in  a  parapraxis  one  is  always

manifest, but the other not always. What do we do, then, in order to

discover the latter? And, if we think we have discovered it, how do we

prove that it is not merely a probable one but the only correct one? Is

there anything else you want to ask? If not, I will go on myself. You will

recall that we do not set much store by parapraxes themselves, and

that all we want is to learn from studying them something that may be

turned to account for psycho-analysis. I therefore put this question to

you. What are these intentions or purposes which are able to disturb

others in this way? And what are the relations between the disturbingpurposes and the disturbed ones? Thus, no sooner is the problem

solved than our work begins afresh.

   First, then, is this the explanation of all cases of slips of the tongue?

I am very much inclined to think so, and my reason is that every time

one investigates an instance of a slip of the tongue an explanation of

this  kind  is  forthcoming.  But  it  is  also  true  that  there  is  no  way  of

proving that a slip of the tongue cannot occur without this mechanism.

It may be so; but theoretically it is a matter of indifference to us, since

the  conclusions  we  want  to  draw  for  our  introduction  to  psycho-

analysis remain, even though - which is certainly not the case - our

view holds good of only a minority of cases of slips of the tongue. The

next  question  -  whether  we  may  extend  our  view  to  other  sorts  of

parapraxis - I will answer in advance with a ‘yes’. You will be able to

convince yourselves of this when we come to examining instances of

slips of the pen, bungled actions, and so on. But for technical reasons

I suggest that we should postpone this task till we have treated slips of

the tongue themselves still more thoroughly.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3155

 

      A  more  detailed  reply  is  called  for  by  the  question  of  what

significance remains for the factors put forward by the authorities -

disturbances  of  the  circulation,  fatigue,  excitement,  absent-

mindedness and the theory of disturbed attention - if we accept the

psychical mechanism of slips of the tongue which we have described.

Observe that we are not denying these factors. It is in general not

such a common thing for psycho-analysis to deny something asserted

by other people; as a rule it merely adds something new - though no

doubt it occasionally happens that this thing that has hitherto been

overlooked and is now brought up as a fresh addition is in fact the

essence of the matter. The influence on the production of slips of the

tongue by physiological dispositions brought about by slight illness,

disturbances  of  the  circulation  or  states  of  exhaustion,  must  be

recognized at once; daily and personal experience will convince you of

it.  But  how  little  they  explain!  Above  all,  they  are  not  necessarypreconditions of parapraxes. Slips of the tongue are just as possible in

perfect health and in a normal state. These somatic factors only serve

therefore, to facilitate and favour the peculiar mental mechanism of

slips of the tongue. I once used an analogy to describe this relation,

and I will repeat it here since I can think of none better to take its

place. Suppose that one dark night I went to a lonely spot and was

there attacked by a rough who took away my watch and purse. Since I

did not see the robber’s face clearly, I laid my complaint at the nearest

police  station  with  the  words:  ‘Loneliness  and  darkness  have  just

robbed me of my valuables.’ The police officer might then say to me:

‘In what you say you seem to be unjustifiably adopting an extreme

mechanistic view. It would be better to represent the facts in this way:

"Under the shield of darkness and favoured by loneliness, an unknown

thief robbed you of your valuables." In your case the essential task

seems to me to be that we should find the thief. Perhaps we shall then

be able to recover the booty.’

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3156

 

      Such  psycho-physiological  factors  as  excitement,  absent-

mindedness and disturbances of attention will clearly help us very little

towards an explanation. They are only empty phrases, screens behind

which we must not let ourselves be prevented from having a look. The

question is rather what it is that has been brought about here by the

excitement, the particular distracting of attention. And again, we must

recognize the importance of the influence of sounds, the similarity of

words and the familiar associations aroused by words. These facilitate

slips of the tongue by pointing to the paths they can take. But if I have

a path open to me, does that fact automatically decide that I shall take

it?  I  need  a  motive  in  addition  before  I  resolve  in  favour  of  it  and

furthermore a force to propel me along the path. So these relations of

sounds and words are also, like the somatic dispositions, only things

that favour slips of the tongue and cannot provide the true explanation

of them. Only consider: in an immense majority of cases my speech is

not disturbed by the circumstance that the words I am using recallothers with a similar sound, that they are intimately linked with their

contraries or that familiar associations branch off from them. Perhaps

we might still find a way out by following the philosopher Wundt, when

he  says  that  slips  of  the  tongue  arise  if,  as  a  result  of  physical

exhaustion,  the  inclination  to  associate  gains  the  upper  hand  over

what  the  speaker  otherwise  intends  to  say.  That  would  be  most

convincing if it were not contradicted by experience, which shows that

in one set of cases the somatic factors favouring slips of the tongue

are  absent  and  in  another  set  of  cases  the associative  factors

favouring them are equally absent.

   I am particularly interested, however, in your next question: how

does one discover the two mutually interfering purposes? You do not

realize, probably, what a momentous question this is. One of the two,

the purpose that is disturbed, is of course unmistakable: the person

who makes the slip of the tongue knows it and admits to it. It is only

the  other,  the  disturbing  purpose,  that  can  give  rise  to  doubt  and

hesitation. Now, we have already seen, and no doubt you have not

forgotten,  that  in  a  number  of  cases  this  other  purpose  is  equally

evident. It is indicated by the outcome of the slip, if only we have the

courage to grant that outcome a validity of its own. Take the President

of the Lower House, whose slip of the tongue said the contrary of what

he intended. It is clear that he wanted to open the sitting, but it is

equally clear that he also wanted to close it. That is so obvious that it

leaves us nothing to interpret. But in the other cases, in which the

disturbing  purpose  only distorts  the  original  one  without  itself

achieving  complete  expression,  how  do  we  arrive  at  the  disturbing

purpose from the distortion?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3157

 

   In a first group of cases this is done quite simply and securely - in

the  same  way,  in  fact,  as  with  the disturbed  purpose.  We  get  the

speaker to give us the information directly. After his slip of the tongue

he  at  once  produces  the  wording  which  he  originally  intended:  ‘It

draut . . . no, it dauert [will last] another month perhaps.’ Well, in justthe same way we get him to tell us the disturbing purpose. ‘Why’, we

ask  him,  ‘did  you  say  "draut?’  He  replies:  ‘I  wanted  to  say  "It’s  a

traurige [sad] story".’ Similarly, in the other case, where the slip of the

tongue was ‘Vorschwein’, the speaker confirms the fact that he had

wanted  at  first  to  say  ‘It’s  a Schweinerei  [disgusting]’,  but  had

controlled  himself  and  gone  off  into  another  remark.  Here  then  the

distorting purpose is as securely established as the distorted one. My

choice of these examples has not been unintentional, for their origin

and solution come neither from me nor from any of my followers. And

yet in both these cases active measures of a kind were necessary in

order to bring about the solution. The speaker had to be asked why he

had made the slip and what he could say about it. Otherwise he might

perhaps have passed over his slip without wanting to explain it. But

when he was asked he gave the explanation with the first thing that

occurred to him. And now please observe that this small active step

and its successful outcome are already a psycho-analysis and are a

model for every psycho-analytic investigation which we shall embark

upon later.

   Am I too mistrustful, however, if I suspect that at the very moment at

which psycho-analysis makes its appearance before you resistance to

it simultaneously raises its head? Do you not feel inclined to object

that the information given by the person of whom the question was

asked - the person who made the slip of the tongue - is not completely

conclusive? He was naturally anxious, you think, to fulfil the request to

explain the slip, so he said the first thing that came into his head which

seemed capable of providing such an explanation. But that is no proof

that the slip did in fact take place in that way. It may have been so, but

it  may  just  as  well  have  happened  otherwise.  And  something  else

might  have  occurred  to  him  which  would  have  fitted  in  as  well  or

perhaps even better.

   It is strange how little respect you have at bottom for a psychical

fact! Imagine that someone had undertaken the chemical analysis of a

certain  substance  and  had  arrived  at  a  particular  weight  for  one

component of it - so and so many milligrams. Certain inferences could

be drawn from this weight. Now do you suppose that it would ever

occur to a chemist to criticize those inferences on the ground that the

isolated  substance  might  equally  have  had  some  other  weight?Everyone will bow before the fact that this was the weight and none

other and will confidently draw his further inferences from it. But when

you are faced with the psychical fact that a particular thing occurred to

the mind of the person questioned, you will not allow the fact’s validity:

something else might have occurred to him! You nourish the illusion of

there being such a thing as psychical freedom, and you will not give it

up. I am sorry to say I disagree with you categorically over this.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3158

 

   You will break off at that, but only to take up your resistance again at

another  point.  You  proceed:  ‘It  is  the  special  technique  of  psycho-

analysis, as we understand, to get people under analysis themselves

to  produce  the  solution  of  their  problems.  Now  let  us  take  another

example - the one in which a speaker proposing the toast of honour

on  a  ceremonial  occasion  called  on  his  audience  to  hiccough

[aufzustossen] to the health of the Chief. You say that the disturbing

intention  in  this  case  was  an  insulting  one:  that  was  what  was

opposing  the  speaker’s  expression  of  respect.  But  this  is  pure

interpretation on your part, based upon observations apart from the

slip of the tongue. If in this instance you were to question the person

responsible  for  the  slip,  he  would  not  confirm  your  idea  that  he

intended an insult; on the contrary, he would energetically repudiate it.

Why, in view of this clear denial, do you not abandon your unprovable

interpretation?’

      Yes.  You  have  lighted  on  a  powerful  argument  this  time.  I  can

imagine  the  unknown  proposer  of  the  toast.  He  is  probably  a

subordinate to the Chief of the Department who is being honoured -

perhaps he himself is already an Assistant Lecturer, a young man with

excellent  prospects  in  life.  I  try  to  force  him  to  admit  that  he  may

nevertheless  have  had  a  feeling  that  there  was  something  in  him

opposing his toast in honour of the Chief. But this lands me in a nice

mess.  He  gets  impatient  and  suddenly  breaks  out:  ‘Just  you  stop

trying to cross-question me or I shall turn nasty. You’re going to ruin

my  whole  career  with  your  suspicions.  I  simply  said  "aufstossen[hiccough to]" instead of "anstossen [drink to]" because I’d said "auf"

twice  before  in  the  same  sentence.  That’s  what  Meringer  calls  a

perseveration  and  there’s  nothing  more  to  be  interpreted  about  it.

D’you understand? Basta!’ - H’m! That was a surprising reaction, a

truly energetic denial. I see there’s nothing more to be done with the

young man. But I also reflect that he shows a strong personal interest

in insisting on his parapraxis not having a sense. You may also feel

that there was something wrong in his being quite so rude about a

purely  theoretical  enquiry.  But,  you  will  think,  when  all  is  said  and

done he must know what he wanted to say and what he didn’t.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3159

 

   But must he? Perhaps that may still be the question.

   Now, however, you think you have me at your mercy. ‘So that’s your

technique’, I hear you say. ‘When a person who has made a slip of the

tongue says something about it that suits you, you pronounce him to

be the final decisive authority on the subject. "He says so himself!".

But when what he says doesn’t suit your book, then all at once you

say he’s of no importance - there’s no need to believe him.

   That is quite true. But I can put a similar case to you in which the

same  monstrous  event  occurs.  When  someone  charged  with  an

offence  confesses  his  deed  to  the  judge,  the  judge  believes  his

confession; but if he denies it, the judge does not believe him. If it

were otherwise, there would be no administration of justice, and in

spite of occasional errors we must allow that the system works.

   ‘Are you a judge, then? And is a person who has made a slip of the

tongue brought up before you on a charge? So making a slip of the

tongue is an offence, is it?’¹

   Perhaps we need not reject the comparison. But I would ask you to

observe what profound differences of opinion we have reached after a

little investigation of what seemed such innocent problems concerning

the parapraxes - differences which at the moment we see no possible

way of smoothing over. I propose a provisional compromise on the

basis of the analogy with the judge and the defendant. I suggest thatyou shall grant me that there can be no doubt of a parapraxis having a

sense if the subject himself admits it. I will admit in return that we

cannot arrive at a direct proof of the suspected sense if the subject

refuses us information, and equally, of course, if he is not at hand to

give us the information. Then, as in the case of the administration of

justice, we are obliged to turn to circumstantial evidence, which may

make  a  decision  more  probable  in  some  instances  and  less  so  in

others. In the law courts it may be necessary for practical purposes to

find a defendant guilty on circumstantial evidence. We are under no

such  necessity;  but  neither  are  we  obliged  to  disregard  the

circumstantial  evidence.  It  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  a

science  consists  entirely  of  strictly  proved  theses,  and  it  would  be

unjust to require this. Only a disposition with a passion for authority

will  raise  such  a  demand,  someone  with  a  craving  to  replace  his

religious catechism by another, though it is a scientific one. Science

has only a few apodeictic propositions in its catechism: the rest are

assertions promoted by it to some particular degree of probability. It is

actually a sign of a scientific mode of thought to find satisfaction in

these  approximations  to  certainty  and  to  be  able  to  pursue

constructive work further in spite of the absence of final confirmation.

 

   ¹ [The German words are on the same pattern: ‘Versprechen’ and ‘Vergehen’.]

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3160

 

   But if the subject does not himself give us the explanation of the

sense of a parapraxis, where are we to find the starting-points for our

interpretation - the circumstantial evidence? In various directions. In

the first place from analogies with phenomena apart from parapraxes:

when, for instance, we assert that distorting a name when it occurs as

a  slip  of  the  tongue  has  the  same  insulting  sense  as  a  deliberate

twisting of a name. Further, from the psychical situation in which the

parapraxis  occurs,  the  character  of  the  person  who  makes  the

parapraxis,  and  the  impressions  which  he  has  received  before  the

parapraxis and to which the parapraxis is perhaps a reaction. What

happens as a rule is that the interpretation is carried out according togeneral principles: to begin with there is only a suspicion, a suggestion

for an interpretation, and we then find a confirmation by examining the

psychical situation. Sometimes we have to wait for subsequent events

as  well  (which  have,  as  it  were,  announced  themselves  by  the

parapraxis) before our suspicion is confirmed.

   I cannot easily give you illustrations of this if I limit myself to the field

of slips of the tongue, though even there some good instances are to

be found. The young man who wanted to ‘begleitdigen’ a lady was

certainly a timid character. The lady whose husband could eat and

drink  what she  wanted  is  known  to  me  as  one  of  those  energetic

women  who  wear  the  breeches  in  their  home.  Or  let  us  take  the

following example: At the General Meeting of the ‘Concordia’ a young

member made a speech of violent opposition, in the course of which

he  addressed  the  committee  as  ‘Vorschussmitglieder  [lending

members]’,  a  word  which  seems  to  be  made  up  of  ‘Vorstand

[directors]’ and ‘Ausschuss [committee]’. We shall suspect that some

disturbing  purpose  was  at  work  in  him,  acting  against  his  violent

opposition, based on something connected with a loan. And in fact we

learnt from our informant that the speaker was constantly in financial

difficulties and just at that time had applied for a loan. The disturbing

intention could therefore be replaced by the thought: ‘Moderate your

opposition; these are the same people who will have to sanction your

loan.’

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3161

 

   But I can give you a large selection of circumstantial evidence of this

kind if I pass over to the wide field of the other parapraxes.

   If anyone forgets a proper name which is familiar to him normally or

if, in spite of all his efforts, he finds it difficult to keep it in mind, it is

plausible to suppose that he has something against the person who

bears the name so that he prefers not to think of him. Consider, for

instance,  what  we  learn  in  the  following  cases  about  the  psychical

situation in which the parapraxis occurred.

   ‘A Herr Y. fell in love with a lady, but he met with no success, andshortly afterwards she married a Herr X. Thereafter, Herr Y., in spite of

having  known  Herr  X.  for  a  long  time  and  even  having  business

dealings  with  him,  forgot  his  name  over  and  over  again,  so  that

several times he had to enquire what it was from other people when

he wanted to correspond with Herr X.’ Herr Y. evidently wanted to

know nothing of his more fortunate rival: ‘never thought of shall he

be.’¹

      Or:  A  lady  enquired  from  her  doctor  for  news  of  a  common

acquaintance, but called her by her maiden name. She had forgotten

her friend’s married name. She admitted afterwards that she had been

very unhappy about the marriage and disliked her friend’s husband.²

   We shall have a good deal to say about forgetting names in other

connections;  for  the  moment  we  are  principally  interested  in  the

psychical situation in which the forgetting occurs.

   The forgetting of intentions can in general be traced to an opposing

current of thought, which is unwilling to carry out the intention. But this

view is not only held by us psycho-analysts; it is the general opinion,

accepted  by  everyone  in  their  daily  lives  and  only  denied  when  it

comes to theory. A patron who gives his protégé the excuse of having

forgotten his request fails to justify himself. The protégé immediately

thinks: ‘It means nothing to him; it’s true he promised, but he doesn’t

really want to do it.’ For that reason forgetting is banned in certain

circumstances of ordinary life; the distinction between the popular and

the  psycho-analytic  view  of  these  parapraxes  seems  to  have

disappeared. Imagine the lady of the house receiving her guest with

the words: ‘What? have you come to-day? I’d quite forgotten I invited

you for to-day.’ Or imagine a young man confessing to his fiancée that

he had forgotten to keep their last rendez-vous. He will certainly not

confess it; he will prefer to invent on the spur of the moment the most

improbable obstacles which prevented his appearing at the time and

afterwards made it impossible for him to let her know. We all know too

that in military affairs the excuse of having forgotten something is of

no help and is no protection against punishment, and we must all feel

that that is justified. Here all at once everyone is united in thinking that

a particular parapraxis has a sense and in knowing what that sense is.

Why are they not consistent enough to extend this knowledge to the

other  parapraxes  and  to  admit  them  fully?  There  is  of  course  ananswer to this question too.

 

   ¹ From Jung.

   ² From Brill.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3162

 

   Since laymen have so little doubt about the sense of this forgetting

of intentions, you will be the less surprised to find writers employing

this sort of parapraxis in the same sense. Any of you who have seen

or read Bernard Shaw’s Caesar and Cleopatra will remember that in

the last scene Caesar, as he is leaving Egypt, is haunted by the idea

that there is something else he had intended to do but has forgotten.

In the end it turns out what this was: he had forgotten to say good-bye

to  Cleopatra.  The  dramatist  is  seeking  by  this  little  contrivance  to

ascribe  to  the  great  Caesar  a  superiority  which  he  did  not  in  fact

possess and which he never desired. For historical sources will tell

you that Caesar made Cleopatra follow him to Rome, that she was

living there with her little Caesarion when Caesar was murdered, and

that she thereupon fled from the city.

   Cases of forgetting an intention are in general so clear that they are

not of much use for our purpose of obtaining circumstantial evidence

of  the  sense  of  a  parapraxis  from  the  psychical  situation.  Let  us

therefore  turn  to  a  particularly  ambiguous  and  obscure  kind  of

parapraxis - to losing and mislaying. You will no doubt find it incredible

that we ourselves can play an intentional part in what is so often the

painful  accident  of  losing  something.  But  there  are  plenty  of

observations like the following one. A young man lost a pencil of his of

which he had been very fond. The day before, he had received a letter

from his brother-in-law which ended with these words: ‘I have neither

the inclination nor the time at present to encourage you in your frivolity

and  laziness.’  The  pencil  had  actually  been  given  to  him  by  this

brother-in-law. Without this coincidence we could not, of course, have

asserted that a part was played in the loss by an intention to get rid of

the thing.¹ Similar cases are very common. We lose an object if we

have quarrelled with the person who gave it to us and do not want tobe reminded of him; or if we no longer like the object itself and want to

have an excuse for getting another and better one instead. The same

intention directed against an object can also play a part, of course, in

cases of dropping, breaking or destroying things. Can we regard it as

a matter of chance when a schoolchild immediately before his birthday

loses, ruins or smashes some of his personal belongings, such as his

satchel or his watch?

   Nor will anyone who has sufficiently often experienced the torment

of not being able to find something that he himself has put away feel

inclined  to  believe  that  there  is  a  purpose  in  mislaying  things.  Yet

instances are far from rare in which the circumstances attendant on

the mislaying point to an intention to get rid of the object temporarily or

permanently.

 

   ¹ From Dattner.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3163

 

   Here is the best example, perhaps, of such an occasion. A youngish

man  told  me  the  following  story:  ‘Some  years  ago  there  were

misunderstandings between me and my wife. I found her too cold, and

although I willingly recognized her excellent qualities we lived together

without any tender feelings. One day, returning from a walk, she gave

me  a  book  which  she  had  bought  because  she  thought  it  would

interest me. I thanked her for this mark of "attention", promised to read

the book and put it on one side. After that I could never find it again.

Months passed by, in which I occasionally remembered the lost book

and made vain attempts to find it. About six months later my dear

mother, who was not living with us, fell ill. My wife left home to nurse

her mother-in-law. The patient’s condition became serious and gave

my  wife  an  opportunity  of  showing  the  best  side  of  herself.  One

evening I returned home full of enthusiasm and gratitude for what my

wife  had  accomplished.  I  walked  up  to  my  desk,  and  without  any

definite intention but with a kind of somnambulistic certainty opened

one of the drawers. On the very top I found the long-lost book I had

mislaid. With the extinction of the motive the mislaying of the objectceased as well.

 

   Ladies and Gentlemen, I could multiply this collection of examples

indefinitely;  but  I  will  not  do  so  here.  You  will  in  any  case  find  a

profusion  of  case  material  for  the  study  of  parapraxes  in  my

Psychopathology of Everyday Life (first published in 1901).¹ All these

examples  lead  to  the  same  result:  they  make  it  probable  that

parapraxes  have  a  sense,  and  they  show  you  how  that  sense  is

discovered  or  confirmed  by  the  attendant  circumstances.  I  will  be

briefer to-day, because we have adopted the limited aim of using the

study  of  these  phenomena  as  a  help  towards  a  preparation  for

psycho-analysis. There are only two groups of observations into which

I need enter more fully here: accumulated and combined parapraxes

and the confirmation of our interpretations by subsequent events.

 

   ¹ See also similar collections by Maeder (in French), Brill (in English), Jones (in English)

and J. Stärcke (in Dutch), etc.
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3164

 

   Accumulated and combined parapraxes are without doubt the finest

flower  of  their  kind.  If  we  had  only  been  concerned  to  prove  that

parapraxes have a sense we should have confined ourselves to them

from the first, for in their case the sense is unmistakable even to the

dull-witted  and  forces  itself  on  the  most  critical  judgement.  An

accumulation  of  these  phenomena  betrays  an  obstinacy  that  is

scarcely ever a characteristic of chance events but fits in well with

something intentional. Finally, the mutual interchangeability between

different species of parapraxes demonstrates what it is in parapraxes

that is important and characteristic: not their form or the method which

they  employ  but  the  purpose  which  they  serve  and  which  can  be

achieved in the most various ways. For this reason I will give you an

instance of repeated forgetting. Ernest Jones tells us that once, for

reasons unknown to him, he left a letter lying on his desk for several

days. At last he decided to send it off, but he had it returned to him by

the Dead Letter Office¹ since he had forgotten to address it. After hehad addressed it he took it to the post, but this time it had no stamp.

And then at last he was obliged to admit his reluctance to sending the

letter off at all.

   In another case a bungled action is combined with an instance of

mislaying. A lady travelled to Rome with her brother-in-law, who was a

famous  artist.  The  visitor  was  received  with  great  honour  by  the

German community in Rome, and among other presents he was given

an antique gold medal. The lady was vexed that her brother-in-law did

not appreciate the lovely object sufficiently. When she returned home

(her place in Rome having been taken by her sister) she discovered

while unpacking that she had brought the medal with her - how, she

did not know. She at once sent a letter with the news to her brother-in-

law, and announced that she would send the article she had walked

off with back to Rome next day. But next day the medal had been so

cleverly mislaid that it could not be found and sent of; and it was at

this point, that the meaning of her ‘absent-mindedness’ dawned on the

lady: she wanted to keep the object for herself.²

 

   ¹ [In English in the original.]

   ² Reported by R. Reitler.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3165

 

   I have already given you an example of a combination of a forgetting

with an error, the case of someone forgetting an appointment and on a

second occasion, having firmly decided not to forget this time, turning

up at the wrong hour. An exactly similar case was reported to me from

his  own  experience  by  a  friend  with  literary  as  well  as  scientific

interests. ‘Some years ago’, he told me, ‘I allowed myself to be elected

to  the  committee  of  a  certain  literary  society,  as  I  thought  that  the

organization  might  one  day  be  able  to  help  me  to  have  my  play

produced;  and  I  took  a  regular  part,  though  without  being  much

interested, in the meetings which were held every Friday. Then, a few

months ago, I was given the promise of a production at the theatre at

F.;  and  since  then  I  have  regularly forgotten  the  meetings  of  the

society. When I read your book on the subject I felt ashamed of myforgetfulness. I reproached myself with the thought that it was shabby

behaviour on my part to stay away now that I no longer needed these

people, and resolved on no account to forget the next Friday. I kept on

reminding myself of this resolution until I carried it into effect and stood

at  the  door  of  the  room  where  the  meetings  were  held.  To  my

astonishment it was locked; the meeting was over. I had in fact made

a mistake over the day; it was now Saturday!’

   It would be agreeable to add further, similar examples. But I must

proceed,  and  give  you  a  glimpse  of  the  cases  in  which  our

interpretation has to wait for the future for confirmation. The governing

condition  of  these  cases,  it  will  be  realized,  is  that  the  present

psychical situation is unknown to us or inaccessible to our enquiries.

Our interpretation is consequently no more than a suspicion to which

we  ourselves  do  not  attach  too  much  importance.  Later,  however,

something  happens  which  shows  us  how  well-justified  our

interpretation  had  been.  I  was  once  the  guest  of  a  young  married

couple  and  heard  the  young  woman  laughingly  describe  her  latest

experience. The day after her return from the honeymoon she had

called for her unmarried sister to go shopping with her as she used to

do, while her husband went to his business. Suddenly she noticed a

gentleman on the other side of the street, and nudging her sister had

cried: ‘Look, there goes Herr L.’ She had forgotten that this gentleman

had been her husband for some weeks. I shuddered as I heard the

story, but I did not dare to draw the inference. The little incident only

occurred to my mind some years later when the marriage had come to

a most unhappy end.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3166

 

   Maeder tells of a lady who, on the eve of her wedding had forgotten

to try on her wedding-dress and, to her dressmaker’s despair, only

remembered it late in the evening. He connects this forgetfulness with

the fact that she was soon divorced from her husband. I know a lady

now divorced from her husband, who in managing her money affairs

frequently signed documents in her maiden name, many years beforeshe in fact resumed it. - I know of other women who have lost their

wedding-rings during the honeymoon, and I know too that the history

of their marriages has given a sense to the accident. - And now here

is one more glaring example, but with a happier ending. The story is

told of a famous German chemist that his marriage did not take place,

because he forgot the hour of his wedding and went to the laboratory

instead of to the church. He was wise enough to be satisfied with a

single attempt and died at a great age unmarried.

   The idea may possibly have occurred to you that in these examples

parapraxes  have  taken  the  place  of  the  omens  or  auguries  of  the

ancients.  And  indeed  some  omens  were  nothing  else  than

parapraxes, as, for instance, when someone stumbled or fell down.

Others of them, it is true, had the character of objective happenings

and not of subjective acts. But you would hardly believe how difficult it

sometimes is to decide whether a particular event belongs to the one

group or to the other. An act so often understands how to disguise

itself as a passive experience.

      All  those  of  us  who  can  look  back  on  a  comparatively  long

experience  of  life  will  probably  admit  that  we  should  have  spared

ourselves many disappointments and painful surprises if we had found

the  courage  and  determination  to  interpret  small  parapraxes

experienced in our human contacts as auguries and to make use of

them as indications of intentions that were still concealed. As a rule

we dare not do so; it would make us feel as though, after a detour

through science, we were becoming superstitious again. Nor do all

auguries come true, and you will understand from our theories that

they do not all need to come true.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3167

 

                                        LECTURE IV

 

                            PARAPRAXES (concluded)

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - We may take it as the outcome of our efforts

so far and the basis of our further investigations that parapraxes havea sense. Let me insist once again that I am not asserting - and for our

purposes there is no need to do so - that every single parapraxis that

occurs has a sense, even though I regard that as probably the case. It

is enough for us if we can point to such a sense relatively often in the

different forms of parapraxis. Moreover, in this respect these different

forms behave differently. Cases of slips of the tongue and of the pen,

etc., may occur on a purely physiological basis. I cannot believe that

this is so in the types depending on forgetting (forgetting names or

intentions, mislaying, etc.). It is very probable that there are cases of

losing which can be regarded as unintended. It is in general true that

only a certain proportion of the errors that occur in ordinary life can be

looked at from our point of view. You should bear these limitations in

mind  when  henceforward  we  start  from  the  assumption  that

parapraxes  are  psychical  acts  and  arise  from  mutual  interference

between two intentions.

   This is the first product of psycho-analysis. Psychology has hitherto

known nothing of the occurrence of such mutual interferences or of

the  possibility  that  they  might  result  in  such  phenomena.  We  have

made  a  quite  considerable  extension  to  the  world  of  psychical

phenomena and have won for psychology phenomena which were not

reckoned earlier as belonging to it.

   Let us pause a moment longer over the assertion that parapraxes

are ‘psychical acts’. Does this imply more than what we have said

already - that they have a sense? I think not. I think, rather, that the

former  assertion  is  more  indefinite  and  more  easily  misunderstood.

Anything  that  is  observable  in  mental  life  may  occasionally  be

described  as  a  mental  phenomenon.  The  question  will  then  be

whether  the  particular  mental  phenomenon  has  arisen  immediately

from  somatic,  organic  and  material  influences  -  in  which  case  its

investigation will not be part of psychology - or whether it is derived in

the  first  instance  from  other  mental  processes,  somewhere  behind

which the series of organic influences begins. It is this latter situation

that we have in view when we describe a phenomenon as a mental

process,  and  for  that  reason  it  is  more  expedient  to  clothe  our

assertion in the form: ‘the phenomenon has a sense.’ By ‘sense’ we

understand  ‘meaning’,  ‘intention,’  ‘purpose’  and  ‘position  in  a

continuous psychical context’. 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3168

 

   There are a number of other phenomena which are closely akin to

parapraxes but to which that name is no longer appropriate. We call

them chance and symptomatic actions. Like the others, they have the

character of being without a motive, insignificant and unimportant; but

they have in addition, more clearly, that of being unnecessary. They

are distinguished from parapraxes by their lack of another intention

with which they are in collision and which is disturbed by them. On the

other hand, they merge insensibly into the gestures and movements

which  we  regard  as  expressions  of  the  emotions.  These  chance

actions include all sorts of manipulations with our clothing, or parts of

our body or objects within our reach, performed as though in play and

apparently  with  no  purpose,  or,  again,  the  omission  of  these

manipulations; or, further, tunes that we hum to ourselves. I suggest

that all these phenomena have a sense and can be interpreted in the

same  way  as  parapraxes,  that  they  are  small  indications  of  more

important mental processes and are fully valid psychical acts. But I do

not propose to linger over this fresh extension of the field of mental

phenomena; I shall return to the parapraxes, in connection with which

problems  important  for  psycho-analysis  can  be  worked  out  with  far

greater clarity.

 

      The  most  interesting  questions  which  we  have  raised  about

parapraxes and not yet answered are perhaps these. We have said

that parapraxes are the product of mutual interference between two

different intentions, of which one may be called the disturbed intention

and  the  other  the  disturbing  one.  The  disturbed  intentions  give  no

occasion for further questions, but concerning the latter we should like

to  know,  first,  what  sort  of  intentions  emerge  as  a  disturbance  to

others, and secondly what is the relation of the disturbing intentions to

the disturbed ones?

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3169

 

   If you will allow me, I will once more take slips of the tongue as

representatives  of  the  whole  class  and  I  will  reply  to  the  second

question before the first.

   In a slip of the tongue the disturbing intention may be related in its

content  to  the  disturbed  one,  in  which  case  it  will  contradict  it  or

correct it or supplement it. Or - the more obscure and more interesting

case - the content of the disturbing intention may have nothing to do

with that of the disturbed one.

   We shall have no difficulty in finding evidence of the former relation

in  instances  we  already  know  and  in  similar  ones.  In  almost  every

case in which a slip of the tongue reverses the sense, the disturbing

intention  expresses  the  contrary  to  the  disturbed  one  and  the

parapraxis represents a conflict between two incompatible inclinations.

‘I declare the sitting opened, but I should prefer it to be already closed’

is the sense of the President’s slip of the tongue. A political periodical

which had been accused of corruption defended itself in an article the

climax of which should have been: ‘Our readers will bear witness to

the fact that we have always acted in the most unself-seeking manner

for  the  good  of  the  community.’  But  the  editor  entrusted  with  the

preparation of the article wrote ‘in the most self-seeking manner’. That

is to say, he was thinking: ‘This is what I am obliged to write; but I

have different ideas.’ A member of parliament who was insisting that

the truth should be told to the Emperor ‘rückhaltloss [unreservedly]’

evidently heard an inner voice that was shocked at his boldness and,

by  a  slip  of  the  tongue,  changed  the  word  into  ‘rückgratloss

[spinelessly]’.¹

   In the instances already familiar to you which give an impression of

being  contractions  or  abbreviations,  what  we  have  before  us  are

corrections, additions or continuations, by means of which a second

purpose  makes  itself  felt  alongside  of  the  first.  ‘Facts  came  to

Vorschein  [light]  -  better  to  say  it  straight  out  -  they  were

Schweinereien  [disgusting];  well  then,  facts  came  to Vorschwein.’

‘Those  who  understand  this  can  be  counted on  the  fingers  of  one

hand - no, there’s really only one person who understands it, so: canbe counted on one finger.’ Or: ‘My husband can eat and drink what he

wants. But, as you know, I don’t put up with his wanting anything at all,

so: he can eat and drink what I want.’ In all these cases, then, the slip

of the tongue arises from the content of the disturbed intention itself or

is connected with it.

 

   ¹ This was in the German Reichstag in November 1908.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3170

 

      The  other  sort  of  relation  between  the  two  mutually  interfering

intentions seems puzzling. If the disturbing intention has nothing to do

with the disturbed one, where can it have come from and why is it that

it makes itself noticeable as a disturbance at this particular point? The

observation which can alone give us the answer to this shows that the

disturbance  arises  from  a  train  of  thought  which  has  occupied  the

person  concerned  a  short  time  before  and,  whether  it  has  already

been expressed in speech or not, produces this subsequent effect. It

must in fact, therefore, be described as a perseveration, though not

necessarily as the perseveration of spoken words. In this case too an

associative link between the disturbing and the disturbed intentions is

present; but it does not lie in their content but is artificially constructed,

often along extremely forced associative paths.

   Here is a simple example of this, derived from my own observation. I

once  met  two  Viennese  ladies  in  the  lovely  Dolomites,  who  were

dressed in walking clothes. I accompanied them part of the way, and

we discussed the pleasures and also the trials of spending a holiday in

that way. One of the ladies admitted that spending the day like that

entailed a good deal of discomfort. ‘It is certainly not at all pleasant’,

she  said,  ‘if  one  has  been  tramping  all  day  in  the  sun  and  has

perspired right through one’s blouse and chemise.’ In this sentence

she  had  to  overcome  a  slight  hesitation  at  one  point.  Then  she

continued: ‘But then when one gets "nach Hose" and can change. . . .’

This  slip  of  the  tongue  was  not  analysed  but  I  expect  you  can

understand it easily. The lady’s intention had obviously been to give a

more  complete  list  of  her  clothes:  blouse,  chemise  and Hose[drawers]. Reasons of propriety led her to omit any mention of the

‘Hose’. But in the next sentence, with its quite independent content,

the unspoken word emerged as a distortion of the similar-sounding

‘nach Hause [home]’.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3171

 

 

   We can now turn, however, to the main question, which we have

long  postponed,  of  what  sort  of  intentions  these  are,  which  find

expression in this unusual fashion as disturbers of other intentions.

Well, they are obviously of very different sorts, among which we must

look for the common factor. If we examine a number of examples with

this  in  view,  they  will  soon  fall  into  three  groups.  The  first  group

contains those cases in which the disturbing purpose is known to the

speaker and moreover had been noticed by him before he made the

slip of the tongue. Thus, in the ‘Vorschwein’ slip the speaker admitted

not only that he had formed the judgement ‘Schweinereien’ about the

events in question, but also that he had had the intention, from which

he  afterwards  drew  back,  of  expressing  his  judgement  in  words.  A

second  group  is  made  up  of  other  cases  in  which  the  disturbing

purpose is equally recognized as his by the speaker, but in which he

was unaware that it was active in him just before he made the slip.

Thus,  he  accepts  our  interpretation  of  his  slip,  but  nevertheless

remains  to  some  extent  surprised  at  it.  Instances  of  this  kind  of

attitude can perhaps be found in other sorts of parapraxes more easily

than in slips of the tongue. In a third group the interpretation of the

disturbing intention is vigorously rejected by the speaker; he not only

denies that it was active in him before he made the slip, but seeks to

maintain that it is entirely foreign to him. You will recall the example of

the ‘hiccough’ and the positively rude denial which I brought on myself

from the speaker by uncovering his disturbing intention. As you know,

we have not yet come to any agreement in our views on these cases. I

should pay no attention to the denial put forward by the proposer of

the toast and should persist in my interpretation unruffled, while you, Isuppose,  are  still  affected  by  his  protest  and  raise  the  question  of

whether we ought not to give up interpreting parapraxes of this kind

and regard them as purely physiological acts in the pre-analytic sense.

I can well imagine what it is that deters you. My interpretation carries

with it the hypothesis that intentions can find expression in a speaker

of which he himself knows nothing but which I am able to infer from

circumstantial evidence. You are brought up short in the face of such

a novel and momentous hypothesis. I can understand that, and I see

your point so far as that goes. But one thing is certain. If you want to

apply consistently the view of parapraxes which has been confirmed

by so many examples, you will have to make up your mind to accept

the strange hypothesis I have mentioned. If you cannot do that, you

will  have  once  more  to  abandon  the  understanding  of  parapraxes

which you have only just achieved.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3172

 

   Let us consider for a moment what it is that unites the three groups,

what it is that the three mechanisms of slips of the tongue have in

common.  It  is  fortunately  unmistakable.  In  the  first  two  groups  the

disturbing purpose is recognized by the speaker; furthermore, in the

first group that purpose announce: itself immediately before the slip.

But in both cases it is forced back. The speaker decides not to put it

into words, and after that the slip of the tongue occurs; after that, that

is to say, the purpose which has been forced back is put into words

against  the  speaker’s  will,  either  by  altering  the  expression  of  the

intention which he has permitted, or by mingling with it, or by actually

taking its place. This, then, is the mechanism of a slip of the tongue.

      On  my  view,  I  can  bring  what  happens  in  the third  group  into

complete harmony with the mechanism I have described. I have only

to  assume  that  what  distinguishes  these  three  groups  from  one

another is the differing extent to which the intention is forced back. In

the first group the intention is there and makes itself noticed before the

speaker’s remark; only then is it rejected; and it takes its revenge in

the slip of the tongue. In the second group the rejection goes further:the intention has already ceased to be noticeable before the remark is

made.  Strangely  enough,  this  does  not  in  the  least  prevent  it  from

playing its part in causing the slip. But this behaviour makes it easier

for us to explain what happens in the third group. I shall venture to

assume that a purpose can also find expression in a parapraxis when

it has been forced back and not noticed for a considerable time, for a

very long time perhaps, and can for that reason be denied straight out

by the speaker. But even if you leave the problem of the third group on

one side, you are bound to conclude from the observations we have

made  in  the  other  cases  that the  suppression  of  the  speaker’s

intention  to  say  something  is  the  indispensable  condition  for  the

occurrence of a slip of the tongue.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3173

 

      We  may  now  claim  to  have  made  further  advances  in  our

understanding of parapraxes. We know not only that they are mental

acts, in which we can detect sense and intention, not only that they

come  about  through  mutual  interference  between  two  different

intentions, but beyond this we know that one of these intentions must

have been in some way forced back from being put into effect before it

can manifest itself as a disturbance of the other intention. It must itself

have been disturbed before it can become a disturber. This does not

mean, of course, that we have yet achieved a complete explanation of

the phenomena which we call parapraxes. We see further questions

immediately cropping up, and we suspect in general that the further

our understanding goes the more occasions there will be for raising

fresh questions. We may ask, for instance, why things should not be

much  simpler.  If  the  intention  is  to  force  back  a  particular  purpose

instead of carrying it into effect, the forcing back should be successful,

so that the purpose does not manifest itself at all; or on the other hand

the forcing back might fail, so that the purpose that was to have been

forced back would manifest itself completely. But parapraxes are the

outcome of a compromise: they constitute a half-success and a half-

failure  for  each  of  the  two  intentions;  the  intention  which  is  beingchallenged is neither completely suppressed nor, apart from special

cases, carried through quite unscathed. We may conclude that special

conditions must prevail in order that an interference or compromise of

this kind shall come about, but we can form no conception of what

they can be. Nor do I think that we could discover these unknown

factors  by  going  deeper  into  the  study  of  parapraxes.  It  will  be

necessary, rather, to examine first yet other obscure regions of mental

life: it is only from analogies which we shall meet with there that we

shall find the courage to set up the hypotheses necessary for throwing

a  more  penetrating  light  upon  parapraxes.  And  one  thing  more.

Working from small indications, as we are constantly in the habit of

doing in the present field, brings its own dangers. There is a mental

disease,  ‘combinatory  paranoia’,  in  which  the  exploitation  of  small

indications like these is carried to unlimited lengths; and I will not of

course claim that conclusions built on such foundations are invariably

correct.  We  can  only  be  guarded  against  these  risks  by  the  broad

basis of our observations, the repetition of similar impressions from

the most varied spheres of mental life.

   At this point, therefore, we will leave the analysis of parapraxes. But

there is one point more to which I would draw your attention. I would

ask you to bear in mind as a model the manner in which we have

treated these phenomena. From this example you can learn the aims

of our psychology. We seek not merely to describe and to classify

phenomena, but to understand them as signs of an interplay of forces

in  the  mind,  as  a  manifestation  of  purposeful  intentions  working

concurrently  or  in  mutual  opposition.  We  are  concerned  with  a

dynamic view of mental phenomena. On our view the phenomena that

are  perceived  must  yield  in  importance  to  trends  which  are  only

hypothetical.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3174

 

 

   We shall therefore not enter more deeply into parapraxes, but we

may still undertake a cursory survey of the extent of this field, in thecourse of which we shall come once more upon things we already

know but shall also discover some novelties. In this survey I shall keep

to the division into three groups which I proposed to begin with: slips

of  the  tongue  together  with  their  cognate  forms  (slips  of  the  pen,

misreading and mishearing); forgetting, subdivided according to the

objects  forgotten  (proper  names,  foreign  words,  intentions  or

impressions); and bungled actions, mislaying and losing. Errors, in so

far as they concern us, fall under the headings partly of forgetting and

partly of bungled actions.

 

   We have already treated slips of the tongue in great detail, but there

are  a  few  more  points  to  be  added.  Slips  of  the  tongue  are

accompanied by certain minor emotional phenomena which are not

quite without interest. No one likes making slips of the tongue, and we

often fail to hear our own slips, though never other people’s. Slips of

the tongue are also in a certain sense contagious; it is not at all easy

to talk about slips of the tongue without making slips of the tongue

oneself.  The  most  trivial  forms  of  such  slips,  precisely  those  which

have  no  special  light  to  throw  on  hidden  mental  processes,  have

reasons which are nevertheless not hard to penetrate. For instance, if

someone  has  pronounced  a  long  vowel  short  on  account  of  a

disturbance affecting the word for some reason or other, he will soon

afterwards pronounce a subsequent short vowel long, thus making a

fresh slip of the tongue to compensate for the earlier one. In the same

way,  if  he  pronounces  a  diphthong  incorrectly  and  carelessly  (for

instance pronouncing an ‘eu’ or ‘oi’ as ‘ei’) he will try to make up for it

by changing a subsequent ‘ei’ into an ‘eu’ or ‘oi’. The decisive factor

here  seems  to  be  consideration  of  the  impression  made  on  the

audience, who are not to suppose that it is a matter of indifference to

the  speaker  how  he  treats  his  mother-tongue.  The  second,

compensating  distortion  actually  has  the  purpose  of  directing  the

hearer’s attention to the first one and of assuring him that the speaker

has noticed it too. The commonest, simplest and most trivial slips of

the  tongue  are  contractions  and  anticipations  which  occur  in

insignificant parts of speech. For instance, in a longish sentence one

may make a slip of the tongue which anticipates the last word of what

one  intends  to  say.  This  gives  an  impression  of  impatience  to  befinished  with  the  sentence,  and  is  evidence  in  general  of  a  certain

antipathy against communicating the sentence or against the whole of

one’s  remarks.  We  thus  arrive  at  marginal  cases  in  which  the

distinctions between the psycho-analytic view of slips of the tongue

and the ordinary physiological one melt into one another. It is to be

assumed that a purpose of disturbing the intention of the speech is

present in these cases but that it can only announce its presence and

not  what  it  itself  has  in  view.  The  disturbance  it  produces  then

proceeds in accordance with certain phonetic influences or associative

attractions and can be regarded as a distraction of the attention from

the  intention  of  the  speech.  But  neither  this  disturbance  of  the

attention  nor  the  inclinations  to  associate  which  have  become

operative touch on the essence of the process. This remains, in spite

of everything, the indication of the existence of an intention which is

disturbing  to  the  intention  of  the  speech,  though  the nature  of  this

disturbing intention cannot be guessed from its consequences, as is

possible in all the better defined cases of slips of the tongue.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3175

 

   Slips of the pen, to which I now pass, are so closely akin to slips of

the tongue that we have nothing new to expect from them. Perhaps

we may glean one little further point. The extremely common small

slips  of  the  pen,  contractions  and  anticipations  of  later  words

(especially of final words) point, once again, to a general dislike of

writing and impatience to be done with it. More marked products of

miswriting  enable  one  to  recognize  the  nature  and  aim  of  the

disturbing purpose. If one finds a slip of the pen in a letter, one knows

in general that there was something the matter with its author, but one

cannot always discover what was going on in him. A slip of the pen is

just as often overlooked by the person responsible as is a slip of the

tongue. The following is a noteworthy observation. There are, as we

know, people who are in the habit of reading through every letter they

write before sending it off. Others do not do this as a rule; but if, as an

exception, they do so they always come across some conspicuousslip  of  the  pen,  which  they  can  then  correct.  How  is  this  to  be

explained? It looks as though these people knew that they had made

a mistake in writing the letter. Are we really to believe this?

   An interesting problem attaches to the practical importance of slips

of the pen. You may perhaps remember the case of a murderer, H.,

who  found  the  means  of  obtaining  cultures  of  highly  dangerous

pathogenic organisms from scientific institutes by representing himself

as a bacteriologist. He then used these cultures for the purpose of

getting rid of his near connections by this most modern of methods.

Now on one occasion this man complained to the Directors of one of

these  institutes  that  the  cultures  that  had  been  sent  to  him  were

ineffective; but he made a slip of the pen, and instead of writing ‘in my

experiments  on  mice  or  guinea-pigs’  he  wrote  quite  clearly  ‘in  my

experiments on men’¹. The doctors at the institute were struck by the

slip, but, so far as I know, drew no conclusions from it. Well, what do

you think? Should not the doctors, on the contrary, have taken the slip

of the pen as a confession and started an investigation which would

have put an early stop to the murderer’s activities? Was not ignorance

of our view of parapraxes responsible in this case for an omission of

practical significance? Well, I think a slip of the pen like this would

certainly have seemed to me most suspicious; but something of great

importance stands in the way of using it as a confession. The matter is

not  as  simple  as  all  that.  The  slip  was  certainly  a  piece  of

circumstantial  evidence;  but  it  was  not  enough  in  itself  to  start  an

investigation.  It  is  true  that  the  slip  of  the  pen  said  that  he  was

concerned  with  thoughts  of  infecting  men,  but  it  did  not  make  it

possible to decide whether these thoughts were to be taken as a clear

intention to injure or as a phantasy of no practical importance. It is

even possible that a man who had made a slip like this would have

every  subjective  justification  for  denying  the  phantasy  and  would

repudiate it as something entirely foreign to him. You will understand

these possibilities still better when later on we come to consider the

distinction between psychical and material reality. But this is another

instance  of  a  parapraxis  acquiring  importance  from  subsequent

events.

 

   ¹ [‘Menschen’ instead of ‘Mäusen oder Meerschweinchen’.] 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3176

 

      With misreading  we  come  to  a  psychical  situation  which  differs

sensibly from that in slips of the tongue or pen. Here one of the two

mutually competing purposes is replaced by a sensory stimulation and

is perhaps on that account less resistant. What one is going to read is

not a derivative of one’s own mental life like something one proposes

to write. In a great majority of cases, therefore, a misreading consists

in a complete substitution. One replaces the word that is to be read by

another,  without  there  necessarily  being  any  connection  of  content

between the text and the product of the misreading, which depends as

a  rule  on  verbal  similarity.  The  best  member  of  this  group  is

Lichtenberg’s ‘Agamemnon’ for ‘angenommen’. If we want to discover

the disturbing purpose which produced the misreading we must leave

the text that has been misread entirely aside and we may begin the

analytic  investigation  with  the  two  questions:  what  is  the  first

association to the product of the misreading? and in what situation did

the misreading occur? Occasionally a knowledge of the latter is alone

enough  to  explain  the  misreading.  For  instance,  a  man  under  the

pressure of an imperious need was wandering about in a strange town

when he saw the word ‘Closet-House’ on a large notice board on the

first storey of a building. He had just enough time to feel surprised at

the  notice-board  being  placed  so  high  up  before  discovering  that,

strictly speaking, what he should have read was ‘Corset-House’. In

other  cases  a  misreading  precisely  of  the  kind  which  is  quite

independent of the content of the text may call for a detailed analysis

which cannot be carried through without practice in the technique of

psycho-analysis and without reliance on it. As a rule, however, it is not

so hard to find the explanation of a misreading: the word substituted

immediately  betrays,  as  in  the  Agamemnon  example,  the  circle  of

ideas from which the disturbance has arisen. In this time of war, for

instance, it is a very usual thing for the names of towns and generals

and  the  military  terms  that  are  constantly  buzzing  around  us  to  be

read wherever a similar word meets our eyes. Whatever interests and

concerns  us  puts  itself  in  the  place  of  what  is  strange  and  stilluninteresting. After-images of thoughts trouble new perceptions.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3177

 

   With misreading, too, there is no lack of cases of another sort, in

which the text of what is read itself arouses the disturbing purpose,

which thereupon, as a rule, turns it into its opposite. What we ought to

read is something unwished-for, and analysis will convince us that an

intense wish to reject what we have read must be held responsible for

its alteration.

   In the more frequent cases of misreading which we mentioned first,

we miss two factors to which we have assigned an important role in

the mechanism of parapraxes: a conflict between two purposes and a

forcing-back of one of them which takes its revenge by producing a

parapraxis. Not that anything contrary to this occurs in misreading. But

the prominence of the thought that leads to the misreading is far more

noticeable  than  the  forcing-back  which  it  may  have  experienced

previously.

 

   It is these two factors which we meet with most markedly in the

different  situations  in  which  parapraxes  of  forgetting  occur. The

forgetting  of  intentions  is  quite  unambiguous;  as  we  have  already

seen, its interpretation is not disputed even by laymen. The purpose

which disturbs the intention is in every instance a counter-intention, an

unwillingness; and all that remains for us to learn about it is why it has

not expressed itself in some other and less disguised manner. But the

presence of this counter-will is unquestionable. Sometimes, too, we

succeed  in  guessing  something  of  the  motives  which  compel  this

counter-will  to  conceal  itself;  acting  surreptitiously  by  means  of  the

parapraxis  it  always  achieves  its  aim,  whereas  it  would  be  sure  of

repudiation if it emerged as an open contradiction. If some important

change in the psychical situation takes place between the forming of

the  intention  and  its  carrying-out,  as  a  result  of  which  there  is  no

longer  any  question  of  the  intention  being  carried  out,  then  the

forgetting of the intention drops out of the category of parapraxes. Itno longer seems strange to have forgotten it, and we realize that it

would have been unnecessary to remember it: thereafter it becomes

permanently or temporarily extinct. The forgetting of an intention can

only be called a parapraxis if we cannot believe that the intention has

been interrupted in this latter way.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3178

 

   The instances of forgetting an intention are in general so uniform

and so perspicuous that for that very reason they are of no interest for

our investigation. Nevertheless there are two points at which we can

learn something new from a study of these parapraxes. Forgetting -

that is, failure to carry out an intention - points, as we have said, to a

counter-will that is hostile to it. This is no doubt true; but our enquiries

show that the counter-will can be of two kinds - direct or indirect. What

I mean by the latter will best appear from one or two examples. If a

patron forgets to put in a word with a third person on behalf of his

protégé  this  may  happen  because  he  is  not  really  very  much

interested in the protégé and therefore has no great desire to speak

on his behalf. In any case, that is how the protégé will understand the

patron’s forgetting. But things may be more complicated. The counter-

will in the patron against carrying out the intention may come from

another direction and may be aimed at quite a different point. It may

have  nothing  to  do  with  the protégé  but  may  perhaps  be  directed

against the third person to whom the recommendation was to have

been made. So you see from this once more the doubts that stand in

the way of a practical application of our interpretations. In spite of the

correct  interpretation  of  the  forgetting,  the protégé  is  in  danger  of

being  too  distrustful  and  of  doing  his  patron  a  grave  injustice.  Or,

supposing someone forgets an appointment which he has promised

someone  else  to  keep,  the  most  frequent  reason  for  it  will  be,  no

doubt, a direct disinclination to meeting this person. But in such a case

analysis might show that the disturbing purpose did not relate to him

but was directed against the place at which the meeting was planned

to  happen  and  was  avoided  on  account  of  a  distressing  memoryattaching  to  it.  Or,  again,  if  someone  forgets  to  post  a  letter,  the

counter-purpose may be based on the contents of the letter; but it is

by no means out of the question that the letter may be harmless in

itself  and  may  only  be  subject  to  the  counter-purpose  because

something about it recalls another letter which had been written on

some earlier occasion and which offered the counter-will a direct point

of  attack.  It  can  be  said,  therefore,  that  here  the  counter-will  was

transferred from the earlier letter, which justified it, to the present one,

which it had in fact no grounds for concern about. You see, then, that

we must practise restraint and foresight in applying our interpretations,

justified as they are: things that are psychologically equivalent may in

practice have a great variety of meanings.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3179

 

   Phenomena such as these last may seem to you most unusual, and

you will perhaps be inclined to suppose that an ‘indirect’ counter-will

already  indicates  that  the  process  is  a  pathological  one.  But  I  can

assure you that it occurs as well within the limits of what is normal and

healthy. Moreover you should not misunderstand me. I am far from

admitting  that  our  analytic  interpretations  are  untrustworthy.  The

ambiguities  in  the  forgetting  of  intentions  which  I  have  been

mentioning exist only so long as we have not made an analysis of the

case  and  are  only  making  our  interpretations  on  the  basis  of  our

general assumptions. If we carry out an analysis upon the person in

question,  we  invariably  learn  with  sufficient  certainty  whether  the

counter-will is a direct one or what other origin it may have.

   The second point I have in mind is this. If in a large majority of

instances  we  find  confirmation  of  the  fact  that  the  forgetting  of  an

intention goes back to a counter-will, we grow bold enough to extend

the  solution  to  another  set  of  instances  in  which  the  person  under

analysis does not confirm but denies the counter-will we have inferred.

Take as examples of this such extremely common events as forgetting

to return books one has been lent or to pay bills or debts. We shall

venture to insist to the person concerned that an intention exists inhim to keep the books and not to pay the debts, while he will deny this

intention but will not be able to produce any other explanation of his

behaviour. Thereupon we shall go on to say that he has this intention

but knows nothing about it, but that it is enough for us that it reveals its

presence by producing the forgetting in him. He may repeat to us that

he has in fact forgotten. You will now recognize the situation as one in

which  we  found  ourselves  once  before.  If  we  want  to  pursue  our

interpretations  of  parapraxes,  which  have  so  frequently  proved

justified, to a consistent conclusion, we are forced to the inescapable

hypothesis  that  there  are  purposes  in  people  which  can  become

operative  without  their  knowing  about  them.  But  this  brings  us  into

opposition  to  all  the  views  that  dominate  both  ordinary  life  and

psychology.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3180

 

   The forgetting of proper names and foreign names, as well as of

foreign  words,  can  similarly  be  traced  back  to  a  counter-intention,

which  is  aimed  either  directly  or  indirectly  against  the  name

concerned.  I  have  already  given  you  several  instances  of  direct

dislike. But indirect causation is particularly frequent in these cases

and can usually only be established by careful analyses. For instance,

during the present war, which has obliged us to give up so many of

our former enjoyments, our power of remembering proper names has

suffered greatly as the result of the strangest associations. A short

time  ago  I  found  that  I  was  unable  to  reproduce  the  name  of  the

innocent Moravian town of Bisenz; and analysis showed that what was

responsible for this was not any direct hostility to it but its resemblance

in sound to the name of the Palazzo Bisenzi in Orvieto which I had

repeatedly enjoyed visiting in the past. Here for the first time, in this

reason  for  objecting  to  remembering  a  name,  we  come  across  a

principle  which  will  later  on  reveal  its  enormous  importance  for  the

causation  of  neurotic  symptoms:  the  memory’s  disinclination  to

remembering anything which is connected with feelings of unpleasure

and  the  reproduction  of  which  would  renew  the  unpleasure.  Thisintention to avoid unpleasure arising from a recollection or from other

psychical  acts,  this  psychical  flight  from  unpleasure,  may  be

recognized as the ultimate operative motive not only for the forgetting

of names but for many other parapraxes, such as omissions, errors,

and so on.

      The  forgetting  of  names,  however,  seems  particularly  facilitated

  psycho-physiologically,  and  for  that  reason  cases  occur  in  which

interference  by  the  unpleasure  motive  cannot  be  confirmed.  If

someone has a tendency to forget names, analytic investigation will

show that names escape him not only because he does not like them

themselves or because they remind him of something disagreeable,

but also because in his case the same name belongs to another circle

of associations with which he is more intimately related. The name is,

as  it  were,  anchored  there  and  is  kept  from  contact  with  the  other

associations which have been momentarily activated. If you recall the

tricks of mnemotechnics, you will realize with some surprise that the

same chains of association which are deliberately laid down in order

to prevent names from being forgotten can also lead to our forgetting

them.  The  most  striking  example  of  this  is  afforded  by  the  proper

names of persons, which naturally possess quite different psychical

importance for different people. Let us, for instance, take a first name

such as Theodore. To one of you it will have no special meaning, to

another it will be the name of his father or brother or of a friend, or his

own  name.  Analytic  experience  will  then  show  you  that  the  first  of

these people is in no danger of forgetting that a particular stranger

bears  this  name,  whereas  the  others  will  be  constantly  inclined  to

withhold from strangers a name which seems to them reserved for

intimate  connections.  If  you  now  bear  in  mind  that  this  associative

inhibition may coincide with the operation of the unpleasure principle

and, besides that, with an indirect mechanism, you will be in a position

to form an adequate idea of the complications in the causation of the

temporary forgetting of a name. An appropriate analysis will however

unravel every one of these tangles for you.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3181