such developments, he could bring it into use before the signs of an

unfavourable development set in. Thus, with the help of analysis, he

could  have  a  prophylactic  influence  on  the  child  while  it  was  still

healthy. On the other hand, he could detect the first indications of a

development  in  the  direction  of  neurosis  and  could  guard  the  child

against its further development at a time at which, for various reasons,

a child is never taken to see a doctor. One cannot but think that a

psycho-analytic activity such as this on the part of the educator - and

of the similarly placed pastoral worker in protestant countries - would

inevitably  be  of  inestimable  value  and  might  often  make  the

intervention of a doctor unnecessary.

   The only question is whether the practice of psycho-analysis may

not  have  as  its  prerequisite  a  medical  training,  from  which  the

educator and the pastoral worker must remain debarred, or whether

there  may  be  other  considerations  which  are  opposed  to  the

suggestion that the technique of psycho-analysis should be confided

to any but a doctor’s hands. I confess that I can see no ground for any

such reservations. The practice of psycho-analysis calls much less for

medical training than for psychological instruction and a free human

outlook. The majority of doctors are not equipped to practise psycho-

analysis  and  have  completely  failed  to  grasp  the  value  of  that

therapeutic  procedure.  The  educator  and  the  pastoral  worker  are

bound  by  the  standards  of  their  profession  to  exercise  the  same

consideration,  care  and  restraint  as  are  usually  practised  by  the

doctor,  and  apart  from  this  their  association  with  young  people

perhaps makes them better fitted to understand these young people’s

mental  life.  But  in  both  cases  the  only  guarantee  of  the  harmless

application of the analytic procedure must depend on the personality

of the analyst.

 


              Introduction To Pfister's The Psycho-Analytic Method

                                                                                      2636

 

      Where  a  case  borders  upon  mental  abnormality,  the  analytic

educator  will  be  bound  to  make  himself  familiar  with  the  most

necessary psychiatric knowledge, and furthermore to call a doctor intoconsultation  when  the  diagnosis  and  prognosis  of  the  disturbance

appear  doubtful.  In  a  number  of  cases  it  will  only  be  possible  to

achieve success if there is collaboration between the educator and the

doctor.

      In  one  single  respect  an  educator’s  responsibility  may  perhaps

exceed  that  of  a  doctor.  The  doctor  has  as  a  rule  to  deal  with

psychical structures which have already become rigid and he will find

in the patient’s established individuality a limit to his own achievement

but at the same time a guarantee of the patient’s capacity to stand

alone. The educator, however, works upon material which is plastic

and open to every impression, and he must keep before himself an

obligation not to mould the young mind in accordance with his own

personal ideals but rather according to his subject’s dispositions and

possibilities.

   Let us hope that the application of psycho-analysis to the service of

education  will  quickly  fulfil  the  hopes  which  educators  and  doctors

may rightly attach to it. A book such as this of Pfister’s, which seeks to

acquaint educators with analysis, will then be able to count on the

gratitude of later generations.

 

VIENNA, February 1913

                                                                                       2637

 

          PREFACE TO BOURKE’S SCATALOGIC RITES OF ALL

                                        NATIONS

                                        (1913)

 


                                                                                      2638

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2639

 

          PREFACE TO BOURKE’S SCATALOGIC RITES OF ALL

                                        NATIONS

 

While I was living in Paris in 1885 as a pupil of Charcot, what chiefly

attracted  me,  apart  from  the  great  man’s  own  lectures,  were  the

demonstrations and addresses given by Brouardel. He used to show

us  from  post-mortem  material  at  the  morgue  how  much  there  was

which deserved to be known by doctors but of which science preferred

to take no notice. On one occasion he was discussing the indications

which enabled one to judge the social rank, character and origin of an

unidentified  body,  and  I  heard  him  say:  ‘Les  genoux  sales  sont  le

signe  d’une  fille  honnête.’  He  was  using  a  girl’s  dirty  knees  as

evidence of her virtue!

   The lesson that bodily cleanliness is far more readily associated with

vice  than  with  virtue  often  occurred  to  me  later  on,  when  psycho-

analytic work made me acquainted with the way in which civilized men

to-day deal with the problem of their physical nature. They are clearly

embarrassed by anything that reminds them too much of their animal

origin. They are trying to emulate the ‘more perfected angels’ in the

last scene of Faust, who complain:

 

                                                                Uns bleibt ein Erdenrest
                                                                zu tragen peinlich,
                                                                und wär’ er von Asbest,                                                                er ist nicht reinlich.¹

 

   Since, however, they must necessarily remain far removed from

such perfection, men have chosen to evade the predicament by so far

as possible denying the very existence of this inconvenient ‘trace of

the Earth’, by concealing it from one another, and by withholding from

it  the  attention  and  care  which  it  might  claim  as  an  integrating

component  of  their  essential  being.  The  wiser  course  would

undoubtedly have been to admit its existence and to dignify it as much

as its nature will allow.

 

   ¹ [Literally: ‘We still have a trace of the Earth, which is distressing to bear; and though it

were of asbestos it is not cleanly.’]
 


              Preface To Bourke's Scatalogic Rites Of All Nations

                                                                                      2640

 

      It  is  far  from  being  a  simple  matter  to  survey  or  describe  the

consequences involved in this way of treating the ‘distressing trace of

the  Earth’,  of  which  the  sexual  and  excretory  functions  may  be

considered the nucleus. It will be enough to mention a single one of

these consequences, the one with which we are most concerned here:

the fact that science is prohibited from dealing with these proscribed

aspects  of  human  life,  so  that  anyone  who  studies  such  things  is

regarded as scarcely less ‘improper’ than someone who actually does

improper things.

      Nevertheless,  psycho-analysis  and  folklore  have  not  allowed

themselves to be deterred from transgressing these prohibitions and

have been able as a result to teach us all kinds of things that are

indispensable  for  an  understanding  of  human  nature.  If  we  limit

ourselves here to what has been learnt about the excretory functions,

it may be said that the chief finding from psycho-analytic research has

been the fact that the human infant is obliged to recapitulate during

the early part of his development the changes in the attitude of the

human  race  towards  excremental  matters  which  probably  had  their

start when homo sapiens first raised himself off Mother Earth. In the

earliest years of infancy there is as yet no trace of shame about theexcretory functions or of disgust at excreta. Small children show great

interest in these, just as they do in others of their bodily secretions;

they like occupying themselves with them and can derive many kinds

of pleasure from doing so. Excreta, regarded as parts of a child’s own

body  and  as  products  of  his  own  organism,  have  a  share  in  the

esteem - the narcissistic esteem, as we should call it - with which he

regards everything relating to his self. Children are, indeed, proud of

their  own  excretions  and  make  use  of  them  to  help  in  asserting

themselves against adults. Under the influence of its upbringing, the

child’s  coprophilic  instincts  and  inclinations  gradually  succumb  to

repression; it learns to keep them secret, to be ashamed of them and

to feel disgust at their objects. Strictly speaking, however, the disgust

never  goes  so  far  as  to  apply  to  a  child’s  own  excretions,  but  is

content  with  repudiating  them  when  they  are  the  products  of  other

people. The interest which has hitherto been attached to excrement is

carried  over  on  to  other  objects  -  for  instance,  from  faeces  on  to

money, which is, of course, late in acquiring significance for children.

Important constituents in the formation of character are developed, or

strengthened, from the repression of coprophilic inclinations.

 


              Preface To Bourke's Scatalogic Rites Of All Nations

                                                                                      2641

 

   Psycho-analysis further shows that, to begin with, excremental and

sexual  instincts  are  not  distinct  from  each  other  in  children.  The

divorce  between  them  only  occurs  later  and  it  remains  incomplete.

Their  original  affinity,  which  is  established  by  the  anatomy  of  the

human  body,  still  makes  itself  felt  in  many  ways  in  normal  adults.

Finally,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  these  developments  can  no

more  be  expected  to  yield  a  perfect  result  than  any  others.  Some

portion  of  the  old  preferences  persist,  some  part  of  the  coprophilic

inclinations continue to operate in later life and are expressed in the

neuroses, perversions and bad habits of adults.

   Folklore has adopted a quite different method of research, and yet it

has reached the same results as psycho-analysis. It shows us how

incompletely  the  repression  of  coprophilic  inclinations  has  beencarried out among various peoples at various times and how closely at

other  cultural  levels  the  treatment  of  excretory  substances

approximates to that practised by children. It also demonstrates the

persistent and indeed ineradicable nature of coprophilic interests, by

displaying to our astonished gaze the multiplicity of applications - in

magical ritual, in tribal customs, in observances of religious cults and

in the art of healing - by which the old esteem for human excretions

has  found  new  expression.  The  connection,  too,  with  sexual  life

seems to be fully preserved.

      This  expansion  of  our  knowledge  clearly  involves  no  risk  to  our

morality.  The  major  part  of  what  is  known  of  the  role  played  by

excretions in human life has been brought together in J. G. Bourke’s

Scatalogic  Rites  of  All  Nations.  To  make  it  accessible  to  German

readers  is  therefore  not  only  a  courageous  but  also  a  meritorious

undertaking.

                                                                                       2642

 

            THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SEQUENCES OF VOWELS

                                        (1911)

 

Objections have no doubt often been raised to the assertion made by

Stekel  that  in  dreams  and  associations  names  which  have  to  be

concealed seem to be replaced by others that resemble them only in

containing  the  same  sequence  of  vowels.  A  striking  analogy  is,

however,  provided  from  the  history  of  religion.  Among  the  ancient

Hebrews  the  name  of  God  was  taboo;  it  might  neither  be  spoken

aloud nor written down. (This is far from being an isolated example of

the  special  significance  of  names  in  archaic  civilizations.)  This

prohibition  was  so  implicitly  obeyed  that  to  this  very  day  the

vocalization  of  the  four  consonants  in  God’s  name  ()  remains

unknown. It was, however, pronounced ‘Jehovah’, being supplied with

the vowels of the word ‘Adonai’ (‘Lord’), against which there was no

such prohibition. (Reinach, 1905-12, 1, 1.)

                                                                                       2643

 

                    ‘GREAT IS DIANA OF THE EPHESIANS’

                                        (1911)

 

The ancient Greek city of Ephesus in Asia Minor, for the exploration of

whose ruins, incidentally, our Austrian archaeology has to be thanked,

was especially celebrated in antiquity for its splendid temple dedicated

to  Artemis  (Diana).  Ionic  invaders  -  perhaps  in  the  eighth  century

before Christ - conquered the city, which had long been inhabited by

people of Asiatic race, and found in it the cult of an ancient mother

goddess who possibly bore the name of Oupis, and identified her with

Artemis,  a  deity  of  their  home  land.  The  evidence  of  excavations

shows that in the course of centuries several temples were erected on

the same site in honour of the goddess. It was the fourth of these

temples that was destroyed by a fire started by the crazy Herostratus

in the year 356, during the night in which Alexander the Great was

born. It was rebuilt, more magnificent than ever. With its concourse of

priests, magicians and pilgrims, and with its shops in which amulets,

mementoes  and  oblations  were  offered  for  sale,  the  commercial

metropolis of Ephesus might be compared to a modern Lourdes.

   In about A.D. 54, the apostle Paul spent several years at Ephesus.

He preached, performed miracles, and found a large following among

the  people.  He  was  persecuted  and  accused  by  the  Jews;  and  he

separated  from  them  and  founded  an  independent  Christian

community. In consequence of the spread of his doctrine, there was a

falling-off  in  the  trade  of  the  goldsmiths,  who  used  to  make

mementoes of the holy place - small figures of Artemis and models of

the temple - for the faithful and the pilgrims who came from all over

the world.¹ Paul was much too strict a Jew to allow the old deity to

survive  under  another  name,  to  re-baptize  her,  as  the  Ionic

conquerors had done with the goddess Oupis. So it was that the pious

artisans and artists of the city became uneasy about their goddess as

well  as  about  their  earnings.  They  revolted,  and,  with  endlessly

repeated cries of ‘Great is Diana of the Ephesians’, streamed through

the main street, called ‘Arcadian’, to the theatre, where their leader,Demetrius,  delivered  an  incendiary  speech  against  the  Jews  and

against Paul. The authorities succeeded with difficulty in quelling the

tumult  by  the  assurance  that  the  majesty  of  the  goddess  was

unassailable and out of reach of any attack.²

 

   ¹ See also Goethe’s poem (Sophienausgabe, 2, 195).
   ² Acts, xix.

 


                        'Great Is Diana Of The Ephesians'

                                                                                      2644

 

   The church founded by Paul at Ephesus did not long remain faithful

to  him.  It  came  under  the  influence  of  a  man  named  John,  whose

personality has set the critics some hard problems. He may have been

the author of the Apocalypse, which teems with invectives against the

apostle Paul. Tradition identifies him with the apostle John, to whom

the fourth gospel is attributed. According to that gospel, when Jesus

was on the cross he called out to his favourite disciple, pointing to

Mary: ‘Behold thy mother!’ And from that moment John took Mary to

him.  So  when  John  went  to  Ephesus,  Mary  accompanied  him.

Accordingly, alongside of the church of the apostle in Ephesus, there

was built the first basilica in honour of the new mother-goddess of the

Christians. Its existence is attested as early as in the fourth century.

Now once again the city had its great goddess, and, apart from her

name, there was little change. The goldsmiths, too, recovered their

work of making models of the temple and images of the goddess for

the new pilgrims. The function of Artemis expressed by the attribute of

Κουροτρό fος,¹ however, was handed over to a St. Artemidorus, who

took on the care of women in labour.

   Then came the conquest of the city by Islam, and finally its ruin and

abandonment owing to the river on which it stood becoming choked

with  sand.  But  even  then  the  great  goddess  of  Ephesus  had  not

abandoned her claims. In our own days she appeared as a saintly

virgin to a pious German girl, Katharina Emmerich, at Dülmen. She

described to her her journey to Ephesus, the furnishings of the house

in which she had lived there and in which she had died, the shape of

her bed, and so on. And both the house and the bed were in factfound exactly as the virgin had described them, and they are once

more the goal of the pilgrimages of the faithful.

 

   ¹ [‘Rearer of boys.’]

                                                                                       2645

 

                        PREFACE TO MAXIM STEINER’S

            THE PSYCHICAL DISORDERS OF MALE POTENCY

                                        (1913)

 

The author of this little monograph, which deals with the pathology

and treatment of psychical impotence in males, is one of the small

band of physicians who early recognized the importance of psycho-

analysis  for  their  special  branch  of  medicine  and  who  have  never

since ceased to perfect themselves in its theory and technique. We

are aware that only a small part of neurotic ailments - which we have

now  come  to  know  as  the  outcome  of  disturbances  of  the  sexual

function - are dealt with in neuropathology itself. The greater number

of them find a place among the disorders of the particular organ which

is the victim of a neurotic disturbance. It is therefore expedient and

proper  that  the  treatment  of  these  symptoms  or  syndromes  should

also be the business of the specialist, who is alone capable of making

a differential diagnosis between a neurotic and an organic illness, who

can draw the line, in the case of mixed forms, between their organic

and neurotic elements, and who can in general give us information on

the way in which the two factors in the disease mutually reinforce each

other. But if ‘nervous’ organic diseases are not to fall into neglect as

being mere appendages of the material disorders of the same organ -

a neglect which, from their frequency and practical importance, they

are far from meriting - the specialist, whether he is concerned with the

stomach, the heart or the urogenitary system, must, in addition to his

general medical knowledge and his specialized attainments, also be

able to make use, for his own field of work, of the lines of approach,

the discoveries and the techniques of the nerve specialist.

   A great therapeutic advance will have been made when specialists

no  longer  dismiss  a  patient  suffering  from  a  nervous  ailment  in  an

organ  with  a  pronouncement  such  as:  ‘There’s  nothing  wrong  with

you; it’s simply nerves’, or with the not much better further advice: ‘Go

to  a  nerve  specialist;  he’ll  order  you  a  light  course  of  cold-water

treatment.’ No doubt, too, we shall require the specialist in any organto be capable of understanding and treating nervous disorders in his

field, rather than expect the nerve-specialist to be trained into being a

universal  specialist  in  every  organ  in  which  neuroses  produce

symptoms. And it may accordingly be anticipated that only neuroses

with mainly psychical symptoms will remain in the sphere of the nerve

specialist.

   We may hope, therefore, that the time is not far distant when it will

be generally recognized that no sort of nervous disturbance can be

understood and treated without the help of the line of approach and

often  of  the  technique  of  psycho-analysis.  Such  an  assertion  may

sound to-day like a piece of presumptuous exaggeration; but I venture

to prophesy that it is destined to become a platitude. It will, however,

always be to the credit of the author of the present work that he has

not waited for this to happen before admitting psycho-analysis as a

treatment of the nervous ailments within his own specialized branch of

medicine.

 

VIENNA, March 1913.

                                                                                       2646

 

                                TOTEM AND TABOO

 

Some Points of Agreement between the Mental Lives of Savages and

                                      Neurotics

 

                                  (1913 [1912-13])

 


                                                                                      2647

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2648

 

                                      PREFACE

 

The four essays that follow were originally published (under a heading

which serves as the present book’s sub-title) in the first two volumes

of Imago, a periodical issued under my direction. They represent a

first attempt on my part at applying the point of view and the findings

of psycho-analysis to some unsolved problems of social psychology

[Völkerpsychologie]. Thus they offer a methodological contrast on the

one  hand  to  Wilhelm  Wundt’s  extensive  work,  which  applies  the

hypotheses and working methods of non-analytic psychology to the

same purposes, and on the other hand to the writings of the Zurich

school of psycho-analysis, which endeavour, on the contrary, to solve

the problems of individual psychology with the help of material derived

from social psychology. (Cf. Jung, 1912 and 1913.) I readily confess

that it was from these two sources that I received the first stimulus for

my own essays.

   I am fully conscious of the deficiencies of these studies. I need not

mention those which are necessarily characteristic of pioneering work;

but others require a word of explanation. The four essays collected inthese  pages  aim  at  arousing  the  interest  of  a  fairly  wide  circle  of

educated  readers,  but  they  cannot  in  fact  be  understood  and

appreciated except by those few who are no longer strangers to the

essential  nature  of  psycho-analysis.  They  seek  to  bridge  the  gap

between students of such subjects as social anthropology, philology

and folklore on the one hand, and psycho-analysts on the other. Yet

they cannot offer to either side what each lacks - to the former an

adequate initiation into the new psychological technique or to the latter

a  sufficient  grasp  of  the  material  that  awaits  treatment.  They  must

therefore rest content with attracting the attention of the two parties

and with encouraging a belief that occasional co-operation between

them could not fail to be of benefit to research.

   It will be found that the two principal themes from which the title of

this little book is derived - totems and taboos - have not received the

same treatment. The analysis of taboos is put forward as an assured

and  exhaustive  attempt  at  the  solution  of  the  problem.  The

investigation of totemism does no more than declare that ‘here is what

psycho-analysis can at the moment contribute towards elucidating the

problem of the totem’. The difference is related to the fact that taboos

still  exist  among  us.  Though  expressed  in  a  negative  form  and

directed  towards  another  subject-matter,  they  do  not  differ  in  their

psychological  nature  from  Kant’s  ‘categorical  imperative’,  which

operates in a compulsive fashion and rejects any conscious motives.

Totemism, on the contrary, is something alien to our contemporary

feelings - a religio-social institution which has been long abandoned

as  an  actuality  and  replaced  by  newer  forms.  It  has  left  only  the

slightest traces behind it in the religions, manners and customs of the

civilized  peoples  of  to-day  and  has  been  subject  to  far-reaching

modifications even among the races over which it still holds sway. The

social and technical advances in human history have affected taboos

far less than the totem.

   An attempt is made in this volume to deduce the original meaning of

totemism from the vestiges remaining of it in childhood from the hints

of it which emerge in the course of the growth of our own children. The

close connection between totems and taboos carries us a step further

along the path towards the hypothesis presented in these pages; and

if in the end that hypothesis bears a highly improbable appearance,that need be no argument against the possibility of its approximating

more or less closely to the reality which it is so hard to reconstruct.

 

ROME, September 1913

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2649

 

                PREFACE TO THE HEBREW TRANSLATION

 

No reader of this book will find it easy to put himself in the emotional

position of an author who is ignorant of the language of holy writ, who

is completely estranged from the religion of his fathers - as well as

from every other religion - and who cannot take a share in nationalist

ideals, but who has yet never repudiated his people, who feels that he

is in his essential nature a Jew and who has no desire to alter that

nature. If the question were put to him: ‘Since you have abandoned all

these common characteristics of your countrymen, what is there left to

you that is Jewish?’ he would reply: ‘A very great deal, and probably

its very essence.’ He could not now express that essence clearly in

words;  but  some  day,  no  doubt,  it  will  become  accessible  to  the

scientific mind.

   Thus it is an experience of a quite special kind for such an author

when a book of his is translated into the Hebrew language and put into

the hands of readers for whom that historic idiom is a living tongue: a

book, moreover, which deals with the origin of religion and morality,

though it adopts no Jewish standpoint and makes no exceptions in

favour of Jewry. The author hopes, however, that he will be at one

with  his  readers  in  the  conviction  that  unprejudiced  science  cannot

remain a stranger to the spirit of the new Jewry.

 

VIENNA, December 1930

 


                                                                                      2650

 

                                TOTEM AND TABOO 

                                            I

 

                          THE HORROR OF INCEST

 

Prehistoric man, in the various stages of his development, is known to

us through the inanimate monuments and implements which he has

left behind, through the information about his art, his religion and his

attitude towards life which has come to us either directly or by way of

tradition handed down in legends, myths and fairy tales, and through

the relics of his mode of thought which survive in our own manners

and customs. But apart from this, in a certain sense he is still our

contemporary. There are men still living who, as we believe, stand

very  near  to  primitive  man,  far  nearer  than  we  do,  and  whom  we

therefore regard as his direct heirs and representatives. Such is our

view  of  those  whom  we  describe  as  savages  or  half-savages;  and

their mental life must have a peculiar interest for us if we are right in

seeing  in  it  a  well-preserved  picture  of  an  early  stage  of  our  own

development.

   If that supposition is correct, a comparison between the psychology

of primitive peoples, as it is taught by social anthropology, and the

psychology of neurotics, as it has been revealed by psycho-analysis,

will be bound to show numerous points of agreement and will throw

new light upon familiar facts in both sciences.

 

   For external as well as for internal reasons, I shall select as the

basis  of  this  comparison  the  tribes  which  have  been  described  by

anthropologists as the most backward and miserable of savages, the

aborigines of Australia, the youngest continent, in whose fauna, too,

we  can  still  observe  much  that  is  archaic  and  that  has  perished

elsewhere.

   The Australian aborigines are regarded as a distinct race, showing

neither  physical  nor  linguistic  relationship  with  their  nearest

neighbours, the Melanesian, Polynesian and Malayan peoples. They

do not build houses or permanent shelters; they do not cultivate the

soil; they keep no domesticated animals except the dog; they are not

even acquainted with the art of making pottery. They live entirely uponthe flesh of all kinds of animals which they hunt, and upon roots which

they dig. Kings or chiefs are unknown among them; communal affairs

are decided by a council of elders. It is highly doubtful whether any

religion, in the shape of a worship of higher beings, can be attributed

to  them.  The  tribes  in  the  interior  of  the  continent,  who  have  to

struggle against the hardest conditions of existence as a result of the

scarcity  of  water,  appear  to  be  more  primitive  in  all  respects  than

those living near the coast.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2651

 

   We should certainly not expect that the sexual life of these poor

naked  cannibals  would  be  moral  in  our  sense  or  that  their  sexual

instincts would be subjected to any great degree of restriction. Yet we

find that they set before themselves with the most scrupulous care

and the most painful severity the aim of avoiding incestuous sexual

relations. Indeed, their whole social organization seems to serve that

purpose or to have been brought into relation with its attainment.

      Among  the  Australians  the  place  of  all  the  religious  and  social

institutions  which  they  lack  is  taken  by  the  system  of  ‘totemism’.

Australian tribes fall into smaller divisions, or clans, each of which is

named  after  its  totem.  What  is  a  totem?  It  is  as  a  rule  an  animal

(whether  edible  and  harmless  or  dangerous  and  feared)  and  more

rarely a plant or a natural phenomenon (such as rain or water), which

stands in a peculiar relation to the whole clan. In the first place, the

totem is the common ancestor of the clan; at the same time it is their

guardian  spirit  and  helper,  which  sends  them  oracles  and,  if

dangerous  to  others,  recognizes  and  spares  its  own  children.

Conversely, the clansmen are under a sacred obligation (subject to

automatic  sanctions)  not  to  kill  of  destroy  their  totem  and  to  avoid

eating its flesh (or deriving benefit from it in other ways). The totemic

character is inherent, not in some individual animal or entity, but in all

the  individuals  of  a  given  class.  From  time  to  time  festivals  are

celebrated at which the clansmen represent or imitate the motions and

attributes of their totem in ceremonial dances. 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2652

 

   The totem may be inherited either through the female or through the

male line. It is possible that originally the former method of descent

prevailed  everywhere  and  was  only  subsequently  replaced  by  the

latter. An Australian’s relation to his totem is the basis of all his social

obligations: it overrides on the one hand his tribal membership and on

the other hand his blood relationships.¹

   The totem is not attached to one particular place. The clansmen are

distributed in different localities and live peacefully side by side with

members of other totem clans.²

 

   ¹ ‘The Totem bond is stronger than the bond of blood or family in the modern sense.’

(Frazer, 1910, 1, 53.)

   ² This highly condensed summary of the totemic system must necessarily be subject to

further comments and qualifications. The word ‘totem’ was first introduced in 1791 (in the form
‘totam’) from the North American Indians by an Englishman, J. Long. The subject itself has
gradually attracted great scientific interest and has produced a copious literature, from which I
may select as works of capital importance J. G. Frazer’s four-volume Totemism and Exogamy
(1910) and the writings of Andrew Lang, e.g. The Secret of the Totem (1905). The merit of
having been the first to recognize the importance of totemism for human prehistory lies with a
Scotsman, John Ferguson McLennan (1869-70). Totemic institutions were, or still are, to be
observed in operation, not only among the Australians, but also among the North American
Indians, among the peoples of Oceania, in the East Indies and in a large part of Africa. It may
also be inferred from certain vestigial remains, for which it is otherwise hard to account, that
totemism existed at one time among the Aryan and Semitic aboriginal races of Europe and
Asia. Many investigators are therefore inclined to regard it as a necessary phase of human
development which has been passed through universally.
   How did prehistoric men come to adopt totems? How, that is, did they come to make the
fact of their being descended from one animal or another the basis of their social obligations
and, as we shall see presently, of their sexual restrictions? There are numerous theories on
the  subject  -  of  which  Wundt  (1906)  has  given  an  epitome  for  German  readers  -  but  no
agreement. It is my intention to devote a special study before long to the problem of totemism,
in which I shall attempt to solve it by the help of a psycho-analytic line of approach. (See the
fourth essay in this work.)
   Not only, however, is the theory of totemism a matter of dispute; the facts themselves are
scarcely capable of being expressed in general terms as I have tried to do in the text above.
There is scarcely a statement which does not call for exceptions or contradictions. But it must
not  be  forgotten  that  even  the  most  primitive  and  conservative  races  are  in  some  sense
ancient races and have a long past history behind them during which their original conditions
of life have been subject to much development and distortion. So it comes about that in those
races  in  which  totemism  exists  to-day,  we  may  find  it  in  various  stages  of  decay  anddisintegration or in the process of transition to other social and religious institutions, or again
in a stationary condition which may differ greatly from the original one. The difficulty in this last
case is to decide whether we should regard the present state of things as a true picture of the
significant features of the past or as a secondary distortion of them.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2653

 

 

   And now we come at last to the characteristic of the totemic system

which has attracted the interest of psycho-analysts. In almost every

place where we find totems we also find a law against persons of the

same  totem  having  sexual  relations  with  one  another  and

consequently  against  their  marrying.  This,  then,  is  ‘exogamy’,  an

institution related to totemism.

   Strictly enforced as it is, this prohibition is a remarkable one. There

is nothing in the concept or attributes of the totem which I have so far

mentioned to lead us to anticipate it; so that it is hard to understand

how  it  has  become  involved  in  the  totemic  system.  We  cannot,

therefore, feel surprised that some investigators actually suppose that

exogamy had originally - in the earliest times and in its true meaning -

nothing to do with totemism, but became attached to it (without there

being  any  underlying  connection)    at  some  time  when  marriage

restrictions  became  necessary.  However  this  may  be,  the  bond

between totemism and exogamy exists and is clearly a very firm one.

      Some  further  considerations  will  make  the  significance  of  this

prohibition clearer:

   (a) The violation of the prohibition is not left to what might be called

the ‘automatic’ punishment of the guilty parties, as in the case of other

totem prohibitions, such as that against killing the totem animal. It is

avenged in the most energetic fashion by the whole clan, as though it

were a question of averting some danger that threatened the whole

community or some guilt that was pressing upon it. A few sentences

from Frazer (1910, 1, 54) will show how severely such misdeeds are

treated by savages who are otherwise far from being moral by our

standards:

   ‘In Australia the regular penalty for sexual intercourse with a person

of a forbidden clan is death. It matters not whether the woman be ofthe same local group or has been captured in war from another tribe;

a man of the wrong clan who uses her as his wife is hunted down and

killed by his clansmen, and so is the woman; though in some cases, if

they succeed in eluding capture for a certain time, the offence may be

condoned. In the Ta-ta-thi tribe, New South Wales, in the rare cases

which  occur,  the  man  is  killed  but  the  woman  is  only  beaten  or

speared,  or  both,  till  she  is  nearly  dead;  the  reason  given  for  not

actually  killing  her  being  that  she  was  probably  coerced.  Even  in

casual  amours  the  clan  prohibitions  are  strictly  observed;  any

violations  of  these  prohibitions  "are  regarded  with  the  utmost

abhorrence and are punished by death".’

   (b) Since the same severe punishment is inflicted in the case of

passing love-affairs which have not resulted in any children, it seems

unlikely that the reasons for the prohibition are of a practical nature.

   (c) Since totems are hereditary and not changed by marriage, it is

easy  to  follow  the  consequences  of  the  prohibition.  Where,  for

instance, descent is through the female line, if a man of the Kangaroo

totem marries a woman of the Emu totem, all the children, both boys

and girls, belong to the Emu clan. The totem regulation will therefore

make  it  impossible  for  a  son  of  this  marriage  to  have  incestuous

intercourse with his mother or sisters, who are Emus like himself.¹

 

   ¹ On the other hand, at all events so far as this prohibition is concerned, the father, who is a

Kangaroo, is free to commit incest with his daughters, who are Emus. If the totem descended
through the male line, however, the Kangaroo father would be prohibited from incest with his
daughters (since all his children would be Kangaroos), whereas the son would be free to
commit incest with his mother. These implications of totem prohibitions suggest that descent
through  the  female  line  is  older  than  that  through  the  male,  since  there  are  grounds  for
thinking that totem prohibitions were principally directed against the incestuous desires of the
son.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2654

 

   (d) But a little more reflection will show that exogamy linked with the

totem effects more (and therefore aims at more) than the prevention of

incest with a man’s mother and sisters. It makes sexual intercourse

impossible for a man with all the women of his own clan (that is to saywith a number of women who are not his blood-relatives) by treating

them all as though they were his blood-relatives. It is difficult at first

sight  to  see  the  psychological  justification  for  this  very  extensive

restriction,  which  goes  far  beyond  anything  comparable  among

civilized peoples. It may be gathered from this, however, that the part

played by the totem as common ancestor is taken very seriously. All

those who are descended from the same totem are blood relations.

They form a single family, and within that family even the most distant

degree  of  kinship  is  regarded  as  an  absolute  hindrance  to  sexual

intercourse.

   We see, then, that these savages have an unusually great horror of

incest, or are sensitive on the subject to an unusual degree, and that

they combine this with a peculiarity which remains obscure to us - of

replacing real blood-relationship by totem kinship. This latter contrast

must not, however, be too much exaggerated, and we must remember

that the totem prohibitions include that against real incest as a special

case.

   The riddle of how it came about that the real family was replaced by

the totem clan must perhaps remain unsolved till the nature of the

totem itself can be explained. At the same time, it is to be observed

that if there were a certain degree of freedom of sexual intercourse

outside marriage, blood-relationship, and consequently the prevention

of incest, would become so uncertain that the prohibition would stand

in need of a wider basis. It is therefore worth remarking that Australian

customs permit the occurrence, in certain social situations and during

certain festivals, of breaches in a man’s exclusive conjugal rights over

a woman.

      Linguistic  usage  in  these  Australian  tribes¹  exhibits  a  peculiarity

which  is  no  doubt  relevant  here.  For  the  terms  used  by  them  to

express  the  various  degrees  of  kinship  do  not  denote  a  relation

between two individuals but between an individual and a group. This is

what L. H. Morgan named the ‘classificatory’ system of relationship.

Thus a man uses the term ‘father’ not only for his actual procreator but

also  for  all  the  other  men  whom  his  mother  might  have  married

according to tribal law and who therefore might have procreated him;

he uses the term ‘mother’ not only for the woman who actually bore

him  but  also  for  all  the  other  women  who  might  have  borne  himwithout transgressing the tribal law; he uses the terms ‘brother’ and

‘sister’ not only for the children of his actual parents but also for the

children of all those persons who stand in the relation of parents to

him  in  the  classificatory  sense;  and  so  on.  Thus  the  kinship  terms

which two Australians apply to each other do not necessarily indicate

any consanguinity, as ours would do: they represent social rather than

physical  relationships.  Something  approaching  the  classificatory

system  is  to  be  found  among  us  when,  for  instance,  children  are

encouraged to refer to all their parents’ friends as ‘Uncle’ or ‘Aunt’, or

when  we  speak  in  a  metaphorical  sense  of  ‘brothers  in  Apollo’  of

‘sisters in Christ’.

 

   ¹ As well as in most other totemic communities.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2655

 

      Though  this  use  of  words  strikes  us  as  so  puzzling,  it  is  easily

explained if we look on it as a survival of the marriage institution which

the Rev. L. Fison has called ‘group marriage’ and which consists in a

certain  number  of  men  exercising  conjugal  rights  over  a  certain

number of women. The children of such a group marriage would then

justly regard one another as brothers and sisters (though they were

not all born of the same mother) and would regard all the men in the

group as their fathers.

   Though some authors, such as Westermarck (1901), have disputed

the conclusions which others have drawn from the existence of the

classificatory  system  of  relationship,  those  who  have  the  closest

acquaintance with the Australian natives are agreed in regarding that

system  as  a  survival  from  the  days  of  group  marriage.  Indeed,

according  to  Spencer  and  Gillen  (1899),  a  certain  form  of  group

marriage exists to this day in the Urabunna and Dieri tribes. Group

marriage  thus  preceded  individual  marriage  among  these  peoples,

and after its disappearance left definite traces behind both in language

and customs.

   But when once we have put group marriage in the place of individual

marriage,  the  apparently  excessive  degree  of  avoidance  of  incestwhich  we  have  come  across  among  the  same  peoples  becomes

intelligible.  Totemic  exogamy,  the  prohibition  of  sexual  intercourse

between  members  of  the  same  clan,  appears  to  have  been  the

appropriate  means  for  preventing  group  incest;  it  thus  became

established and persisted long after its raison d’être had ceased.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2656

 

   It may seem that we have thus discovered the motives the led the

Australian natives to set up their marriage restrictions; but we have

now to learn that the actual state of affairs reveals a far greater, and at

first  sight  a  bewildering,  complexity.  For  there  are  few  races  in

Australia  in  which  the  totem  barrier  is  the  sole  prohibition.  Most  of

them are organized in such a way as to fall into two divisions, known

as  marriage-classes  or  ‘phratries’.  Each  of  these  phratries  is

exogamous and comprises a number of totem clans. As a rule each

phratry is further subdivided into two ‘sub-phratries’, the whole tribe

being  thus  divided  into  four,  with  the  sub-phratries  intermediate

between the phratries and the totem clans.

      The  following  diagram  represents  the  typical  organization  of  an

Australian tribe and corresponds to the actual situation in very large

number of cases:

 








   Here the twelve totem clans are divided into four sub-phratries and

two phratries. All the divisions are exogamous.¹ Sub-phratries c and e

form an exogamous unit; and so also do sub-phratries d and f. The

result (and therefore the purpose) of these arrangements cannot be

doubted: they bring about a still further restriction on the choice of

marriage  and  on  sexual  liberty.  Let  us  suppose  that  each  clancontains an equal number of members. Then, if only the twelve totem

clans existed, each member of a clan would have his choice among

11/12 of all the women in the tribe. The existence of the two phratries

reduces his choice to 6/12 or 1/2, for then a man of totem α can only

marry a woman of totems 1 to 6. With the introduction of the four sub-

phratries his choice is still further reduced to 3/12 or 1/4, for in that

case a man of totem αis restricted in his choice of a wife to a woman

of totems 4, 5 or 6.

 

   ¹ The number of totems is chosen arbitrarily.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2657

 

   The historical relation between the marriage-classes (of which in

some  tribes  there  are  as  many  as  eight)  and  the  totem  clans  is

completely obscure. It is merely evident that these arrangements are

directed towards the same aim as totemic exogamy and pursue it still

further. While, however, totemic exogamy gives one the impression of

being  a  sacred  ordinance  of  unknown  origin  -  in  short,  of  being  a

custom - the complicated institution of the marriage-classes, with their

subdivisions and the regulations attaching to them, look more like the

result of deliberate legislation, which may perhaps have taken up the

task of preventing incest afresh because the influence of the totem

was waning. And, while the totemic system is, as we know, the basis

of all the other social obligations and moral restrictions of the tribe, the

significance of the phratries seems in general not to extend beyond

the regulation of marriage choice which is its aim.

   The system of marriage-classes in its furthest developments bears

witness to an endeavour to go beyond the prevention of natural and

group incest and to forbid marriage between still more distant groups

of relatives. In this it resembles the Catholic Church, which extended

the ancient prohibition against marriage between brothers and sisters

to  marriage  between  cousins  and  even  to  marriage  between  those

who were merely spiritual relatives. (Cf. Lang, 1910-11.)

   It would be little to our purpose if we were to follow in detail the

extraordinarily  involved  and  obscure  discussions  on  the  origin  andsignificance of the marriage-classes and on their relation to the totem.

For our purpose it is enough to draw attention to the great care which

is devoted by the Australians, as well as by other savage peoples, to

the prevention of incest.¹ It must be admitted that these savages are

even more sensitive on the subject of incest than we are. They are

probably liable to a greater temptation to it and for that reason stand in

need of fuller protection.

 

   ¹ Storfer (1911) has quite recently insisted on this point.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2658

 

 

   But the horror of incest shown by these peoples is not satisfied by

the erection of the institutions which I have described and which seem

to be directed principally against group incest. We must add to them a

number of ‘customs’ which regulate the dealings of individuals with

their  near  relatives  in  our  sense  of  the  term,  customs  which  are

enforced literally with religious strictness and the purpose of which can

scarcely be doubted. These customs or customary prohibitions have

been termed ‘avoidances’. They extend far beyond the totemic races

of Australia; but once again I must ask my readers to be content with a

fragmentary extract from the copious material.

      In  Melanesia  restrictive  prohibitions  of  this  sort  govern  a  boy’s

intercourse with his mother and sisters. Thus, for instance, in Lepers’

Island, one of the New Hebrides, when a boy has reached a certain

age he no longer lives at home, but takes up his quarters in the ‘club-

house’, where he now regularly eats and sleeps. It is true that he may

still go to his father’s house to ask for food, but if his sister is at home

he must go away before eating; if no sister is there he may sit down

near the door and eat. If by chance a brother and sister meet in the

open, she must run away or hide. If a boy knows that certain footprints

in the road are his sister’s, he will not follow them, nor will she follow

his. Indeed, he will not even utter her name, and will avoid the use of a

common word if it forms part of her name. This avoidance begins with

the puberty ceremonies and is maintained throughout life. The reservebetween a son and his mother increases as the boy grows up and is

much more on her side than on his. If his mother brings him food, she

does not give it him but puts it down for him to take. In speaking to him

she does not tutoyer him, but uses the more distant plural forms.¹

   Similar customs prevail in New Caledonia. If a brother and sister

happen to meet on a path, the sister will throw herself into the bushes

and he will pass on without turning his head.

   Among the natives of the Gazelle Peninsula in New Britain a sister,

after her marriage, is not allowed to converse with her brother; she

never utters his name, but designates him by another word.²

 

   ¹ Frazer (1910, 2, 77 f.), quoting Codrington (1891).

   ² Frazer (1910, 2, 124).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2659

 

      In  New  Mecklenburg  cousins  of  one  kind  are  subject  to  similar

restrictions,  as  are  brothers  and  sisters.  They  may  not  come  near

each  other,  may  not  shake  hands  and  may  not  give  each  other

presents; but they are allowed to speak to each other at a distance of

some paces. The penalty for incest with a sister is death by hanging.¹

   In Fiji these avoidance rules are particularly strict; they affect not

only blood sisters but tribal sisters as well. It must strike us as all the

more  puzzling  to  hear  that  these  same  savages  practise  sacred

orgies,  in  which  precisely  these  forbidden  degrees  of  kinship  seek

sexual intercourse - puzzling, that is, unless we prefer to regard the

contrast as an explanation of the prohibition.²

   Among the Battas of Sumatra the rules of avoidance apply to all

near relations. ‘A Batta, for example, would think it shocking were a

brother to escort his sister to an evening party. Even in the presence

of others a Batta brother and sister feel embarrassed. If one of them

comes into the house, the other will go away. Further, a father may

never be alone in the house with his daughter, nor a mother with her

son. . . . The Dutch missionary who reports these customs adds that

he is sorry to say that from what he knows of the Battas he believes

the maintenance of most of these rules to be very necessary.’ Thesepeople assume as a matter of course that a solitary meeting between

a man and a woman will lead to an improper intimacy between them.

And  since  they  believe  that  intercourse  between  near  relations  will

lead to punishments and calamities of all sorts, they are right to avoid

any temptation to transgress these prohibitions.³

   Curiously enough, among the Barongo of Delagoa Bay, in South

Africa, the strictest rules affect a man’s relations with his sister-in-law,

the  wife  of  his  wife’s  brother.  If  he  meets  this  formidable  person

anywhere, he carefully avoids her. He does not eat out of the same

dish with her, he speaks to her with embarrassment, does not venture

                                                            4
into her hut and greets her in a trembling voice.

 

   ¹ Frazer (1910, 2, 130 f.), quoting Peckel (1908).

   ² Frazer (1910, 2, 146 ff.), quoting Fison.

   ³ Frazer (1910, 2, 189).

4
    Frazer (1910, 2, 388), quoting Junod.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2660

 

   A rule of avoidance with which one would have expected to meet

more  frequently  operates  among  the  A-kamba  (or  Wa  kamba)  of

British East Africa. A girl has to avoid her father between the age of

puberty and the time of her marriage. If they meet in the road, she

hides while he passes, and she may never go and sit near him. This

holds good until the moment of her betrothal. After her marriage she

does not avoid her father in any way.¹

   By far the most widespread and strictest avoidance (and the most

interesting  from  the  point  of  view  of  civilized  races)  is  that  which

restricts a man’s intercourse with his mother-in-law. It is quite general

in  Australia  and  also  extends  over  Melanesia,  Polynesia  and  the

Negro  races  of  Africa,  wherever  traces  of  totemism  and  the

classificatory  system  of  relationship  are  found  and  probably  still

further. In some of these places there are similar prohibitions against a

woman having innocent intercourse with her father-in-law; but they are

far less usual and severe. In a few isolated cases both parents-in-laware  subject  to  avoidance.  Since  we  are  less  concerned  with  the

ethnographical extent of this avoidance than with its substance and

purpose, I shall once again restrict myself to quoting a few examples.

      Among  the  Melanesians  of  the  Banks’  Islands  ‘these  rules  of

avoidance are very strict and minute. A man will not come near his

wife’s mother and she will not come near him. If the two chance to

meet in a path, the woman will step out of it and stand with her back

turned till he has gone by, or perhaps, if it be more convenient, he will

move out of the way. At Vanua Lava, in Port Patteson, a man would

not even follow his mother-in-law along the beach until the rising tide

had washed her foot prints from the sand. Yet a man and his mother-

in-law may talk to each other at a distance; but a woman will on no

account  mention  the  name  of  her  daughter’s  husband,  nor  will  he

name hers.²

   In the Solomon Islands, after his marriage a man may neither see

nor  converse  with  his  mother-in-law.  If  he  meets  her,  he  may  not

recognize her, but must make off and hide himself as fast as he can.³

 

   ¹ Frazer (1910, 2, 424).

   ² Frazer (1910, 2, 76)

   ³ Frazer (1910, 2, 117), quoting Ribbe (1903).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2661

 

   Among the Eastern Bantu ‘custom requires that a man should "be

ashamed of" his wife’s mother, that is to say, he must studiously shun

her society. He may not enter the same hut with her, and if by chance

they meet on a path, one or other turns aside, she perhaps hiding

behind a bush, while he screens his face with a shield. If they cannot

thus avoid each other, and the mother-in-law has nothing else to cover

herself with, she will tie a wisp of grass round her head as a token of

ceremonial avoidance. All correspondence between the two has to be

carried on either through a third party or by shouting to each other at a

distance  with  some  barrier,  such  as  the  kraal  fence,  interposed

between  them.  They  may  not  even  pronounce  each  other’s  proper

name.’ (Frazer, 1910, 2, 385.)   Among the Basoga, a Bantu people who live in the region of the

sources of the Nile, a man may only speak to his mother-in-law when

she  is  in  another  room  and  out  of  sight.  Incidentally,  these  people

have such a horror of incest that they punish it even when it occurs

among their domestic animals. (Frazer, 1910, 2, 461.)

   While there can be no doubt as to the purpose and significance of

the other avoidances between near relations, and they are universally

regarded  as  protective  measures  against  incest,  the  prohibitions

affecting  a  man’s  intercourse  with  his  mother-in  law-have  received

another interpretation in some quarters. It was with justice regarded as

incomprehensible  that  all  these  different  peoples  should  feel  such

great fear of the temptation presented to a man by an elderly woman,

who might have been, but in fact was not, his mother. (Crawley, 1902,

405.)

      This  objection  was  also  raised  against  the  view  put  forward  by

Fison. He pointed out that certain systems of marriage-classes had

gaps in them, as a result of which marriage between a man and his

mother-in-law  was  not  theoretically  impossible.  For  that  reason,  he

suggested,  a  special  guarantee  against  that  possibility  became

necessary.

   Sir John Lubbock (1870) traced back the attitude of a mother-in-law

to her son-in-law to the institution of ‘marriage by capture’. ‘When the

capture was a reality’, he writes, ‘the indignation of the parents would

also be real; when it became a mere symbol, the parental anger would

be symbolized also, and would be continued even after its origin was

forgotten.’ Crawley has no difficulty in showing how insufficiently this

attempted explanation covers the details of the observed facts.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2662

 

   Tylor believes that the treatment given to a son-in-law by his mother-

in-law  is  merely  a  form  of  ‘cutting’  or  non-recognition  by  the  wife’s

family: the man is regarded as an ‘outsider’ until the first child is born.

In the first place, however, the prohibition is not always brought to an

end when this occurs. But, apart from this, it may be objected that thisexplanation  throws  no  light  on  the  fact  that  the  prohibition  centres

particularly on the mother-in-law - that the explanation overlooks the

factor of sex. Moreover, it takes no account of the attitude of religious

horror expressed in the prohibition. (Crawley, 1902, 407.)

   A Zulu woman, questioned as to the basis of the prohibition, gave

the sensitive reply: ‘It is not right that he should see the breasts which

suckled his wife.’¹

   As we know, the relation between son-in-law and mother-in-law is

also  one  of  the  delicate  points  of  family  organization  in civilized

communities. That relation is no longer subject to rules of avoidance in

the social system of the white peoples of Europe and America; but

many disputes and much unpleasantness could often be eliminated if

the avoidance still existed as a custom and did not have to be re-

erected by individuals. It may be regarded by some Europeans as an

act of high wisdom on the part of these savage races that by their

rules of avoidance they entirely precluded any contact between two

persons brought into this close relationship to each other. There is

scarcely room for doubt that something in the psychological relation of

a  mother-in-law  to  a  son-in-law  breeds  hostility  between  them  and

makes it hard for them to live together. But the fact that in civilized

societies mothers-in-law are such a favourite subject for jokes seems

to me to suggest that the emotional relation involved includes sharply

contrasted components. I believe, that is, that this relation is in fact an

‘ambivalent’  one,  composed  of  conflicting  affectionate  and  hostile

impulses.

 

   ¹ Crawley (1902, 401), quoting Leslie (1875).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2663

 

   Some of those impulses are obvious enough. On the side of the

mother-in-law  there  is  reluctance  to  give  up  the  possession  of  her

daughter, distrust of the stranger to whom she is to be handed over,

an impulse to retain the dominating position which she has occupied

in her own house. On the man’s side there is a determination not to

submit  any  longer  to  someone  else’s  will,  jealousy  of  anyone  whopossessed his wife’s affection before he did, and, last but not least, an

unwillingness  to  allow  anything  to  interfere  with  the  illusory

overvaluation bred of his sexual feelings. The figure of his mother-in-

law usually causes such an interference, for she has many features

which  remind  him  of  her  daughter  and  yet  lacks  all  the  charms  of

youth, beauty and spiritual freshness which endear his wife to him.

   But we are able to bring forward other motives than these, thanks to

the knowledge of concealed mental impulses which we have acquired

from the psycho-analytic examination of individual human beings. A

woman  whose  psychosexual  needs  should  find  satisfaction  in  her

marriage  and  her  family  life  is  often  threatened  with  the  danger  of

being left unsatisfied, because her marriage relation has come to a

premature end and because of the uneventfulness of her emotional

life. A mother, as she grows older, saves herself from this by putting

herself in her children’s place, by identifying herself with them; and

this she does by making their emotional experiences her own. Parents

are said to stay young with their children, and that is indeed one of the

most  precious  psychological  gains  that  parents  derive  from  their

children. Where a marriage is childless, the wife has lost one of the

things which might be of most help to her in tolerating the resignation

that  her  own  marriage  demands  from  her.  A  mother’s  sympathetic

identification with her daughter can easily go so far that she herself

falls in love with the man her daughter loves; and in glaring instances

this may lead to severe forms of neurotic illness as a result of her

violent mental struggles against this emotional situation. In any case, it

very frequently happens that a mother-in-law is subject to an impulse

to fall in love in this way, and this impulse itself or an opposing trend

are added to the tumult of conflicting forces in her mind. And very

often the unkind, sadistic components of her love are directed on to

her son-in-law in order that the forbidden, affectionate ones may be

the more severely suppressed.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2664

 

      A  man’s  relation  to  his  mother-in-law  is  complicated  by  similarimpulses, though they have another source. It is regularly found that

he chose his mother as the object of his love, and perhaps his sister

as well, before passing on to his final choice. Because of the barrier

that exists against incest, his love is deflected from the two figures on

whom  his  affection  was  centred  in  his  childhood  on  to  an  outside

object  that  is  modelled  upon  them.  The  place  of  his  own  and  his

sister’s mother is taken by his mother-in-law. He has an impulse to fall

back upon his original choice, though everything in him fights against

it. His horror of incest insists that the genealogical history of his choice

of an object for his love shall not be recalled. His repudiation of this

impulse is also facilitated by the fact that his mother-in-law is only a

contemporary figure; he has not known her all his life, so that there is

no unchangeable picture of her preserved in his unconscious. A streak

of irritability and malevolence that is apt to be present in the medley of

his  feelings  leads  us  to  suspect  that  she  does  in  fact  offer  him  a

temptation to incest; and this is confirmed by the not uncommon event

of a man openly falling in love with the woman who is later to be his

mother-in-law before transferring his love to her daughter.

   I can see nothing against the presumption that it is precisely this

incestuous factor in the relation that provides savages with the motive

for  their  rules  of  avoidance  between  son-in-law  and  mother-in-law.

Thus the explanation which we should adopt for these strictly enforced

avoidances  among  primitive  peoples  is  that  put  forward  by  Fison,

which regards them merely as a further protection against possible

incest.  The  same  explanation  holds  good  of  all  other  avoidances,

between both blood and tribal relations. The only difference would be

that  in  the  case  of  blood  relations  the  possibility  of  incest  is  an

immediate one and the intention to prevent it may be conscious; in the

other cases, including that of a man’s relation to his mother-in-law, the

possibility of incest would seem to be a temptation in phantasy set in

motion through the agency of unconscious connecting links.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2665

 

    There has been little opportunity in the preceding pages for showing

how new light can be thrown upon the facts of social psychology by

the adoption of a psycho-analytic method of approach: for the horror

of incest displayed by savages has long been recognized as such and

stands in need of no further interpretation. All that I have been able to

add  to  our  understanding  of  it  is  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  it  is

essentially an infantile feature and that it reveals a striking agreement

with the mental life of neurotic patients. Psycho-analysis has taught us

that a boy’s earliest choice of objects for his love is incestuous and

that those objects are forbidden ones - his mother and his sister. We

have learnt, too, the manner in which, as he grows up, he liberates

himself from this incestuous attraction. A neurotic, on the other hand,

invariably exhibits some degree of psychical infantilism. He has either

failed to get free from the psychosexual conditions that prevailed in his

childhood or he has returned to them - two possibilities which may be

summed  up  as  developmental  inhibition  and  regression.  Thus

incestuous fixations of libido continue to play (or begin once more to

play) the principal part in his unconscious mental life. We have arrived

at the point of regarding a child’s relation to his parents, dominated as

it is by incestuous longings, as the nuclear complex of neurosis. This

revelation of the importance of incest in neurosis is naturally received

with  universal  scepticism  by  adults  and  normal  people.  Similar

expressions of disbelief, for instance, inevitably greet the writings of

Otto Rank, which have brought more and more evidence to show the

extent to which the interest of creative writers centres round the theme

of  incest  and  how  the  same  theme,  in  countless  variations  and

distortions,  provides  the  subject-matter  of  poetry.  We  are  driven  to

believe that this rejection is principally a product of the distaste which

human beings feel for their early incestuous wishes, now over taken

by repression. It is therefore of no small importance that we are able

to show that these same incestuous wishes, which are later destined

to  become  unconscious,  are  still  regarded  by  savage  peoples  as

immediate perils against which the most severe measures of defence

must be enforced.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo                                                                                      2666

 

                                            II

 

                TABOO AND EMOTIONAL AMBIVALENCE

 

                                          (1)

 

‘Taboo’ is a Polynesian word. It is difficult for us to find a translation for

it,  since  the  concept  connoted  by  it  is  one  which  we  no  longer

possess. It was still current among the ancient Romans, whose ‘sacer’

was  the  same  as  the  Polynesian  ‘taboo’.  So,  too,  the  ‘άγος’  of  the

Greeks and the ‘kadesh’ of the Hebrews must have had the same

meaning  as  is  expressed  in  ‘taboo’  by  the  Polynesians  and  in

analogous  terms  by  many  other  races  in  America,  Africa

(Madagascar) and North and Central Asia.

      The  meaning  of  ‘taboo’,  as  we  see  it,  diverges  in  two  contrary

directions. To us it means, on the one hand, ‘sacred’, ‘consecrated’,

and  on  the  other  ‘uncanny’,  ‘dangerous’,  ‘forbidden’,  ‘unclean’.  The

converse of ‘taboo’ in Polynesian is ‘noa’, which means ‘common’ or

‘generally accessible’. Thus ‘taboo’ has about it a sense of something

unapproachable,  and  it  is  principally  expressed  in  prohibitions  and

restrictions.  Our  collocation  ‘holy  dread’  would  often  coincide  in

meaning with ‘taboo’.

   Taboo restrictions are distinct from religious or moral prohibitions.

They are not based upon any divine ordinance, but may be said to

impose  themselves  on  their  own  account.  They  differ  from  moral

prohibitions  in  that  they  fall  into  no  system  that  declares  quite

generally  that  certain  abstinences  must  be  observed  and  gives

reasons for that necessity. Taboo prohibitions have no grounds and

are of unknown origin. Though they are unintelligible to us, to those

who are dominated by them they are taken as a matter of course.

   Wundt (1906, 308) describes taboo as the oldest human unwritten

code of laws. It is generally supposed that taboo is older than gods

and dates back to a period before any kind of religion existed.

                                     Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2667

 

   Since we need an impartial account of taboo to submit to psycho-

analytic examination, I shall now give some extracts and summaries of

portions of the article ‘Taboo’ in the Encyclopaedia Britannica (1910-

11),¹  the  author  of  which  was  Northcote  W.  Thomas,  the

anthropologist.

 

   ‘Properly speaking taboo includes only (a) the sacred (or unclean)

character of person or things, (b) the kind of prohibition which results

from this character, and (c) the sanctity (or uncleanness) which results

from a violation of the prohibition. The converse of taboo in Polynesia

is noa and allied forms, which mean "general" or "common". . . .

   ‘Various classes of taboo in the wider sense may be distinguished:

(i) natural or direct, the result of mana (mysterious power) inherent in

a person or thing; (ii) communicated or indirect, equally the result of

mana,  but  (a)  acquired  or  (b)  imposed  by  a  priest,  chief  or  other

person;  (iii)  intermediate,  where  both  factors  are  present,  as  in  the

appropriation of a wife to her husband. .. .’ The term is also applied to

other  ritual  restrictions,  but  what  is  better  described  as  a  ‘religious

interdiction’ should not be referred to as taboo.

   ‘The objects of taboo are many: (i) direct taboos aim at (a)  the

protection  of  important  persons-chiefs,  priests,  etc.  -  and  things

against harm; (b) the safeguarding of the weak - women, children and

common  people  generally  -  from  the  powerful manas  (magical

influence) of chiefs and priests; (c) the provision against the dangers

incurred  by  handling  or  coming  in  contact  with  corpses,  by  eating

certain  foods,  etc.;  (d)  the  guarding  the  chief  acts  of  life  -  birth,

initiation, marriage and sexual functions, etc., against interference; (e)

the securing of human beings against the wrath or power of gods and

spirits;² (f)  the  securing  of  unborn  infants  and  young  children,  who

stand in a specially sympathetic relation with one or both parents, from

the  consequences  of  certain  actions,  and  more  especially  from  the

communication of qualities supposed to be derived from certain foods.

(ii) Taboos are imposed in order to secure against thieves the property

of an individual, his fields, tools, etc. . . .’ 

   ¹ This includes a bibliography of the chief literature on the subject.

   ² In the present context this use of the term ‘taboo’ may be disregarded as not being a

primary one.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2668

 

   The punishment for the violation of a taboo was no doubt originally

left  to  an  internal,  automatic  agency:  the  violated  taboo  itself  took

vengeance. When, at a later stage, ideas of gods and spirits arose,

with  whom  taboo  became  associated,  the  penalty  was  expected  to

follow automatically from the divine power. In other cases, probably as

a result of a further evolution of the concept, society itself took over

the punishment of offenders, whose conduct had brought their fellows

into danger. Thus the earliest human penal systems may be traced

back to taboo.

   ‘The violation of a taboo makes the offender himself taboo. . . .’

Certain of the dangers brought into existence by the violation may be

averted by acts of atonement and purification.

   The source of taboo is attributed to a peculiar magical power which

is  inherent  in  persons  and  spirits  and  can  be  conveyed  by  them

through the medium of inanimate objects. ‘Persons or things which are

regarded  as  taboo  may  be  compared  to  objects  charged  with

electricity;  they  are  the  seat  of  a  tremendous  power  which  is

transmissible by contact, and may be liberated with destructive effect

if the organisms which provoke its discharge are too weak to resist it;

the result of a violation of a taboo depends partly on the strength of

the magical influence inherent in the taboo object or person, partly on

the strength of the opposing mana of the violator of the taboo. Thus,

kings and chiefs are possessed of great power, and it is death for their

subjects to address them directly; but a minister or other person of

greater mana than common can approach them unharmed, and can in

turn be approached by their inferiors without risk. . . . So too indirect

taboos depend for their strength on the mana of him who imposes

them; if it is a chief or a priest, they are more powerful than those

imposed by a common person. . . .’   It is no doubt the transmissibility of taboo which accounts for the

attempts to throw it off by suitable purificatory ceremonies.

   Taboos may be permanent or temporary. Among the former are

those attaching to priests and chiefs, as well as to dead persons and

anything belonging to them. Temporary taboos may be attached to

certain  particular  states,  such  as  menstruation  and  child-birth,  to

warriors before and after an expedition, or to special activities such as

fishing and hunting. A general taboo may (like a Papal Interdict) be

imposed upon a whole region and may then last for many years.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2669

 

 

   If I judge my readers’ feelings aright, I think it is safe to say that in

spite of all that they have now heard about taboo they still have very

little idea of the meaning of the term or of what place to give it in their

thoughts. This is no doubt due to the insufficiency of the information I

have  given  them  and  to  my  having  omitted  to  discuss  the  relation

between taboo and superstition, the belief in spirits, and religion. On

the other hand, I am afraid a more detailed account of what is known

about taboo would have been even more confusing, and I can assure

them that in fact the whole subject is highly obscure.

   What we are concerned with, then, is a number of prohibitions to

which  these  primitive  races  are  subjected.  Every  sort  of  thing  is

forbidden; but they have no idea why, and it does not occur to them to

raise the question. On the contrary, they submit to the prohibitions as

though  they  were  a  matter  of  course  and  feel  convinced  that  any

violation of them will be automatically met by the direst punishment.

We have trustworthy stories of how any unwitting violation of one of

these  prohibitions  is  in  fact  automatically  punished.  An  innocent

wrong-doer, who may, for instance, have eaten a forbidden animal,

falls into a deep depression, anticipates death and then dies in real

earnest.  These  prohibitions  are  mainly  directed  against  liberty  of

enjoyment and against freedom of movement and communication. In

some cases they have an intelligible meaning and are clearly aimed atabstinences and renunciations. But in other cases their subject-matter

is quite incomprehensible; they are concerned with trivial details and

seem to be of a purely ceremonial nature.

   Behind all these prohibitions there seems to be something in the

nature of a theory that they are necessary because certain persons

and  things  are  charged  with  a  dangerous  power,  which  can  be

transferred through contact with them, almost like an infection. The

quantity of this dangerous attribute also plays a part. Some people or

things  have  more  of  it  than  others  and  the  danger  is  actually

proportional to the difference of potential of the charges. The strangest

fact  seems  to  be  that  anyone  who  has  transgressed  one  of  these

prohibitions himself acquires the characteristic of being prohibited - as

though the whole of the dangerous charge had been transferred over

to him. This power is attached to all special individuals, such as kings,

priests  or  new  born  babies,  to  all exceptional  states,  such  as  the

physical states of menstruation, puberty or birth, and to all uncanny

things, such as sickness and death and what is associated with them

through their power of infection or contagion.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2670

 

   The word ‘taboo’ denotes everything, whether a person or a place or

a thing or a transitory condition, which is the vehicle or source of this

mysterious attribute. It also denotes the prohibitions arising from the

same attribute. And, finally, it has a connotation which includes alike

‘sacred’  and  ‘above  the  ordinary’,  as  well  as  ‘dangerous’,  ‘unclean’

and ‘uncanny’.

   This word and the system denoted by it give expression to a group

of  mental  attitudes  and  ideas  which  seem  remote  indeed  from  our

understanding. In particular, there would seem to be no possibility of

our coming into closer contact with them without examining the belief

in  ghosts  and  spirits  which  is  characteristic  of  these  low  levels  of

culture.

   Why, it may be asked at this point, should we concern ourselves at

all with this riddle of taboo? Not only, I think, because it is worth whiletrying to solve any  psychological  problem  for  its  own  sake,  but  for

other reasons as well. It may begin to dawn on us that the taboos of

the savage Polynesians are after all not so remote from us as we were

inclined to think at first, that the moral and conventional prohibitions by

which  we  ourselves  are  governed  may  have  some  essential

relationship  with  these  primitive  taboos  and  that  an  explanation  of

taboo  might  throw  a  light  upon  the  obscure  origin  of  our  own

‘categorical imperative’.

 

   Accordingly, we shall be particularly interested to hear the views of

so notable an investigator as Wilhelm Wundt on the subject of taboo,

especially as he promises ‘to trace back the concept of taboo to its

earliest roots’ (1906, 301).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2671

 

   Wundt writes of that concept that ‘it comprises all of the usages in

which is expressed a dread of certain objects related to cult ideas or of

actions connected with them’. (Ibid., 237.) And, in another passage: ‘If

we understand by it, in accordance with the general meaning of the

word, every prohibition (whether laid down in usage or custom or in

explicitly formulated laws) against touching an object or making use of

it  for  one’s  own  purposes  or  against  using  certain  proscribed

words . . .’ then, he goes on, there can be no race and no level of

culture which has escaped the ill-effects of taboo.

   Wundt next proceeds to explain why it seems to him advisable to

study the nature of taboo in the primitive conditions of the Australian

savages rather than in the higher culture of the Polynesian peoples.

He divides the taboo prohibition is among the Australians into three

classes,  according  as  they  affect  animals,  human  beings  or  other

objects.  The  taboos  on  animals,  which  consist  essentially  of

prohibitions against killing and eating them, constitute the nucleus of

Totemism.¹  The  second  class  of  taboos,  those  directed  towards

human beings, are of an entirely different kind. They are restricted in

the first instance to circumstances in which the person on whom thetaboo is imposed finds himself in an unusual situation. Thus young

men are taboo at their initiation ceremonies, women are taboo during

menstruation  and  immediately  after  giving  birth;  so  too  new-born

babies,  sick  persons  and,  above  all,  the  dead  are  taboo.  A  man’s

property which is in his constant use is permanently taboo to all other

men: his clothing, for instance, his tools and weapons. Included in a

man’s most personal property, in Australia, is the new name which he

received when he was a boy at his initiation. It is taboo and must be

kept secret. The third class of taboos, which are imposed on trees,

plants, houses and localities, are less stable. They appear to follow a

rule that anything that is uncanny or provokes dread for any reason

becomes subject to taboo.

   The modifications shown by taboo in the richer culture of Polynesia

and the Malay Archipelago are, as Wundt himself is obliged to admit,

not very profound. The more marked social differences among these

peoples  find  expression  in  the  fact  that  chiefs,  kings  and  priests

exercise a specially effective taboo and are themselves subject to a

taboo of the greatest force.

 

   ¹ Cf. the first and fourth essays in this work.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2672

 

   But, adds Wundt, the true sources of taboo lie deeper than in the

interests of the privileged classes: ‘they have their origin in the source

of  the  most  primitive  and  at  the  same  time  most  lasting  of  human

instincts - in fear of "demonic" powers.’ (Ibid., 307.) ‘Taboo is originally

nothing other than the objectified fear of the "demonic" power which is

believed  to  lie  hidden  in  a  tabooed  object.  The  taboo  prohibits

anything that may provoke that power and commands that, if it has

been injured, whether wittingly or unwittingly, the demon’s vengeance

must be averted.’

   Little by little, we are told, taboo then grows into a force with a basis

of its own, independent of the belief in demons. It develops into the

rule  of  custom  and  tradition  and  finally  of  law.  ‘But  the  unspoken

command  underlying  all  the  prohibitions  of  taboo,  with  theirnumberless variations according to the time and place, is originally

one and one only: "Beware of the wrath of demons!"‘

   Wundt informs us, then, that taboo is an expression and derivative

of the belief of primitive peoples in ‘demonic’ power. Later, he tells us,

it freed itself from this root and remained a power simply because it

was a power - from a kind of mental conservatism. And thereafter it

itself became the root of our moral precepts and of our laws. Though

the first of these assertions may provoke little contradiction, I believe I

shall  be  expressing  the  thoughts  of  many  readers  when  I  say  that

Wundt’s explanation comes as something of a disappointment. This is

surely not tracing back the concept of taboo to its sources or revealing

its  earliest  roots.  Neither  fear  nor  demons  can  be  regarded  by

psychology  as  ‘earliest’  things,  impervious  to  any  attempt  at

discovering their antecedents. It would be another matter if demons

really existed. But we know that, like gods, they are creations of the

human mind: they were made by something and out of something.

   Wundt has important views on the double significance of taboo,

though these are not very clearly expressed. According to him, the

distinction between ‘sacred’ and ‘unclean’ did not exist in the primitive

beginnings of taboo. For that very reason those concepts were at that

stage without the peculiar significance which they could only acquire

when they became opposed to each other. Animals, human beings or

localities on which a taboo was imposed were ‘demonic’, not ‘sacred’,

nor, therefore, in the sense which was later acquired, ‘unclean’. It is

precisely this neutral and intermediate meaning - ‘demonic’ or ‘what

may  not  be  touched’  -  that  is  appropriately  expressed  by  the  word

‘taboo’, since it stresses a characteristic which remains common for all

time  both  to  what  is  sacred  and  to  what  is  unclean:  the  dread  of

contact with it. The persistence, however, of this important common

characteristic is at the same time evidence that the ground covered by

the two was originally one and that it was only as a result of further

influences that it be came differentiated and eventually developed into

opposites.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2673 

   According to Wundt, this original characteristic of taboo - the belief

in a ‘demonic’ power which lies hidden in an object and which, if the

object is touched or used unlawfully, takes its vengeance by casting a

spell over the wrong-doer - is still wholly and solely ‘objectified fear’.

That fear has not yet split up into the two forms into which it later

develops: veneration and horror.

   But how did this split take place? Through the transplanting, so

Wundt tells us, of the taboo ordinances from the sphere of demons

into the sphere of belief in gods. The contrast between ‘sacred’ and

‘unclean’ coincides with a succession of two stages of mythology. The

earlier of these stages did not completely disappear when the second

one was reached but persisted in what was regarded as an inferior

and eventually a contemptible form. It is, he says, a general law of

mythology that a stage which has been passed, for the very reason

that  it  has  been  overcome  and  driven  under  by  a  superior  stage,

persists in an inferior form alongside the later one, so that the objects

of its veneration turn into objects of horror.

   The remainder of Wundt’s discussion deals with the relation of the

concept of taboo to purification and sacrifice.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2674

 

                                          (2)

 

   Anyone approaching the problem of taboo from the angle of psycho-

analysis, that is to say, of the investigation of the unconscious portion

of the individual mind, will recognize, after a moment’s reflection, that

these phenomena are far from unfamiliar to him. He has come across

people who have created for themselves individual taboo prohibitions

of this very kind and who obey them just as strictly as savages obey

the communal taboos of their tribe or society. If he were not already

accustomed to describing such people as ‘obsessional’ patients, he

would  find  ‘taboo  sickness’  a  most  appropriate  name  for  their

condition.  Having  learnt  so  much,  however,  about  this  obsessionalsickness from psycho-analytic examination - its clinical aetiology and

the essence of its psychical mechanism - he can scarcely refrain from

applying  the  knowledge  he  has  thus  acquired  to  the  parallel

sociological phenomenon.

   A warning must be uttered at this point. The similarity between taboo

and obsessional sickness may be no more than a matter of externals;

it may apply only to the forms in which they are manifested and not

extend to their essential character. Nature delights in making use of

the same forms in the most various biological connections: as it does,

for instance, in the appearance of branch-like structures both in coral

and  in  plants,  and  indeed  in  some  forms  of  crystal  and  in  certain

chemical precipitates. It would obviously be hasty and unprofitable to

infer  the  existence  of  any  internal  relationship  from  such  points  of

agreement as these, which merely derive from the operation of the

same mechanical causes. We shall bear this warning in mind, but we

need not be deterred by it from proceeding with our comparison.

 

      The  most  obvious  and  striking  point  of  agreement  between  the

obsessional  prohibitions  of  neurotics  and  taboos  is  that  these

prohibitions are equally lacking in motive and equally puzzling in their

origin. Having made their appearance at some unspecified moment,

they are forcibly maintained by an irresistible fear. No external threat

of punishment is required, for there is an internal certainty, a moral

conviction, that any violation will lead to intolerable disaster. The most

that an obsessional patient can say on this point is that he has an

undefined feeling that some particular person in his environment will

be injured as result of the violation. Nothing is known of the nature of

the  injury;  and  indeed  even  this  wretchedly  small  amount  of

information  is  more  often  obtained  in  connection  with  the  expiatory

and defensive actions which we shall have to discuss later than with

the prohibitions themselves.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2675

 

   As in the case of taboo, the principal prohibition, the nucleus of theneurosis, is against touching; and thence it is sometimes known as

‘touching  phobia’  or  ‘délire  du  toucher’.  The  prohibition  does  not

merely apply to immediate physical contact but has an extent as wide

as  the  metaphorical  use  of  the  phrase  ‘to  come  in  contact  with’.

Anything  that  directs  the  patient’s  thoughts  to  the  forbidden  object,

anything that brings him into intellectual contact with it, is just as much

prohibited as direct physical contact. This same extension also occurs

in the case of taboo.

   The purpose of some of the prohibitions is immediately obvious.

Others, on the contrary, strike us as incomprehensible, senseless and

silly, and prohibitions of this latter sort are described as ‘ceremonial’.

This distinction, too, is found in the observances of taboo.

   Obsessional prohibitions are extremely liable to displacement. They

extend from one object to another along whatever paths the context

may  provide,  and  this  new  object  then  becomes,  to  use  the  apt

expression of one of my women patients, ‘impossible’ - till at last the

whole  world  lies  under  an  embargo  of  ‘impossibility’.  Obsessional

patients behave as though the ‘impossible’ persons and things were

carriers of a dangerous infection liable to be spread by contact on to

everything in their neighbourhood. I have already drawn attention to

the same characteristic capacity for contagion and transference in my

description of taboo. We know, too, that anyone who violates a taboo

by coming into contact with something that is taboo becomes taboo

himself and that then no one may come into contact with him.

   I will now put side by side two instances of the transference (or, as it

is better to say, the displacement) of a prohibition. One of these is

taken from the life of the Maoris and the other from an observation of

my own on a female obsessional patient.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2676

 

   ‘A Maori chief would not blow a fire with his mouth; for his sacred

breath would communicate its sanctity to the fire, which would pass it

on to the pot on the fire, which would pass it on to the meat in the pot,

which would pass it on to the man who ate the meat, which was in thepot, which stood on the fire, which was breathed on by the chief; so

that the eater, infected by the chief’s breath conveyed through these

intermediaries, would surely die.’¹

   My patient’s husband purchased a household article of some kind

and brought it home with him. She insisted that it should be removed

or it would make the room she lived in ‘impossible’. For she had heard

that  the  article  had  been  bought  in  a  shop  situated  in,  let  us  say,

‘Smith’ Street.² ‘Smith’, however, was the married name of a woman

friend of hers who lived in a distant town and whom she had known in

her  youth  under  her  maiden  name.  This  friend  of  hers  was  at  the

moment ‘impossible’ or taboo. Consequently the article that had been

purchased  here  in  Vienna  was  as  taboo  as  the  friend  herself  with

whom she must not come into contact.

   Obsessional prohibitions involve just as extensive renunciations and

restrictions in the lives of those who are subject to them as do taboo

prohibitions;  but  some  of  them  can  be  lifted  if  certain  actions  are

performed. Thereafter, these actions must be performed: they become

compulsive or obsessive acts, and there can be no doubt that they are

in  the  nature  of  expiation,  penance,  defensive  measures  and

purification.  The  commonest  of  these  obsessive  acts  is  washing  in

water (‘washing mania’). Some taboo prohibitions can be replaced in

just the same way; or rather their violation can be made good by a

similar  ‘ceremonial’;  and  here  again  lustration  with  water  is  the

preferred method.

      Let  us  now  summarize  the  points  in  which  agreement  between

taboo usages and obsessional symptoms is most clearly shown: (1)

the fact that the prohibitions lack any assignable motive; (2) the fact

that they are maintained by an internal necessity; (3) the fact that they

are easily displaceable and that there is a risk of infection from the

prohibited object; and (4) the fact that they give rise to injunctions for

the performance of ceremonial acts.

 

   ¹ Frazer (1911b, 136).

   ² [’Hirschengasse’ and ‘Hirsch’ in the original.]

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2677 

 

      Now  both  the  clinical  history  and  the  psychical  mechanism  of

obsessional  neurosis  have  become  known  to  us  through  psycho-

analysis. The clinical history of a typical case of ‘touching phobia’ is as

follows.  Right  at  the  beginning,  in  very  early  childhood,  the  patient

shows a strong desire  to  touch,  the  aim  of  which  is  of  a  far  more

specialized kind that one would have been inclined to expect. This

desire is promptly met by an external prohibition against carrying out

that particular kind of touching.¹ The prohibition is accepted, since it

finds support from powerful internal forces,² and proves stronger than

the  instinct  which  is  seeking  to  express  itself  in  the  touching.  In

consequence, however, of the child’s primitive psychical constitution,

the  prohibition  does  not  succeed  in abolishing  the  instinct.  Its  only

result is to repress the instinct (the desire to touch) and banish it into

the  unconscious.  Both  the  prohibition  and  the  instinct  persist:  the

instinct because it has only been repressed and not abolished, and

the prohibition because, if it ceased, the instinct would force its way

through into consciousness and into actual operation. A situation is

created  which  remains  undealt  with  -  a  psychical  fixation  -  and

everything  else  follows  from  the  continuing  conflict  between  the

prohibition and the instinct.

   The principal characteristic of the psychological constellation which

becomes fixed in this way is what might be described as the subject’s

ambivalent³ attitude towards a single object, or rather towards one act

in connection with that object. He is constantly wishing to perform this

act (the touching), and detests it as well. The conflict between these

two currents cannot be promptly settled because - there is no other

way of putting it - they are localized in the subject’s mind in such a

manner that they cannot come up against each other. The prohibition

is  noisily  conscious,  while  the  persistent  desire  to  touch  is

unconscious and the subject knows nothing of it. If it were not for this

psychological  factor,  an  ambivalence  like  this  could  neither  last  so

long nor lead to such consequences.

 

   ¹ Both the desire and the prohibition relate to the child’s touching his own genitals.

   ² That is, from the child’s loving relation to the authors of the prohibition.   ³ To borrow the apt term coined by Bleuler.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2678

 

   In our clinical history of a case we have insisted that the imposition

of the prohibition in very early childhood is the determining point; a

similar importance attaches in the subsequent developments to the

mechanism of repression at the same early age. As a result of the

repression  which  has  been  enforced  and  which  involves  a  loss  of

memory  -  an  amnesia  -  the  motives  for  the  prohibition  (which  is

conscious)  remain  unknown;  and  all  attempts  at  disposing  of  it  by

intellectual processes must fail, since they cannot find any base of

attack. The prohibition owes its strength and its obsessive character

precisely  to  its  unconscious  opponent,  the  concealed  and

undiminished  desire  -  that  is  to  say,  to  an  internal  necessity

inaccessible  to  conscious  inspection.  The  ease  with  which  the

prohibition can be transferred and extended reflects a process which

falls in with the unconscious desire and is greatly facilitated by the

psychological  conditions  that  prevail  in  the  unconscious.  The

instinctual  desire  is  constantly  shifting  in  order  to  escape  from  the

impasse and endeavours to find substitutes - substitute objects and

substitute acts - in place of the prohibited ones. In consequence of

this, the prohibition itself shifts about as well, and extends to any new

aims  which  the  forbidden  impulse  may  adopt.  Any  fresh  advance

made by the repressed libido is answered by a fresh sharpening of the

prohibition. The mutual inhibition of the two conflicting forces produces

a need for discharge, for reducing the prevailing tension; and to this

may be attributed the reason for the performance of obsessive acts. In

the case of a neurosis these are clearly compromise actions: from one

point of view they are evidences of remorse, efforts at expiation, and

so on, while on the other hand they are at the same time substitutive

acts to compensate the instinct for what has been prohibited. It is a

law of neurotic illness that these obsessive acts fall more and more

under the sway of the instinct and approach nearer and nearer to the

activity which was originally prohibited.

                                     Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2679

 

 

   Let us now make the experiment of treating taboo as though it were

of  the  same  nature  as  an  obsessional  prohibition  in  one  of  our

patients. We must make it clear beforehand, however, that many of

the taboo prohibitions that come under our notice are of a secondary,

displaced and distorted kind, and that we shall have to be satisfied if

we can throw only a little light on the most fundamental and significant

taboos. Moreover, the differences between the situation of a savage

and of a neurotic are no doubt of sufficient importance to make any

exact  agreement  impossible  and  to  prevent  our  carrying  the

comparison to the point of identity in every detail.

   In the first place, then, it must be said that there is no sense in

asking savages to tell us the real reason for their prohibitions - the

origin of taboo. It follows from our postulates that they cannot answer,

since  their  real  reason  must  be  ‘unconscious’.  We  can,  however,

reconstruct the history of taboo as follows on the model of obsessional

prohibitions. Taboos, we must suppose, are prohibitions of primaeval

antiquity  which  were  at  some  time  externally  imposed  upon  a

generation of primitive men; they must, that is to say, no doubt have

been impressed on them violently by the previous generation. These

prohibitions must have concerned activities towards which there was a

strong inclination. They must then have persisted from generation to

generation, perhaps merely as a result of tradition transmitted through

parental and social authority. Possibly, however, in later generations

they  may  have  become  ‘organized’  as  an  inherited  psychical

endowment. Who can decide whether such things as ‘innate ideas’

exist, or whether in the present instance they have operated, either

alone or in conjunction with education, to bring about the permanent

fixing  of  taboos?  But  one  thing  would  certainly  follow  from  the

persistence  of  the  taboo,  namely  that  the  original  desire  to  do  the

prohibited  thing  must  also  still  persist  among  the  tribes  concerned.

They must therefore have an ambivalent attitude towards their taboos.

In  their  unconscious  there  is  nothing  they  would  like  more  than  to

violate them, but they are afraid to do so; they are afraid preciselybecause they would like to, and the fear is stronger than the desire.

The desire is unconscious, however, in every individual member of the

tribe just as it is in neurotics.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2680

 

   The most ancient and important taboo prohibitions are the two basic

laws  of  totemism:  not  to  kill  the  totem  animal  and  to  avoid  sexual

intercourse with members of the totem clan of the opposite sex.

      These,  then,  must  be  the  oldest  and  most  powerful  of  human

desires. We cannot hope to understand this or test our hypothesis on

these two examples, so long as we are totally ignorant of the meaning

and origin of the totemic system. But the wording of these two taboos

and the fact of their concurrence will remind anyone acquainted with

the  findings  of  psycho-analytic  investigations  on  individuals  of

something quite definite, which psycho-analysts regard as the centre-

point of childhood wishes and as the nucleus of neuroses.¹

   The multiplicity of the manifestations of taboo, which have led to the

attempts at classification that I have already mentioned, are reduced

to a single unity by our thesis: the basis of taboo is a prohibited action,

for performing which a strong inclination exists in the unconscious.

    We have heard, though without understanding it, that anyone who

does what is forbidden, that is, who violates a taboo, becomes taboo

himself. How is this to be brought into line with the fact that taboo

attaches not only to a person who has done what is forbidden but also

to persons in particular states, to the states themselves, as well as to

impersonal  objects?  What  can  the  dangerous  attribute  be  which

remains the same under all these different conditions? There is only

one  thing  it  can  be:  the  quality  of  exciting  men’s  ambivalence  and

tempting them to transgress the prohibition.

   Anyone who has violated a taboo becomes taboo himself because

he possesses the dangerous quality of tempting others to follow his

example: why should he be allowed to do what is forbidden to others?

Thus  he  is  truly  contagious  in  that  every  example  encourages

imitation, and for that reason he himself must be shunned.      But  a  person  who  has  not  violated  any  taboo  may  yet  be

permanently  or  temporarily  taboo  because  he  is  in  a  state  which

possesses the quality of arousing forbidden desires in others and of

awakening  a  conflict  of  ambivalence  in  them.  The  majority  of

exceptional  positions  and  exceptional  states  are  of  this  kind  and

possess  this  dangerous  power.  The  king  or  chief  arouses  envy  on

account of his privileges: everyone, perhaps, would like to be a king.

Dead  men,  new-born  babies  and  women  menstruating  or  in  labour

stimulate desires by their special helplessness; a man who has just

reached maturity stimulates them by the promise of new enjoyment.

For that reason all of these persons and all of these states are taboo,

since temptation must be resisted.

 

   ¹ Cf. my forthcoming study upon totemism, to which I have referred more than once in these

pages (the fourth essay in this work).
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2681

 

   Now, too, we can understand why the amounts of mana possessed

by different persons can be subtracted from one another and can to

some extent cancel one another out. A king’s taboo is too strong for

one of his subjects because the social difference between them is too

great. But a minister may without any harm serve as an intermediary

between them. If we translate this from the language of taboo into that

of normal psychology, it means something like this. A subject, who

dreads the great temptation presented to him by contact with the king,

can perhaps tolerate dealings with an official whom he does not need

to envy so much and whose position may even seem attainable to

him. A minister, again, can mitigate his envy of the king by reflecting

on the power which he himself wields. So it comes about that smaller

differences  between  the  amounts  of  the  tempting  magical  force

possessed by two people are less to be feared than greater ones.

      It  is  equally  clear  why  it  is  that  the  violation  of  certain  taboo

prohibitions constitutes a social danger which must be punished or

atoned for by all the members of the community if they are not all to

suffer  injury.  If  we  replace  the  unconscious  desires  by  consciousimpulses we shall see that the danger is a real one. It lies in the risk of

imitation, which would quickly lead to the dissolution of the community.

If the violation were not avenged by the other members they would

become  aware  that  they  wanted  to  act  in  the  same  way  as  the

transgressor.  We  cannot  be  surprised  at  the  fact  that,  in  the

restrictions of taboo, touching plays a part similar to the one which it

plays  in  ‘touching  phobias’,  though  the  secret  meaning  of  the

prohibition cannot be of such a specialized nature in taboo as it is in

the neurosis. Touching is the first step towards obtaining any sort of

control over, or attempting to make use of, a person or object.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2682

 

   We have translated the contagious power inherent in taboo into the

possession  of  some  attribute  likely  to  produce  temptation  or

encourage imitation. This does not appear to tally with the fact that the

contagious character of taboo is shown chiefly by its transmissibility

on  to  material  objects,  which  then  themselves  become  carriers  of

taboo.

   This transmissibility of taboo is a reflection of the tendency, on which

we have already remarked, for the unconscious instinct in the neurosis

to  shift  constantly  along  associative  paths  on  to  new  objects.  Our

attention is thus directed to the fact that the dangerous magical force

of mana corresponds to two powers of a more realistic sort: the power

of reminding a man of his own prohibited wishes and the apparently

more important one of inducing him to transgress the prohibition in

obedience to those wishes. These two functions can be reduced to

one, however, if we suppose that in a primitive mind the awakening of

the  memory  of  a  forbidden  action  is  naturally  linked  with  the

awakening  of  an  impulse  to  put  that  action  into  effect.  Thus

recollection and temptation come together again. It must be admitted,

too, that, in so far as the example of a man transgressing a prohibition

tempts  another  man  to  do  the  same,  disobedience  to  prohibitions

spreads  like  a  contagion,  in  just  the  same  way  as  a  taboo  is

transferred from a person to a material object and from one materialobject to another.

      If  the  violation  of  a  taboo  can  be  made  good  by  atonement  or

expiation, which involve the renunciation of some possession or some

freedom, this proves that obedience to the taboo injunction meant in

itself the renunciation of something desirable. Emancipation from one

renunciation  is  made  up  for  by  the  imposition  of  another  one

elsewhere.  This  leads  us  to  conclude  that  atonement  is  a  more

fundamental factor than purification in the ceremonials of taboo.

 

   I will now sum up the respects in which light has been thrown on the

nature of taboo by comparing it with the obsessional prohibitions of

neurotics. Taboo is a primaeval prohibition forcibly imposed (by some

authority)  from  outside,  and  directed  against  the  most  powerful

longings to which human beings are subject. The desire to violate it

persists  in  their  unconscious;  those  who  obey  the  taboo  have  an

ambivalent attitude to what the taboo prohibits. The magical power

that  is  attributed  to  taboo  is  based  on  the  capacity  for  arousing

temptation;  and  it  acts  like  a  contagion  because  examples  are

contagious  and  because  the  prohibited  desire  in  the  unconscious

shifts from one thing to another. The fact that the violation of a taboo

can be atoned for by a renunciation shows that renunciation lies at the

basis of obedience to taboo.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2683

 

                                          (3)

 

   What we now want to discover is how much value is to be attributed

to  the  parallel  we  have  drawn  between  taboo  and  obsessional

neurosis  and  to  the  view  of  taboo  which  we  have  based  on  that

parallel. Their value must clearly depend on whether the view we have

put forward has any advantages over others, and whether it gives us a

clearer understanding of taboo than we could otherwise reach. We

may be inclined to feel that we have given sufficient evidence of the

applicability of our view in what has already been said; yet we mustattempt to strengthen the evidence by entering into our explanation of

taboo prohibitions and usages in greater detail.

   There is also another path open to us. We can start an inquiry as to

whether  some  of  the  hypotheses  which  we  have  carried  over  from

neuroses to taboo or some of the results to which that procedure has

led us may not be directly verifiable in the phenomena of taboo. But

we  must  decide  what  we  are  to  look  for.  Our  assertion  that  taboo

originated in a primaeval prohibition imposed at one time or other by

some external authority is obviously incapable of demonstration. What

we shall rather endeavour to confirm, therefore, are the psychological

determinants of taboo, which we have learnt to know from obsessional

neurosis. How did we arrive at our knowledge of these psychological

factors in the case of the neurosis? Through the analytical study of its

symptoms, and particularly of obsessional acts, defensive measures

and obsessional commands. We found that they showed every sign of

being  derived  from ambivalent  impulses,  either  corresponding

simultaneously  to both  a  wish  and  a  counter-wish  or  operating

predominantly on behalf of one of the two opposing trends. If, now, we

could  succeed  in  demonstrating  that  ambivalence,  that  is,  the

dominance of opposing trends, is also to be found in the observances

of taboo, or if we could point to some of them which, like obsessional

acts, give simultaneous expression to both currents, we should have

established  the  psychological  agreement  between  taboo  and

obsessional neurosis in what is perhaps their most important feature.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2684

 

   The two fundamental prohibitions of taboo are, as I have already

remarked, inaccessible to our analysis owing to their connection with

totemism;  while  certain  others  of  its  injunctions  are  of  a  secondary

nature  and  consequently  useless  for  our  purpose.  For  taboo  has

become the ordinary method of legislation in the communities affected

by it and it has come to serve social purposes which are certainly

more  recent  than  taboo  itself:  such,  for  instance,  are  the  taboos

imposed by chiefs and priests for the protection of their own propertyand  privileges.  There  nevertheless  remain  a  large  group  of

observances on which our investigation can be made. From these I

shall select the taboos attaching (a) to enemies, (b) to chiefs and (c) to

the dead; and I shall take the material for our examination from the

excellent collection included by Frazer in Taboo and the Perils of the

Soul (1911b), the second part of his great work The Golden Bough.

 

                        (a) The Treatment of Enemies

 

   We may be inclined to suppose that savage and half-savage races

are guilty of uninhibited and ruthless cruelty towards their enemies.

We shall be greatly interested to learn, then, that even in their case

the killing of a man is governed by a number of observances which

are  included  among  the  usages  of  taboo.  These  observances  fall

easily into four groups. They demand (1) the appeasement of the slain

enemy,  (2)  restrictions  upon  the  slayer,  (3)  acts  of  expiation  and

purification  by  him  and  (4)  certain  ceremonial  observances.  Our

incomplete information on the subject does not enable us to determine

with certainty how general or the reverse these usages may be among

the  peoples  concerned;  but  for  our  purposes  this  is  a  matter  of

indifference.  It  may  safely  be  assumed,  in  any  case,  that  what  we

have before us are not isolated peculiarities but widespread usages.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2685

 

 

   The rites of appeasement performed in the island of Timor, when a

warlike expedition has returned in triumph bringing the heads of the

vanquished foe, are particularly remarkable, since in addition to them

the leader of the expedition is submitted to severe restrictions (see

below, p. 2687). On the occasion of the expedition’s return, sacrifices

are offered to appease the souls of the men whose heads have been

taken. ‘The people think that some misfortune would befall the victor

were  such  offerings  omitted.  Moreover,  a  part  of  the  ceremony

consists of a dance accompanied by a song, in which the death of theslain  man  is  lamented  and  his  forgiveness  is  entreated.  "Be  not

angry", they say, "because your head is here with us; had we been

less lucky, our heads might now have been exposed in your village.

We have offered the sacrifice to appease you. Your spirit may now

rest and leave us in peace. Why were you our enemy? Would it not

have  been  better  that  we  should  remain  friends?  Then  your  blood

would not have been spilt and your head would not have been cut

off."’¹ The same is true of the people of Paloo, in Celebes. So, too, ‘the

Gallas returning from war sacrifice to the jinn or guardian spirits of

their slain foes before they will re-enter their own houses’.²

      Other  peoples  have  found  a  means  for  changing  their  former

enemies after their death into guardians, friends and benefactors. This

method lies in treating their severed heads with affection, as some of

the savage races of Borneo boast of doing. When the Sea Dyaks of

Sarawak  bring  home  a  head  from  a  successful  head-hunting

expedition, for months after its arrival it is treated with the greatest

consideration  and  addressed  with  all  the  names  of  endearment  of

which their language is capable. The most dainty morsels of food are

thrust into its mouth, delicacies of all kinds and even cigars. The head

is repeatedly implored to hate its former friends and to love its new

hosts  since  it  has  now  become  one  of  them.  It  would  be  a  great

mistake  to  suppose  that  these  observances,  which  strike  us  as  so

horrible, are performed with any intention of ridicule.³

   In several of the savage tribes of North America observers have

been struck by the mourning over enemies who have been killed and

scalped. When a Choctaw had killed an enemy, he went into mourning

for a month during which he was subjected to severe restrictions; and

the  Dacotas  had  similar  practices.  When  the  Osages,  reports  a

witness, have mourned over their own dead, ‘they will mourn for the

                                    4
foe just as if he was a friend’.

 

   ¹ Frazer (1911b, 166).

   ² Frazer (loc. cit.), quoting Paulitschke (1893-6).

   ³ Frazer (1914, 1, 295), quoting Low (1848).

4
    Frazer (1911b, 181), quoting Dorsey (1884).

                                     Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2686

 

 

      Before  considering  the  remaining  classes  of  taboo  usages  in

connection with enemies, we must deal with an obvious objection. It

will be argued against us, with Frazer and others, that the grounds for

such rites of appeasement are simple enough and have nothing to do

with any such thing as ‘ambivalence’. These peoples are dominated

by a superstitious fear of the ghosts of the slain - a fear which was not

unknown in classical antiquity and which was put upon the stage by

the  great  English  dramatist  in  the  hallucinations  of  Macbeth  and

Richard  III.  All  the  rites  of  appeasement  follow  logically  from  this

superstition, as well as the restrictions and acts of expiation which will

be  discussed  presently.  This  view  is  also  supported  by  the  fourth

group of these observances, which can only be explained as attempts

at  driving  away  the  ghosts  of  the  victims  that  are  pursuing  their

murderers.¹ In addition to this, the savages openly admit their fear of

the ghosts of dead enemies and themselves attribute to it the taboo

usages which we are discussing.

   This objection is indeed an obvious one, and if it covered the whole

ground we could save ourselves the trouble of any further attempt at

an explanation. I shall put off dealing with it until later, and for the

moment I will merely state the alternative view which is derived from

the  hypothesis  based  upon  our  earlier  discussions  of  taboo.  The

conclusion that we must draw from all these observances is that the

impulses which they express towards an enemy are not solely hostile

ones. They are also manifestations of remorse, of admiration for the

enemy, and of a bad conscience for having killed him. It is difficult to

resist the notion that, long before a table of laws was handed down by

any god, these savages were in possession of a living commandment:

‘Thou shalt not kill’, a violation of which would not go unpunished.

 

   Let us now return to the other three groups of taboo observances.

Restrictions  placed  upon  a  victorious  slayer  are  unusually  frequent

and as a rule severe. In Timor (cf. the rites of appeasement described

above, on p. 2685) the leader of the expedition is forbidden ‘to returnat once to his own house. A special hut is prepared for him, in which

he  has  to  reside  for  two  months,  undergoing  bodily  and  spiritual

purification.  During  this  time  he  may  not  go  to  his  wife  nor  feed

himself; the food must be put into his mouth by another person.’² In

some  Dyak  tribes  men  returning  from  a  successful  expedition  are

obliged  to  keep  to  themselves  for  several  days  and  abstain  from

various  kinds  of  food;  they  may  not  touch  iron  nor  have  any

intercourse with women. In Logea, an island in the neighbourhood of

New Guinea, ‘men who have killed or assisted in killing enemies shut

themselves up for about a week in their houses. They must avoid all

intercourse with their wives and friends, and they may not touch food

with their hands. They may eat vegetable food only, which is brought

to them cooked in special pots. The intention of these restrictions is to

guard  the  men  against  the  smell  of  the  blood  of  the  slain;  for  it  is

believed that if they smelt the blood they would fall ill and die. In the

Toaripi or Motumotu tribe of south-eastern New Guinea a man who

has killed another may not go near his wife, and may not touch food

with his fingers. He is fed by others, and only with certain kinds of

food. These observances last till the new moon.’ (Frazer, 1911b, 167.)

 

   ¹ Frazer (1911b, 169-74). These ceremonies consist of beating on shields, shouting and

screaming, making noises with musical instruments, etc.

   ² Frazer (1911b, 166), quoting Müller (1857).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2687

 

 

   I shall not attempt to give a complete catalogue of the instances

quoted by Frazer of restrictions imposed upon victorious manslayers. I

will only remark upon a few more such cases in which their taboo

character  is  particularly  marked  or  in  which  the  restrictions  are

accompanied by expiation, purification and other ceremonials.

   ‘Among the Monumbos of German New Guinea anyone who has

slain a foe in war becomes thereby "unclean"’ - the same term being

applied  to  women  who  are  menstruating  or  in  child-bed.  He  ‘must

remain a long time in the men’s club-house, while the villagers gatherround  him  and  celebrate  his  victory  with  dance  and  song.  He  may

touch nobody, not even his own wife and children; if he were to touch

them it is believed that they would be covered with sores. He becomes

clean again by washing and using other modes of purification.’

   ‘Among the Natchez of North America young braves who had taken

their first scalps were obliged to observe certain rules of abstinence

for six months. They might not sleep with their wives nor eat flesh;

their only food was fish and hasty-pudding. . . . When a Choctaw had

killed  an  enemy  and  taken  his  scalp,  he  went  into  mourning  for  a

month, during which he might not comb his hair, and if his head itched

he might not scratch it except with a little stick which he wore fastened

to his wrist for the purpose.’

   ‘When a Pima Indian had killed an Apache, he had to go through

severe ceremonies of purification and atonement. During a sixteen-

day fast he might not touch meat nor salt, nor look on a blazing fire,

nor speak to a human being. He lived alone in the woods, waited on

by an old woman, who brought him his scanty dole of food. He bathed

often in the river and (as a sign of mourning) kept his head covered

with  a  plaster  of  mud.  On  the  seventeenth  day  there  was  a  public

ceremony of solemn purification of the man and his weapons. Since

the Pima Indians took the taboo on killing much more seriously than

their  enemies  and  did  not,  like  them,  postpone  the  expiation  and

purification  till  the  end  of  the  expedition,  their  warlike  efficiency

suffered  greatly  from  their  moral  strictness,  or  piety,  if  that  term  is

preferred. Despite their extreme courage, the Americans found them

unsatisfactory allies in their operations against the Apaches.’

      However  much  the  details  and  variations  of  the  ceremonies  of

expiation  and  purification  after  the  slaying  of  enemies  might  be  of

interest for deeper research into the subject, I shall break off at this

point, since for our present purpose they have nothing more to tell us.

I may perhaps suggest that the temporary or permanent isolation of

professional  executioners,  which  has  persisted  to  the  present  day,

may belong in this connection. The position of the public hangman in

mediaeval  society  offers  a  good  picture  of  the  workings  of  taboo

among savages.¹

 

   ¹ Further examples of these practices will be found in Frazer (1911b, 165-90) in the sectionupon ‘Manslayers tabooed’.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2688

 

 

      In  the  accepted  explanation  of  all  these  observances  of

appeasement, restriction, expiation and purification, two principles are

combined:  the  extension  of  the  taboo  from  the  slain  man  on  to

everything that has come in contact with him, and the fear of the slain

man’s ghost. How these two factors are to be combined with each

other to explain the ceremonials, whether they are to be regarded as

of equal weight, whether one is primary and the other secondary, and

if so which - none of these questions receives an answer, and indeed

it would be hard to find one. We, on the other hand, can lay stress on

the unity  of  our  view,  which  derives  all  of  these  observances  from

emotional ambivalence towards the enemy.

 

                          (b) The Taboo upon Rulers

 

   The attitude of primitive peoples to their chiefs, kings and priests is

governed by two basic principles which seem to be complementary

rather than contradictory. A ruler ‘must not only be guarded, he must

also be guarded against’. (Frazer, 1911b, 132.) Both of these ends are

secured by innumerable taboo observances. We know already why it

is that rulers must be guarded against. It is because they are vehicles

of the mysterious and dangerous magical power which is transmitted

by contact like an electric charge and which brings death and ruin to

anyone who is not protected by a similar charge. Any immediate or

indirect contact with this dangerous sacred entity is therefore avoided;

and, if it cannot be avoided, some ceremonial is devised to avert the

dreaded  consequences.  The  Nubas  of  East  Africa,  for  instance,

‘believe that they would die if they entered the house of their priestly

king; however they can evade the penalty of their intrusion by baring

the left shoulder and getting the king to lay his hand on it’. Here we

are met by the remarkable fact that contact with the king is a remedy

and protection against the dangers provoked by contact with the king.No  doubt,  however,  there  is  a  contrast  to  be  drawn  between  the

remedial  power  of  a  touch  made  deliberately  by  the  king  and  the

danger which arises if he is touched - a contrast between a passive

and an active relation to the king.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2689

 

   For examples of the healing power of the royal touch there is no

need to resort to savages. The kings of England, in times that are not

yet remote, enjoyed the power of curing scrofula, which was known

accordingly as ‘the King’s Evil’. Queen Elizabeth I exercised this royal

prerogative  no  less  than  her  successors.  Charles  I  is  said  to  have

cured  a  hundred  patients  at  a  stroke  in  1633.  But  it  was  after  the

Restoration of the monarchy under his dissolute son, Charles II, that

the royal cures of scrofula reached their climax. In the course of his

reign he is reputed to have touched close upon a hundred thousand

persons. The crowd of those in search of cure used to be so great that

on one occasion six or seven of those who came to be healed were

trampled  to  death.  The  sceptical  William  of  Orange,  who  be  came

King  of  England  after  the  dismissal  of  the  Stuarts,  refused  to  lend

himself to these magical practices. On the only occasion on which he

was persuaded into laying his hands on a patient, he said to him: ‘God

give you better health and more sense.’ (Frazer, 1911a, 1, 368-70.)

   The stories which follow are evidence of the fearful effects of active

contact made, even unintentionally, with a king or anything belonging

to him. ‘It once happened that a New Zealand chief of high rank and

great sanctity had left the remains of his dinner by the wayside. A

slave, a stout, hungry fellow, coming up after the chief had gone, saw

the unfinished dinner, and ate it up without asking questions. Hardly

had he finished when he was informed by a horror-stricken spectator

that the food of which he had eaten was the chief’s.’ He was a strong,

courageous man, but ‘no sooner did he hear the fatal news than he

was seized with the most extraordinary convulsions and cramp in the

stomach, which never ceased till he died, about sundown the same

day’.¹  ‘A  Maori  woman  having  eaten  of  some  fruit,  and  beingafterwards told that the fruit had been taken from a tabooed place,

exclaimed that the spirit of the chief, whose sanctity had been thus

profaned, would kill her. This was in the afternoon, and next day by

twelve o’clock she was dead.’² ‘A Maori chief’s tinder-box was once

the means of killing several persons; for, having been lost by him, and

found by some men who used it to light their pipes, they died of fright

on learning to whom it had belonged.³

 

   ¹ Frazer (1911b, 134-5), quoting a Pakeha Maori (1884).

   ² Frazer (loc. cit.), quoting Brown (1845).

   ³ Frazer (loc. cit.).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2690

 

   It is not to be wondered at that a need was felt for isolating such

dangerous  persons  as  chiefs  and  priests  from  the  rest  of  the

community - to build a barrier round them which would make them

inaccessible. It may begin to dawn on us that this barrier, originally

erected for the observance of taboo, exists to this day in the form of

court ceremonial.

   But perhaps the major part of this taboo upon rulers is not derived

from the need for protection against them. The second reason for the

special  treatment  of  privileged  persons  -  the  need  to  provide

protection for them against the threat of danger - has had an obvious

part in creating taboos and so of giving rise to court etiquette.

   The need to protect the king from every possible form of danger

follows from his immense importance to his subjects, whether for weal

or woe. It is his person which, strictly speaking, regulates the whole

course of existence. ‘The people have to thank him for the rain and

sunshine which foster the fruits of the earth, for the wind which brings

ships to their coasts, and even for the solid ground beneath their feet.’

(Frazer, 1911b, 7.)

   These rulers among savage peoples possess a degree of power

and a capacity to confer benefits which are an attribute only of gods,

and with which at later stages of civilization only the most servile of

courtiers would pretend to credit them. 

   It must strike us as self-contradictory that persons of such unlimited

power  should  need  to  be  protected  so  carefully  from  the  threat  of

danger; but that is not the only contradiction shown in the treatment of

royal  personages  among  savage  peoples.  For  these  peoples  also

think it necessary to keep a watch on their king to see that he makes a

proper  use  of  his  powers;  they  feel  by  no  means  convinced  of  his

good intentions or conscientiousness. Thus an element of distrust may

be traced among the reasons for the taboo observances that surround

the king. ‘The idea’, writes Frazer (1911b, 7 f.), ‘that early kingdoms

are despotisms in which the people exist only for the sovereign, is

wholly  inapplicable  to  the  monarchies  we  are  considering.  On  the

contrary, the sovereign in them exists only for his subjects; his life is

only valuable so long as he discharges the duties of his position by

ordering the course of nature for his people’s benefit. So soon as he

fails to do so, the care, the devotion, the religious homage which they

had hitherto lavished on him cease and are changed into hatred and

contempt; he is dismissed ignominiously, and may be thankful if he

escapes with his life. Worshipped as a god one day, he is killed as a

criminal the next. But in this changed behaviour of the people there is

nothing  capricious  or  inconstant.  On  the  contrary,  their  conduct  is

entirely of a piece. If their king is their god, he is or should be also

their preserver; and if he will not preserve them, he must make room

for  another  who  will.  So  long,  however,  as  he  answers  their

expectations, there is no limit to the care which they take of him, and

which  they  compel  him  to  take  of  himself.  A  king  of  this  sort  lives

hedged in by a ceremonious etiquette, a network of prohibitions and

observances, of which the intention is not to contribute to his dignity,

much less to his comfort, but to restrain him from conduct which, by

disturbing the harmony of nature, might involve himself, his people,

and the universe in one common catastrophe. Far from adding to his

comfort, these observances, by trammelling his every act, annihilate

his freedom and often render the very life, which it is their object to

preserve, a burden and sorrow to him.’

 


                                    Totem And Taboo                                                                                      2691

 

   One of the most glaring instances of a sacred ruler being fettered

and paralysed in this way by taboo ceremonials is to be found in the

mode of life of the Mikado of Japan in earlier centuries. An account

written  more  than  two  hundred  years  age  reports  that  the  Mikado

‘thinks it would be very prejudicial to his dignity and holiness to touch

the  ground  with  his  feet;  for  this  reason,  when  he  intends  to  go

anywhere, he must be carried thither on men’s shoulders. Much less

will they suffer that he should expose his sacred person to the open

air, and the sun is not thought worthy to shine on his head. There is

such a holiness ascribed to all parts of his body that he dares to cut off

neither his hair, nor his beard, nor his nails. However, lest he should

grow too dirty, they may clean him in the night when he is asleep;

because, they say, that which is taken from his body at that time hath

been  stolen  from  him  and  that  such  a  theft  doth  not  prejudice  his

holiness or dignity. In ancient times he was obliged to sit on the throne

for some hours every morning, with the imperial crown on his head,

but to sit altogether like a statue, without stirring either hands or feet,

head  or  eyes,  nor  indeed  any  part  of  his  body,  because,  by  this

means, it was thought that he could preserve peace and tranquillity in

his empire; for if, unfortunately, he turned himself on one side or the

other, or if he looked a good while towards any part of his dominions,

it  was  apprehended  that  war,  famine,  fire,  or  some  other  great

misfortune was near at hand to desolate the country.’¹

   Some of the taboos laid upon barbarian kings remind one vividly of

the  restrictions  imposed  upon  murderers.  Thus  in  West  Africa,  ‘at

Shark  Point  near  Cape  Padron,  in  Lower  Guinea,  lives  the  priestly

king Kukulu, alone in a wood. He may not touch a woman nor leave

his  house;  indeed  he  may  not  even  quit  his  chair,  in  which  he  is

obliged to sleep sitting, for if he lay down no wind would arise and

navigation  would  be  stopped.  He  regulates  storms,  and  in  general

maintains a wholesome and equable state of the atmosphere.’ The

same writer says of Loango (in the same part of the world) that the

more powerful a king is, the more taboos he is bound to observe.² The

heir to the throne is also subject to them from infancy; their number

increases as he advances in life, till at the moment that he ascendsthe throne he is positively suffocated by them.

   Our space will not allow nor does our interest require us to enter

further into a description of the taboos associated with the dignity of

kings and priests. I will only add that the principal part is played in

them by restrictions upon freedom of movement and upon diet. Two

examples of taboo ceremonials occurring in civilized communities of a

far  higher  level  of  culture  will  serve  to  show,  however,  what  a

conservative effect upon ancient usages is exercised by contact with

these privileged personages.

 

   ¹ Kaempfer (1727), quoted by Frazer (1911b, 3 f.).

   ² Frazer (1911b, 5 and 8), quoting Bastian (1874-5).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2692

 

   The Flamen Dialis, the high priest of Jupiter in ancient Rome, was

obliged to observe an extraordinary number of taboos. He ‘might not

ride or even touch a horse, nor see an army under arms, nor wear a

ring  which  was  not  broken,  nor  have  a  knot  on  any  part  of  his

garments; . .  . he might not touch wheaten flour or leavened bread; he

might not touch or even name a goat, a dog, raw meat, beans, and

ivy; . . . his hair could be cut only by a free man and with a bronze

knife, and his hair and nails when cut had to be buried under a lucky

tree;  .  .  .  he  might  not  touch  a  dead  body;  .  .  .  he  might  not  be

uncovered in the open air’, and so on. ‘His wife, the Flaminica, had to

observe nearly the same rules, and others of her own besides. She

might not ascend more than three steps of the kind of staircase called

Greek; at a certain festival she might not comb her hair; the leather of

her shoes might not be made from a beast that had died a natural

death, but only from one that had been slain or sacrificed; if she heard

thunder she was tabooed till she had offered an expiatory sacrifice.’

(Frazer, 1911b, 13 f.)

      The  ancient  kings  of  Ireland  were  subject  to  a  number  of

exceedingly strange restrictions. If these were obeyed, every kind of

blessing would descend upon the country, but if they were violated,

disasters of every kind would visit it. A complete list of these taboos iscontained in the Book of Rights, the two oldest manuscript copies of

which  date  from  1390  and  1418.  The  prohibitions  are  of  the  most

detailed character, and refer to specific actions at specific places at

specific times: the king, for instance, may not stay in a certain town on

a particular day of the week; he may not cross a certain river at a

particular hour of the day; he may not encamp for nine days on a

certain plain, and so on. (Frazer, 1911b, 11 f.)

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2693

 

   Among many savage peoples the severity of these taboo restrictions

upon  priestly  kings  has  led  to  consequences  which  have  been

important historically and are of particular interest from our point of

view. The dignity of their position ceased to be an enviable thing, and

those who were offered it often took every possible means of escaping

it. Thus in Cambodia, where there are kingships of Fire and Water, it

is  often  necessary  to  force  successors  into  accepting  these

distinctions. On Niue or Savage Island, a coral island in the South

Pacific, the monarchy actually came to an end because no one could

be  induced  to  take  over  the  responsible  and  dangerous  office.  ‘In

some  parts  of  West  Africa,  when  the  king  dies,  a  family  council  is

secretly held to determine his successor. He on whom the choice falls

is suddenly seized, bound, and thrown into the fetish-house, where he

is kept in durance till he consents to accept the crown. Sometimes the

heir finds means of evading the honour which it is thought to thrust

upon him; a ferocious chief has been known to go about constantly

armed,  resolute  to  resist  by  force  any  attempt  to  set  him  on  the

throne.’¹ Among the natives of Sierra Leone the objection to accepting

the honour of kingship become so great that most tribes were obliged

to choose foreigners as their kings.

   Frazer (1911b, 17-25) attributes to these circumstances the fact that

in the course of history there eventually came about a division of the

original  priestly  kingship  into  a  spiritual  and  a  temporal  power.

Weighed  down  by  the  burden  of  their  sacred  office,  kings  became

unable to exert their dominance in real affairs and these were left inthe  hands  of  inferior  but  practical  persons,  who  were  ready  to

renounce the honours of kingship. These, then, became the temporal

rulers,  while  spiritual  supremacy,  deprived  of  any  practical

significance, was left to the former taboo kings. It is familiar knowledge

how far this hypothesis finds confirmation in the history of old Japan.

 

   ¹ Frazer (1911b, 17 f.), quoting Bastian (1874-5).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2694

 

 

   If we take a general survey of the relations of primitive men to their

rulers,  we  are  left  with  an  expectation  that  we  shall  have  no  great

difficulty in advancing from a description of them to a psycho-analytic

understanding of them. Those relations are of a complex kind and not

free  from  contradictions.  Rulers  are  allowed  great  privileges,  which

coincide exactly with the taboo prohibitions imposed on other people.

They  are  privileged  persons:  they  may  do  or  enjoy  precisely  what

other  people  are  forbidden  by  taboo.  As  against  this  freedom,

however, we find that they are restricted by other taboos from which

common  people  are  exempt.  Here  we  have  a  first  contrast  -  a

contradiction, almost - the fact, that is, of the same individual being

both  more  free  and  more  restricted.  Again,  they  are  regarded  as

possessing extraordinary powers of magic, so that people are afraid of

coming into contact with their persons or their property, while on the

other hand the most beneficial consequences are expected from that

same contact. Here there seems to be another, particularly glaring,

contradiction; but, as we have already seen, it is only an apparent

one.  Contacts  originating  from  the  king  himself  are  healing  and

protective;  the  dangerous  contacts  are  those  effected  by  common

men upon the king or his belongings - probably because they may hint

at  aggressive  impulses.  Yet  another  contradiction,  and  one  not  so

easily resolved, is to be found in the fact that the ruler is believed to

exercise great authority over the forces of Nature, but that he has to

be most carefully protected against the threat of danger - as though

his own power, which can do so much, cannot do this. The situation ismade still more difficult by the fact that the ruler cannot be trusted to

make  use  of  his  immense  powers  in  the  right  way,  that  is,  for  the

benefit of his subjects and for his own protection. Thus people distrust

his  and  feel  justified  in  keeping  a  watch  on  him.  The  etiquette  of

taboos  to  which  the  king’s  whole  life  is  subjected  serves  all  these

protective purposes at once: his own protection from dangers and the

protection of his subjects from the dangers with which he threatens

them.

      It  seems  plausible  to  explain  the  complicated  and  contradictory

attitude of primitive peoples to their rulers in some such way as the

following. For superstitious and other reasons, a variety of different

impulses  find  expression  in  relation  to  kings;  and  each  of  these

impulses  is  developed  to  an  extreme  point  without  regard  to  the

others.  This  gives  rise  to  contradictions  -  by  which,  incidentally,  a

savage intellect is as little disturbed as is a highly civilized one when it

comes to such matters as religion or ‘loyalty’.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2695

 

   So far so good; but the technique of psycho-analysis allows us to go

into the question further and to enter more into the details of these

various  impulses.  If  we  submit  the  recorded  facts  to  analysis,  as

though they formed part of the symptoms presented by a neurosis, our

starting-point must be the excessive apprehensiveness and solicitude

which is put forward as the reason for the taboo ceremonials. The

occurrence  of  excessive  solicitude  of  this  kind  is  very  common  in

neuroses,  and  especially  in  obsessional  neuroses,  with  which  our

comparison is chiefly drawn. We have come to understand its origin

quite clearly. It appears wherever, in addition to a predominant feeling

of  affection,  there  is  also  a  contrary,  but  unconscious,  current  of

hostility - a state of affairs which represents a typical instance of an

ambivalent emotional attitude. The hostility is then shouted down, as it

were,  by  an  excessive  intensification  of  the  affection,  which  is

expressed as solicitude and becomes compulsive, because it might

otherwise  be  inadequate  to  perform  its  task  of  keeping  theunconscious  contrary  current  of  feeling  under  repression.  Every

psycho-analyst  knows  from  experience  with  what  certainty  this

explanation of solicitous over-affection is found to apply even in the

most unlikely circumstances - in cases, for instance, of attachments

between a mother and child or between a devoted married couple. If

we now apply this to the case of privileged persons, we shall realize

that  alongside  the  veneration,  and  indeed  idolization,  felt  towards

them,  there  is  in  the  unconscious  an  opposing  current  of  intense

hostility; that, in fact, as we expected, we are faced by a situation of

emotional  ambivalence.  The  distrust  which  provides  one  of  the

unmistakable elements in kingly taboos would thus be another, more

direct, expression of the same unconscious hostility. Indeed, owing to

the variety of outcomes of a conflict of this kind which are reached

among different peoples, we are not at a loss for examples in which

the  existence  of  this  hostility  is  still  more  obviously  shown.  ‘The

savage Timmes of Sierra Leone’, we learn from Frazer,¹ ‘who elect

their king, reserve to themselves the right of beating him on the eve of

his  coronation;  and  they  avail  themselves  of  this  constitutional

privilege  with  such  hearty  goodwill  that  sometimes  the  unhappy

monarch  does  not  long  survive  his  elevation  to  the  throne.  Hence

when  the  leading  chiefs  have  a  spite  at  a  man  and  wish  to  rid

themselves of him, they elect him king.’ Even in glaring instances like

this, however, the hostility is not admitted as such, but masquerades

as a ceremonial.

 

   ¹ Frazer (1911b, 18), quoting Zweifel and Moustier (1880).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2696

 

   Another side of the attitude of primitive peoples towards their rulers

recalls a procedure which is common in neuroses generally but comes

into  the  open  in  what  are  known  as  delusions  of  persecution.  The

importance of one particular person is immensely exaggerated and his

absolute power is magnified to the most improbable degree, in order

that  it  may  be  easier  to  make  him  responsible  for  everything

disagreeable  that  the  patient  may  experience.  Savages  are  reallybehaving in just the same way with their kings when they ascribe to

them  power  over  rain  and  sunshine,  wind  and  weather,  and  then

depose them or kill them because Nature disappoints their hopes of a

successful hunt or a rich harvest. The model upon which paranoics

base  their  delusions  of  persecution  is  the  relation  of  a  child  to  his

father. A son’s picture of his father is habitually clothed with excessive

powers  of  this  kind,  and  it  is  found  that  distrust  of  the  father  is

intimately linked with admiration for him. When a paranoic turns the

figure of one of his associates into a ‘persecutor’, he is raising him to

the rank of a father: he is putting him into a position in which he can

blame him for all his misfortunes. Thus this second analogy between

savages and neurotics gives us a glimpse of the truth that much of a

savage’s attitude to his ruler is derived from a child’s infantile attitude

to his father.

   But the strongest support for our effort to equate taboo prohibitions

with  neurotic  symptoms  is  to  be  found  in  the  taboo  ceremonials

themselves,  the  effect  of  which  upon  the  position  of  royalty  has

already been discussed. These ceremonials unmistakably reveal their

double  meaning  and  their  derivation  from  ambivalent  impulses,  as

soon as we are ready to allow that the results which they bring about

were intended from the first. The taboo does not only pick out the king

and exalt him above all common mortals, it also makes his existence a

torment and an intolerable burden and reduces him to a bondage far

worse  than  that  of  his  subjects.  Here,  then,  we  have  an  exact

counterpart  of  the  obsessional  act  in  the  neurosis,  in  which  the

suppressed  impulse  and  the  impulse  that  suppresses  it  find

simultaneous  and  common  satisfaction.  The  obsessional  act  is

ostensibly a protection against the prohibited act; but actually, in our

view, it is a repetition of it. The ‘ostensibly’ applies to the conscious

part of the mind, and the ‘actually’ to the unconscious part. In exactly

the same way, the ceremonial taboo of kings is ostensibly the highest

honour and protection for them, while actually it is a punishment for

their  exaltation,  a  revenge  taken  on  them  by  their  subjects.  The

experiences of Sancho Panza (as described by Cervantes) when he

was  Governor  of  his  island  convinced  him  that  this  view  of  court

ceremonial was the only one that met the case. If we could hear the

views of modern kings and rulers on the subject, we might find thatthere were many others who agreed with him.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2697

 

   The question of why the emotional attitude towards rulers includes

such  a  powerful  unconscious  element  of  hostility  raises  a  very

interesting problem, but one that lies outside the limits of the present

study.  I  have  already  hinted  at  the  fact  that  the  child’s  complex  of

emotions towards his father - the father-complex - has a bearing on

the subject, and I may add that more information on the early history

of the kingship would throw a decisive light on it. Frazer (1911a) has

put  forward  impressive  reasons,  though,  as  he  himself  admits,  not

wholly  conclusive  ones,  for  supposing  that  the  earliest  kings  were

foreigners  who,  after  a  brief  reign,  were  sacrificed  with  solemn

festivities as representatives of the deity. It is possible that the course

taken by the evolution of kings may also have had an influence upon

the myths of Christendom.

 

                        (c) The Taboo upon the Dead

 

   We know that the dead are powerful rulers; but we may perhaps be

surprised when we learn that they are treated as enemies.

   The taboo upon the dead is - if I may revert to the simile of infection

- especially virulent among most primitive peoples. It is manifested, in

the  first  instance,  in  the  consequences  that  follow  contact  with  the

dead and in the treatment of mourners.

   Among the Maoris anyone who had handled a corpse or taken any

part in its burial was in the highest degree unclean and was almost cut

off from intercourse with his fellow-men, or, as we might put it, was

boycotted. He could not enter any house, or come into contact with

any person or thing without infecting them. He might not even touch

food with his hands, which, owing to their uncleanness, had become

quite useless. ‘Food would be set for him on the ground, and he would

then sit or kneel down, and, with his hands carefully held behind his

back, would gnaw at it as best he could. In some cases he would befed by another person, who with outstretched arm contrived to do it

without  touching  the  tabooed  man;  but  the  feeder  was  himself

subjected to many severe restrictions, little less onerous than those

which were imposed upon the other. In almost every populous village

there lived a degraded wretch, the lowest of the low, who earned a

sorry pittance by thus waiting upon the defiled.’ He alone was allowed

‘to associate at arm’s length with one who had paid the last offices . . .

to the dead. And when, the dismal term of his seclusion being over,

the  mourner  was  about  to  mix  with  his  fellows  once  more,  all  the

dishes he had used in his seclusion were diligently smashed, and all

the garments he had worn were carefully thrown away.’

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2698

 

   The taboo observances after bodily contact with the dead are the

same over the whole of Polynesia, Melanesia and a part of Africa.

Their most regular feature is the prohibition against those who have

had  such  contact  touching  food  themselves,  and  the  consequent

necessity for their being fed by other people. It is a remarkable fact

that in Polynesia (though the report may perhaps refer only to Hawaii)

priestly kings were subject to the same restriction while performing

their sacred functions.¹ The case of the taboo upon the dead in Tonga

offers a specially clear instance of the way in which the degree of

prohibition varies according to the taboo power of the person upon

whom the taboo is imposed. Thus anyone who touches a dead chief is

unclean for ten months; but if he himself is a chief he is only tabooed

for three, four, or five months according to the rank of the dead man;

but if the dead man were the ‘great divine chief’, even the greatest

chief would be tabooed for ten months. These savages believe firmly

that anyone who violates the taboo ordinances is bound to fall ill and

die; indeed they believe it so firmly that, in the opinion of an observer,

‘no native ever made an experiment to prove the contrary’.²

   Essentially the same prohibitions (though from our point of view they

are more interesting) apply to those who have been in contact with the

dead  only  in  a  metaphorical  sense:  the  dead  person’s  mourningrelations, widowers and widows. The observances that we have so far

mentioned may seem merely to give characteristic expression to the

virulence of the taboo and its contagious power. But those which now

follow give us a hint at the reasons for the taboo - both the ostensible

ones and what we must regard as the deep-lying real ones.

   ‘Among the Shuswap of British Columbia widows and widowers in

mourning are secluded and forbidden to touch their own head or body;

the cups and cooking vessels which they use may be used by no one

else.  .  .  .  No  hunter  would  come  near  such  mourners,  for  their

presence is unlucky. If their shadow were to fall on anyone, he would

be taken ill at once. They employ thorn-bushes for bed and pillow . . .

and  thorn-bushes  are  also  laid  all  around  their  beds.’  This  last

measure is designed to keep the dead person’s ghost at a distance.

The same purpose is shown still more clearly in the usage reported

from  another  North  American  tribe  which  provides  that,  after  her

husband’s death, ‘a widow would wear a breech-cloth made of dry

bunch-grass for several days to prevent her husband’s ghost having

intercourse  with  her.’  This  suggests  that  contact  ‘in  a  metaphorical

sense’ is after all understood as being bodily contact, for the dead

man’s ghost does not leave his relations and does not cease to ‘hover’

round them during the time of mourning.

   ‘Among the Agutainos, who inhabit Palawan, one of the Philippine

Islands, a widow may not leave her hut for seven or eight days after

the death; and even then she may only go out at an hour when she is

not likely to meet anybody, for whoever looks upon her dies a sudden

death.  To  prevent  this  fatal  catastrophe,  the  widow  knocks  with  a

wooden peg on the trees as she goes along, thus warning people of

her  dangerous  proximity;  and  the  very  trees  on  which  she  knocks

soon die.’ The nature of the danger feared from a widow such as this

is made plain by another example. ‘In the Mekeo district of British New

Guinea  a  widower  loses  all  his  civil  rights  and  becomes  a  social

outcast,  an  object  of  fear  and  horror,  shunned  by  all.  He  may  not

cultivate a garden, nor show himself in public, nor walk on the roads

and paths. Like a wild beast he must skulk in the long grass and the

bushes; and if he sees or hears anyone coming, especially a woman,

he must hide behind a tree or a thicket.’ This last hint makes it easy to

trace the origin of the dangerous character of widowers or widows tothe danger of temptation. A man who has lost his wife must resist a

desire to find a substitute for her; a widow must fight against the same

wish  and  is  moreover  liable,  being  without  a  lord  and  master,  to

arouse the desires of other men. Substitutive satisfactions of such a

kind run counter to the sense of mourning and they would inevitably

kindle the ghost’s wrath.³

 

   ¹ Frazer (loc. cit.).

   ² Frazer (1911b, 140), quoting Mariner (1818).

     ³ The  patient  whose  ‘impossibilities’  I  compared  with  taboos  earlier  in  this  paper

(see page 2676) told me that whenever she met anyone dressed in mourning in the street she
was filled with indignation: such people, she thought, should be forbidden to go out.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2699

 

 

   One of the most puzzling, but at the same time instructive usages in

connection with mourning is the prohibition against uttering the name

of  the  dead  person.  This  custom  is  extremely  widespread,  it  is

expressed in a variety of ways and has had important consequences.

It  is  found  not  only  among  the  Australians  and  Polynesians  (who

usually show us taboo observances in the best state of preservation),

but also among ‘peoples so widely separated from each other as the

Samoyeds of Siberia and the Todas of southern India; the Mongols of

Tartary and the Tuaregs of the Sahara; the Ainos of Japan and the

Akamba and Nandi of central Africa; the Tinguianes of the Philippines

and the inhabitants of the Nicobar Islands, of Borneo, of Madagascar,

and of Tasmania.’ (Frazer, 1911b, 353.) In some of these cases the

prohibition  and  its  consequences  last  only  during  the  period  of

mourning,  in  others  they  are  permanent;  but  it  seems  invariably  to

diminish in strictness with the passage of time.

   The avoidance of the name of a dead person is as a rule enforced

with  extreme  severity.  Thus  in  some  South  American  tribes  it  is

regarded as a deadly insult to the survivors to mention the name of a

dead relative in their presence, and the punishment for it is not less

than that laid down for murder. (Ibid., 352.) It is not easy at first to seewhy the mention of the name should be regarded with such horror; but

the dangers involved have given rise to a whole number of methods of

evasion which are interesting and important in various ways. Thus the

Masai in East Africa resort to the device of changing the dead man’s

name immediately after his death; he may then be mentioned freely

under his new name while all the restrictions remain attached to the

old one. This seems to presuppose that the dead man’s ghost does

not know and will not get to know his new name. The Adelaide and

Encounter  Bay  tribes  of  South  Australia  are  so  consistently  careful

that  after  a  death  everyone  bearing  the  same  name  as  the  dead

man’s,  or  a  very  similar  one,  changes  it  for  another.  In  some

instances,  as  for  instance  among  certain  tribes  in  Victoria  and  in

North-West America, this is carried a step further, and after a death all

the dead person’s relations change their names, irrespective of any

similarity in their sound. Indeed, among the Guaycurus in Paraguay,

when a death had taken place, the chief used to change the name of

every  member  of  the  tribe;  and  ‘from  that  moment  everybody

remembered his new name just as if he had borne it all his life’.¹

   Moreover, if the name of the dead man happens to be the same as

that of an animal or common object, some tribes think it necessary to

give  these  animals  or  objects  new  names,  so  that  the  use  of  the

former names shall not recall the dead man to memory. This usage

leads  to  a  perpetual  change  of  vocabulary,  which  causes  much

difficulty  to  the  missionaries,  especially  when  such  changes  are

permanent.  In  the  seven  years  which  the  missionary  Dobrizhoffer

spent among the Abipones of Paraguay, ‘the native word for jaguar

was  changed  thrice,  and  the  words  for  crocodile,  thorn,  and  the

slaughter of cattle underwent similar though less varied vicissitudes’.²

The dread of uttering a dead person’s name extends, indeed, to an

avoidance of the mention of anything in which the dead man played a

part; and an important consequence of this process of suppression is

that these peoples possess no tradition and no historical memory, so

that  any  research  into  their  early  history  is  faced  by  the  greatest

difficulties. A number of these primitive races have, however, adopted

compensatory usages which revive the names of dead persons after a

long  period  of  mourning  by  giving  them  to  children,  who  are  thus

regarded as reincarnations of the dead. 

   ¹ Frazer (1911b, 357), quoting an old Spanish observer.

   ² Frazer (1911b, 360), quoting Dobrizhoffer.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2700

 

   This taboo upon names will seem less puzzling if we bear in mind

the fact that savages regard a name as an essential part of a man’s

personality and as an important possession: they treat words in every

sense as things. As I have pointed out elsewhere, our own children do

the same. They are never ready to accept a similarity between two

words  as  having  no  meaning;  they  consistently  assume  that  if  two

things  are  called  by  similar-sounding  names  this  must  imply  the

existence of some deep-lying point of agreement between them. Even

a civilized adult may be able to infer from certain peculiarities in his

own behaviour that he is not so far removed as he may have thought

from attributing importance to proper names, and that his own name

has  become  to  a  very  remarkable  extent  bound  up  with  his

personality.  So,  too,  psycho-analytic  practice  comes  upon  frequent

confirmations  of  this  in  the  evidence  it  finds  of  the  importance  of

names in unconscious mental activities.¹

   As was only to be expected, obsessional neurotics behave exactly

like savages in relation to names. Like other neurotics, they show a

high  degree  of  ‘complexive  sensitiveness’  in  regard  to  uttering  or

hearing particular words and names; and their attitude towards their

own  names  imposes  numerous,  and  often  serious,  inhibitions  upon

them. One of these taboo patients of my acquaintance had adopted a

rule against writing her own name, for fear that it might fall into the

hands of someone who would then be in possession of a portion of

her  personality.  She  was  obliged  to  fight  with  convulsive  loyalty

against the temptations to which her imagination subjected her, and

so forbade herself ‘to surrender any part of her person’. This included

in the first place her name, and later extended to her handwriting, till

finally she gave up writing altogether.

 

   ¹ Cf. Stekel and Abraham. 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2701

 

   We shall no longer feel surprised, therefore, at savages regarding

the name of a dead person as a portion of his personality and making

it subject to the relevant taboo. So, too, uttering the name of a dead

person  is  clearly  a  derivative  of  having  contact  with  him.  We  may

therefore turn to the wider problem of why such contact is submitted to

so strict a taboo.

 

   The most obvious explanation would point to horror roused by dead

bodies  and  by  the  changes  which  quickly  become  visible  in  them.

Some part must also be played in the matter by mourning for the dead

person, since it must be a motive force in everything relating to him.

But horror at the corpse clearly does not account for all the details of

the taboo observances, and mourning cannot explain why the uttering

of the dead man’s name is an insult to his survivors. Mourning, on the

contrary, tends to be preoccupied with the dead man, to dwell upon

his memory and to preserve it as long as possible. Something other

than mourning must be held responsible for the peculiarities of the

taboo usages, something which has very different purposes in view. It

is  precisely  the  taboo  upon  names  that  gives  us  the  clue  to  this

unknown motive; and if the usages alone did not tell us, we should

learn it from what the mourning savages say to us themselves.

   For they make no disguise of the fact that they are afraid of the

presence or of the return of the dead person’s ghost; and they perform

a great number of ceremonies to keep him at a distance or drive him

off.¹ They feel that to utter his name is equivalent to invoking him and

will  quickly  be  followed  by  his  presence.²  And  accordingly  they  do

everything  they  can  to  avoid  any  such  evocation.  They  disguise

themselves  so  that  the  ghost  shall  not  recognize  them,³  or  they

change his name or their own; they are furious with reckless strangers

who by uttering the ghost’s name incite him against the survivors. It is

impossible  to  escape  the  conclusion  that,  in  the  words  of  Wundt

(1906, 49), they are victims to a fear of ‘the dead man’s soul which

has  become  a  demon’.  Here,  then,  we  seem  to  have  found  aconfirmation  of  Wundt’s  view,  which,  as  we  have  already  seen

(p. 2672), considers that the essence of taboo is a fear of demons.

 

     ¹ Frazer  (1911b,  353)  mentions  the  Tuaregs  of  the  Sahara  as  an  example  of  this

explanation being given by the savages themselves.

   ² Subject, perhaps, to the condition that some of his bodily remains are still in existence.

(Ibid., 372.)

   ³ In the Nicobar Islands. (Ibid., 358.)

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2702

 

   This theory is based on a supposition so extraordinary that it seems

at first sight incredible: the supposition, namely, that a dearly loved

relative at the moment of his death changes into a demon, from whom

his survivors can expect nothing but hostility and against whose evil

desires  they  must  protect  themselves  by  every  possible  means.

Nevertheless, almost all the authorities are at one in attributing these

views to primitive peoples. Westermarck, who, in my opinion, takes far

too little notice of taboo in his book on The Origin and Development of

the  Moral  Ideas,  actually  writes  in  his  chapter  on  ‘Regard  for  the

Dead’: ‘Generally speaking, my collection of facts has led me to the

conclusion that the dead are more commonly regarded as enemies

than  friends,  and  that  Professor  Jevons  and  Mr.  Grant  Allen  are

mistaken  in  their  assertion  that,  according  to  early  beliefs,  the

malevolence  of  the  dead  is  for  the  most  part  directed  against

strangers only, whereas they exercise a fatherly care over the lives

and fortunes of their descendants and fellow clansmen.’¹

 

   ¹ Westermarck (1906-8, 2, 532 ff.). In his footnotes and in the section of the text which

follows, the author gives copious confirmatory evidence, often of an extremely pertinent sort.
For instance: ‘Among the Maoris the nearest and most beloved relatives were supposed to
have their natures changed by death, and to become malignant, even towards those they
formerly loved. . . . Australian natives believed that a deceased person is malevolent for a
long time after death, and the more nearly related the more he is feared. . . . According to
ideas  prevalent  among  the  Central  Eskimo,  the  dead  are  at  first  malevolent  spirits  who
frequently roam around the villages, causing sickness and mischief and killing men by their
touch; but subsequently they are supposed to attain rest and are no longer feared.’
                                     Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2703

 

      In  an  interesting  volume,  Rudolf  Kleinpaul  (1898)  has  used  the

remnants among civilized races of the ancient belief in spirits to throw

light on the relation between the living and the dead. He, too, reaches

the final conclusion that the dead, filled with a lust for murder, sought

to drag the living in their train. The dead slew; and the skeleton which

we  use  to-day  to  picture  the  dead  stands  for  the  fact  that  they

themselves were slayers. The living did not feel safe from the attacks

of the dead till there was a sheet of water between them. That is why

men liked to bury the dead on islands or on the farther side of rivers;

and that, in turn, is the origin of such phrases as ‘Here and in the

Beyond’.  Later,  the  malignity  of  the  dead  diminished  and  was

restricted  to  special  categories  which  had  a  particular  right  to  feel

resentment - such as murdered men, for instance, who in the form of

evil spirits went in pursuit of their murderers, or brides who had died

with their desires unsatisfied. But originally, says Kleinpaul, all of the

dead were vampires, all of them had a grudge against the living and

sought to injure them and rob them of their lives. It was from corpses

that the concept of evil spirits first arose.

 

      The  hypothesis  that  after  their  death  those  most  beloved  were

transformed into demons clearly raises further questions. What was it

that  induced  primitive  men  to  attribute  such  a  change  of  feeling  to

those  who  had  been  dear  to  them?  Why  did  they  make  them  into

demons? Westermarck (1906-8, 2, 534 f.) is of the opinion that these

questions can be answered easily. ‘Death is commonly regarded as

the  gravest  of  all  misfortunes;  hence  the  dead  are  believed  to  be

exceedingly dissatisfied with their fate. According to primitive ideas a

person only dies if he is killed - by magic if not by force - and such a

death naturally tends to make the soul revengeful and ill-tempered. It

is  envious  of  the  living  and  is  longing  for  the  company  of  its  old

friends; no wonder, then, that it sends them diseases to cause their

death. . . . But the notion that the disembodied soul is on the whole a

malicious being . . . is also, no doubt, intimately connected with the

instinctive fear of the dead, which is in its turn the outcome of the fearof death.’

      The  study  of  psychoneurotic  disorders  suggests  a  more

comprehensive explanation, which at the same time covers that put

forward by Westermarck

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2704

 

   When a wife has lost her husband or a daughter her mother, it not

infrequently happens that the survivor is overwhelmed by tormenting

doubts (to which we give the name of ‘obsessive self-reproaches’) as

to whether she may not herself have been responsible for the death of

this cherished being through some act of carelessness or neglect. No

amount of recollection of the care she lavished on the sufferer, no

amount  of  objective  disproof  of  the  accusation,  serves  to  bring  the

torment  to  an  end.  It  may  be  regarded  as  a  pathological  form  of

mourning, and with the passage of time it gradually dies away. The

psycho-analytic investigation of such cases has revealed the secret

motives  of  the  disorder.  We  find  that  in  a  certain  sense  these

obsessive self-reproaches are justified, and that this is why they are

proof against contradictions and protests. It is not that the mourner

was really responsible for the death or was really guilty of neglect, as

the self-reproaches declare to be the case. None the less there was

something in her - a wish that was unconscious to herself - which

would  not  have  been  dissatisfied  by  the  occurrence  of  death  and

which might actually have brought it about if it had had the power. And

after death has occurred, it is against this unconscious wish that the

reproaches are a reaction. In almost every case where there is an

intense  emotional  attachment  to  a  particular  person  we  find  that

behind  the  tender  love  there  is  a  concealed  hostility  in  the

unconscious.  This  is  the  classical  example,  the  prototype,  of  the

ambivalence  of  human  emotions.  This  ambivalence  is  present  to  a

greater or less amount in the innate disposition of everyone; normally,

there is not so much of it as to produce the obsessive self-reproaches

we  are  considering.  Where,  however,  it  is  copiously  present  in  the

disposition, it will manifest itself precisely in the subject’s relation tothose of whom he is most fond, in the place, in fact, where one would

least expect to find it. It must be supposed that the presence of a

particularly  large  amount  of  this  original  emotional  ambivalence  is

characteristic  of  the  disposition  of  obsessional  neurotics  -  whom  I

have  so  often  brought  up  for  comparison  in  this  discussion  upon

taboo.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2705

 

   We have now discovered a motive which can explain the idea that

the souls of those who have just died are transformed into demons

and the necessity felt by survivors to protect themselves by taboos

against  their  hostility.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  emotional  life  of

primitive peoples is characterized by an amount of ambivalence as

great as that which we are led by the findings of psycho-analysis to

attribute to obsessional patients. It then becomes easy to understand

how  after  a  painful  bereavement  savages  should  be  obliged  to

produce  a  reaction  against  the  hostility  latent  in  their  unconscious

similar to that expressed as obsessive self-reproach in the case of

neurotics.  But  this  hostility,  distressingly  felt  in  the  unconscious  as

satisfaction over the death, is differently dealt with among primitive

peoples. The defence against it takes the form of displacing it on to

the object of the hostility, on to the dead themselves. This defensive

procedure, which is a common one both in normal and in pathological

mental life, is known as a ‘projection’. The survivor thus denies that he

has ever harboured any hostile feelings against the dead loved one;

the soul of the dead harbours them instead and seeks to put them into

action during the whole period of mourning. In spite of the successful

defence  which  the  survivor  achieves  by  means  of  projection,  his

emotional  reaction  shows  the  characteristics  of  punishment  and

remorse, for he is the subject of fears and submits to renunciations

and restrictions, though these are in part disguised as measures of

protection against the hostile demon. Once again, therefore, we find

that the taboo has grown up on the basis of an ambivalent emotional

attitude.  The  taboo  upon  the  dead  arises,  like  the  others,  from  thecontrast between conscious pain and unconscious satisfaction over

the death that has occurred. Since such is the origin of the ghost’s

resentment, it follows naturally that the survivors who have the most to

fear will be those who were formerly its nearest and dearest.

   In this respect taboo observances, like neurotic symptoms, have a

double sense. On the one hand, in their restrictive character, they are

expressions of mourning; but on the other hand they clearly betray -

what they seek to conceal - hostility against the dead disguised as

self-defence. We have already learned that certain taboos arise out of

fear of temptation. The fact that a dead man is helpless is bound to act

as an encouragement to the survivor to give free rein to his hostile

passions, and that temptation must be countered by a prohibition.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2706

 

   Westermarck is right in insisting that savages draw no distinction

between  violent  and  natural  death.  In  the  view  of  unconscious

thinking, a man who has died a natural death is a murdered man: evil

wishes  have  killed  him.¹  Anyone  who  investigates  the  origin  and

significance of dreams of the death of loved relatives (of parents or

brothers  or  sisters)  will  be  able  to  convince  himself  that  dreamers,

children and savages are at one in their attitude towards the dead - an

attitude based upon emotional ambivalence.

   At the beginning of this essay disagreement was expressed with

Wundt’s opinion that the essence of taboo was a fear of demons. Yet

we have now assented to an explanation that derives the taboo upon

the dead from a fear of the soul of the dead person transformed into a

demon. The apparent contradiction can easily be resolved. It is true

that we have accepted the presence of demons, but not as something

ultimate and psychologically unanalysable. We have succeeded, as it

were, in getting behind the demons, for we have explained them as

projections of hostile feelings harboured by the survivors against the

dead.

   Both of the two sets of feelings (the affectionate and the hostile),

which, as we have good reason to believe, exist towards the deadperson,  seek  to  take  effect  at  the  time  of  the  bereavement,  as

mourning and as satisfaction. There is bound to be a conflict between

these two contrary feelings; and, since one of the two, the hostility, is

wholly or for the greater part unconscious, the outcome of the conflict

cannot be to subtract, as it were, the feeling with the lesser intensity

from  that  with  the  greater  and  to  establish  the  remainder  in

consciousness - as occurs, for instance, when one forgives a slight

that  one  has  received  from  someone  of  whom  one  is  fond.  The

process  is  dealt  with  instead  by  the  special  psychical  mechanism

known in psycho-analysis, as I have said, by the name of ‘projection’.

The hostility, of which the survivors know nothing and moreover wish

to know nothing, is ejected from internal perception into the external

world, and thus detached from them and pushed on to someone else.

It is ho longer true that they are rejoicing to be rid of the dead man; on

the contrary, they are mourning for him; but, strange to say, he has

turned into a wicked demon ready to gloat over their misfortunes and

eager to kill them. It then becomes necessary for them, the survivors,

to  defend  themselves  against  this  evil  enemy;  they  are  relieved  of

pressure from within, but have only exchanged it for oppression from

without.

 

   ¹ Cf. the next essay in this volume.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2707

 

   It cannot be disputed that this process of projection, which turns a

dead man into a malignant enemy, is able to find support in any real

acts  of  hostility  on  his  part  that  may  be  recollected  and  felt  as  a

grudge against him: his severity, his love of power, his unfairness, or

whatever  else  may  form  the  background  of  even  the  tenderest  of

human relationships. But it cannot be such a simple matter as that.

This factor alone cannot explain the creation of demons by projection.

The faults of the dead no doubt provide a part of the explanation of the

survivors’ hostility; but they would not operate in this way unless the

survivors  had  first  developed  hostility  on  their  own  account.  The

moment  of  death,  moreover,  would  certainly  seem  to  be  a  mostinappropriate  occasion  for  recalling  any  justifiable  grounds  of

complaint that might exist. It is impossible to escape the fact that the

true  determining  factor  is  invariably unconscious  hostility.  A  hostile

current of feeling such as this against a person’s nearest and dearest

relatives may remain latent during their lifetime, that is, its existence

may not be betrayed to consciousness either directly or through some

substitute. But when they die this is no longer possible and the conflict

becomes acute. The mourning which derives from an intensification of

the affectionate feelings becomes on the one hand more impatient of

the latent hostility and, on the other hand, will not allow it to give rise

to any sense of satisfaction. Accordingly, there follow the repression of

the  unconscious  hostility  by  the  method  of  projection  and  the

construction of the ceremonial which gives expression to the fear of

being punished by the demons. When in course of time the mourning

runs its course, the conflict grows less acute, so that the taboo upon

the dead is able to diminish in severity or sink into oblivion.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2708

 

                                          (4)

 

   Having thus explained the basis of the exceedingly instructive taboo

upon the dead, we must not omit to add a few remarks that may help

to increase our understanding of taboo in general.

   The projection of unconscious hostility on to demons in the case of

the  taboo  upon  the  dead  is  only  a  single  instance  of  a  number  of

processes to which the greatest influence must be attributed in the

shaping of the primitive mind. In the case we have been dealing with,

projection served the purpose of dealing with an emotional conflict;

and it is employed in the same way in a large number of psychical

situations that lead to neuroses. But projection was not created for the

purpose  of  defence;  it  also  occurs  where  there  is  no  conflict.  The

projection outwards of internal perceptions is a primitive mechanism,

to which, for instance, our sense perceptions are subject, and which

therefore  normally  plays  a  very  large  part  in  determining  the  formtaken by our external world. Under conditions whose nature has not

yet been sufficiently established, internal perceptions of emotional and

thought  processes  can  be  projected  outwards  in  the  same  way  as

sense perceptions; they are thus employed for building up the external

world, though they should by rights remain part of the internal world.

This may have some genetic connection with the fact that the function

of attention was originally directed not towards the internal world but

towards the stimuli that stream in from the external world, and that that

function’s only information upon endopsychic processes was received

from feelings of pleasure and unpleasure. It was not until a language

of abstract thought had been developed, that is to say, not until the

sensory  residues  of  verbal  presentations  had  been  linked  to  the

internal  processes,  that  the  latter  themselves  gradually  became

capable  of  being  perceived.  Before  that,  owing  to  the  projection

outwards of internal perceptions, primitive men arrived at a picture of

the external world which we, with our intensified conscious perception,

have now to translate back into psychology.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2709

 

   The projection of their own evil impulses into demons is only one

portion of a system which constituted the Weltanschauung of primitive

peoples,  and  which  we  shall  come  to  know  as  ‘animism’  in  the

following  essay.  There  we  shall  have  to  investigate  that  system’s

psychological  characteristics,  and  we  shall  do  so  once  again  by

reference  to  the  similar  systems  which  we  find  constructed  by

neurotics. For the moment I will only say that the prototype of all such

systems  is  what  we  have  termed  the  ‘secondary  revision’  of  the

content of dreams. And we must not forget that, at and after the stage

at  which  systems  are  constructed,  two  sets  of  reasons  can  be

assigned for every psychical event that is consciously judged - one set

belonging to the system and the other set real but unconscious.¹

   Wundt (1906, 129) remarks that ‘among the activities attributed by

myths all over the world to demons, the harmful predominate, so that

in popular belief bad demons are clearly older than good ones’. It isquite possible that the whole concept of demons was derived from the

important relation of the living to the dead. The ambivalence inherent

in  that  relation  was  expressed  in  the  subsequent  course  of  human

development by the fact that, from the same root, it gave rise to two

completely  opposed  psychical  structures:  on  the  one  hand  fear  of

demons and ghosts and on the other hand veneration of ancestors.²

The fact that demons are always regarded as the spirits of those who

have  died recently  shows  better  than  anything  the  influence  of

mourning on the origin of the belief in demons. Mourning has a quite

specific  psychical  task  to  perform:  its  function  is  to  detach  the

survivors’ memories and hopes from the dead. When this has been

achieved,  the  pain  grows  less  and  with  it  the  remorse  and  self-

reproaches and consequently the fear of the demon as well. And the

same  spirits  who  to  begin  with  were  feared  as  demons  may  now

expect to meet with friendlier treatment; they are revered as ancestors

and appeals are made to them for help.

 

   ¹ The projected creations of primitive men resemble the personifications constructed by

creative  writers;  for  the  latter  externalize  in  the  form  of  separate  individuals  the  opposing
instinctual impulses struggling within them.

    ² In  the  course  of  psycho-analyses  of  neurotics  who  suffer  (or  who  suffered  in  their

childhood) from fear of ghosts, it is often possible to show without much difficulty that the
ghosts are disguises for the patient’s parents. Cf. in this connection a paper upon ‘Sexual
Ghosts’ by Haeberlin (1912). Here the person concerned was not the subject’s parent (who
was dead) but someone else of erotic significance to him.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2710

 

 

   If we follow the changing relations between survivors and the dead

through the course of ages, it becomes obvious that there has been

an extraordinary diminution in ambivalence. It is now quite easy to

keep down the unconscious hostility to the dead (though its existence

can  still  be  traced)  without  any  particular  expenditure  of  psychical

energy. Where, in earlier times, satisfied hatred and pained affection

fought each other, we now find that a kind of scar has been formed in

the shape of piety, which declares ‘de mortuis nil nisi bonum’. It is onlyneurotics whose mourning for the loss of those dear to them is still

troubled by obsessive self-reproaches - the secret of which is revealed

by psycho-analysis as the old emotional ambivalence. We need not

discuss here how this alteration came about or how much share in it is

due  to  a  constitutional  modification  and  how  much  to  a  real

improvement  in  family  relations.  But  this  example  suggests  the

probability  that the  psychical  impulses  of  primitive  peoples  were

characterized by a higher amount of ambivalence than is to be found

in modern civilized man. It is to be supposed that as this ambivalence

diminished, taboo (a symptom of the ambivalence and a compromise

between two conflicting impulses) slowly disappeared Neurotics, who

are obliged to reproduce the struggle and the taboo resulting from it,

may be said to have inherited an archaic constitution as an atavistic

vestige; the need to compensate for this at the behest of civilization is

what drives them to their immense expenditure of mental energy.

   And here we may recall the obscure and puzzling statement by

Wundt  on  the  double  meaning  of  the  word  taboo:  ‘sacred’  and

‘unclean’. (See above.) Originally, according to him, the word did not

possess these two meanings, but described ‘what is demonic’, ‘what

may  not  be  touched’,  thus  stressing  an  important  characteristic

common to both the extreme concepts. The persistence, however (he

added), of this common characteristic was evidence that the ground

covered by the two - the sacred and the unclean - was originally one

and did not become differentiated until later.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2711

 

   Our discussions, on the contrary, lead us to the simple conclusion

that the word ‘taboo’ had a double meaning from the very first and that

it  was  used  to  designate  a  particular  kind  of  ambivalence  and

whatever arose from it. ‘Taboo’ is itself an ambivalent word; and one

feels  on  looking  back  that  the  well-attested  meaning  of  the  word

should alone have made it possible to infer - what has actually been

arrived at as a result of extensive researches - that the prohibitions of

taboo  are  to  be  understood  as  consequences  of  an  emotionalambivalence. Study of the earliest languages has taught us that there

were once many such words, which expressed contrary ideas and in a

sense (though not in quite the same sense as the word ‘taboo’) were

ambivalent.¹ Slight modifications in the pronunciation of the antithetical

‘primal word’ made it possible subsequently to give separate verbal

expression to the two contrary ideas which were originally combined in

it.

   The word ‘taboo’ met with a different fate. As the importance of the

ambivalence denoted by it diminished, the word itself, or rather the

words analogous to it, fell out of use. I hope to be able, in a later

connection,  to  make  it  probable  that  a  definite  historical  chain  of

events is concealed behind the fate of this concept: that the word was

at first attached to certain quite specific human relations which were

characterized by great emotional ambivalence, and that its use then

spread on to other analogous relations.

 

   If I am not mistaken, the explanation of taboo also throws light on

the  nature  and  origin  of conscience.  It  is  possible,  without  any

stretching of the sense of the terms, to speak of a taboo conscience

or, after a taboo has been violated, of a taboo sense of guilt. Taboo

conscience is probably the earliest form in which the phenomenon of

conscience is met with.

   For what is ‘conscience’? On the evidence of language it is related

to  that  of  which  one  is  ‘most  certainly  conscious’.  Indeed,  in  some

languages  the  words  for  ‘conscience’  and  ‘consciousness’  can

scarcely be distinguished.

 

   ¹ Cf. my review of Abel’s ‘Antithetical Meaning of Primal Words’.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2712

 

   Conscience is the internal perception of the rejection of a particular

wish operating within us. The stress, however, is upon the fact that

this rejection has no need to appeal to anything else for support, that it

is  quite  ‘certain  of  itself’.  This  is  even  clearer  in  the  case  of

consciousness of guilt - the perception of the internal condemnation ofan act by which we have carried out a particular wish. To put forward

any  reason  for  this  would  seem  superfluous:  anyone  who  has  a

conscience must feel within him the justification for the condemnation,

must feel the self-reproach for the act that has been carried out. This

same  characteristic  is  to  be  seen  in  the  savage’s  attitude  towards

taboo.  It  is  a  command  issued  by  conscience;  any  violation  of  it

produces a fearful sense of guilt which follows as a matter of course

and of which the origin is unknown.¹

   Thus it seems probable that conscience too arose, on a basis of

emotional ambivalence, from quite specific human relations to which

this ambivalence was attached; and that it arose under the conditions

which we have shown to apply in the case of taboo and of obsessional

neurosis - namely, that one of the opposing feelings involved shall be

unconscious and kept under repression by the compulsive domination

of the other one. This conclusion is supported by several things we

have learnt from the analysis of neuroses.

   In the first place, we have found that a feature in the character of

obsessional neurotics is a scrupulous conscientiousness which is a

symptom reacting against the temptation lurking in their unconscious.

If their illness becomes more acute, they develop a sense of guilt of

the most intense degree. In fact, one may venture to say that if we

cannot trace the origin of the sense of guilt in obsessional neurotics,

there can be no hope of our ever tracing it. This task can be directly

achieved in the case of individual neurotic patients, and we may rely

upon reaching a similar solution by inference in the case of primitive

peoples.

 

   ¹ The sense of guilt in the case of taboos is not in the least diminished if the violation occurs

unwittingly. (Cf. the instances above.) An interesting parallel is found in Greek mythology: the
guilt of Oedipus was not palliated by the fact that he incurred it without his knowledge and
even against his intention.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2713

 

   In the second place, we cannot help being struck by the fact that a

sense of guilt has about it much of the nature of anxiety: we coulddescribe it without any misgivings as ‘dread of conscience’. But the

anxiety  points  to  unconscious  sources.  The  psychology  of  the

neuroses has taught us that, if wishful impulses are repressed, their

libido is transformed into anxiety. And this reminds us that there is

something unknown and unconscious in connection with the sense of

guilt, namely the reasons for the act of repudiation. The character of

anxiety  that  is  inherent  in  the  sense  of  guilt  corresponds  to  this

unknown factor.

   Since taboos are mainly expressed in prohibitions, the underlying

presence of a positive current of desire may occur to us as something

quite obvious and calling for no lengthy proofs based on the analogy

of the neuroses. For, after all, there is no need to prohibit something

that  no  one  desires  to  do,  and  a  thing  that  is  forbidden  with  the

greatest emphasis must be a thing that is desired. If we were to apply

this plausible thesis to our primitive peoples, we should be led to the

conclusion that some of their strongest temptations were to kill their

kings and priests, to commit incest, to maltreat the dead, and so on -

which seems scarcely probable. And we should be met with the most

positive contradiction if we were to apply the same thesis to instances

in  which  we  ourselves  seem  most  clearly  to  hear  the  voice  of

conscience. We should maintain with the most absolute certainty that

we feel not the slightest temptation to violate any of these prohibitions

- the commandment to ‘do no murder’, for instance - and that we feel

nothing but horror at the notion of violating them.

      If,  however,  we  were  to  admit  the  claims  thus  asserted  by  our

conscience, it would follow, on the one hand, that these prohibitions

would be superfluous - both taboo and our own moral prohibitions -

and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fact  of  conscience  would  remain

unexplained  and  no  place  would  be  left  for  the  relations  between

conscience, taboo and neurosis. In other words, we should be back in

the state of knowledge we were in before we approached the problem

from the psycho-analytic angle.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2714

    Suppose, on the other hand, that we were to take into account the

finding  arrived  at  by  psycho-analysis  from  the  dreams  of  normal

people, to the effect that we ourselves are subject, more strongly and

more often than we suspect, to a temptation to kill someone and that

that temptation produces psychical effects even though it remains out

of  sight  of  our  consciousness.  Suppose,  again,  that  we  were  to

recognize the compulsive observances of certain neurotics as being

guarantees against an intensified impulse to murder or as being self-

punishments on account of it. In that case we should have to attach

still greater importance to our thesis that where there is a prohibition

there must be an underlying desire. We should have to suppose that

the desire to murder is actually present in the unconscious and that

neither taboos nor moral prohibitions are psychologically superfluous

but  that  on  the  contrary  they  are  explained  and  justified  by  the

existence of an ambivalent attitude towards the impulse to murder.

   One of the characteristics of this ambivalent relation which I have

repeatedly stressed as fundamental - the fact that the positive current

of  desire  is  an  unconscious  one  -  opens  the  way  to  further

considerations  and  to  further  possible  explanations.  Psychical

processes in the unconscious are not in every respect identical with

those  with  which  our  conscious  mind  is  familiar;  they  enjoy  some

remarkable liberties that are forbidden to the latter. An unconscious

impulse  need  not  have  arisen  at  the  point  where  it  makes  its

appearance;  it  may  arise  from  some  quite  other  region  and  have

applied originally to quite other persons and connections; it may have

reached  the  place  at  which  it  attracts  our  attention  though  the

mechanism of ‘displacement’. Owing, moreover, to the indestructibility

and insusceptibility to correction which are attributes of unconscious

processes, it may have survived from very early times to which it was

appropriate  into  later  times  and  circumstances  in  which  its

manifestations are bound to seem strange. These are no more than

hints, but if they were attentively developed their importance for our

understanding of the growth of civilization would become apparent.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2715 

 

      Before  I  conclude  this  discussion,  a  further  point  must  not  be

overlooked which will pave the way for later inquiries. In maintaining

the  essential  similarity  between  taboo  prohibitions  and  moral

prohibitions, I have not sought to dispute the fact that there must be a

psychological difference between them. The only possible reason why

the  prohibitions  no  longer  take  the  form  of  taboos  must  be  some

change in the circumstances governing the ambivalence underlying

them.

      In  our  analytical  examination  of  the  problems  of  taboo  we  have

hitherto allowed ourselves to be led by the points of agreement that

we have been able to show between it and obsessional neurosis. But

after  all  taboo  is  not  a  neurosis  but  a  social  institution.  We  are

therefore faced with the task of explaining what difference there is in

principle between a neurosis and a cultural creation such as taboo.

   Once again I will take a single fact as my starting-point. It is feared

among primitive peoples that the violation of a taboo will be followed

by a punishment, as a rule by some serious illness or by death. The

punishment threatens to fall on whoever was responsible for violating

the  taboo.  In  obsessional  neuroses  the  case  is  different.  What  the

patient  fears  if  he  performs  some  forbidden  action  is  that  a

punishment will fall not on himself but on someone else. This person’s

identity is as a rule left unstated, but can usually be shown without

difficulty by analysis to be one of those closest and most dear to the

patient. Here, then, the neurotic seems to be behaving altruistically

and the primitive man egoistically. Only if the violation of a taboo is not

automatically avenged upon the wrong-doer does a collective feeling

arise among savages that they are all threatened by the outrage; and

they  thereupon  hasten  to  carry  out  the  omitted  punishment

themselves. There is no difficulty in explaining the mechanism of this

solidarity. What is in question is fear of an infectious example, of the

temptation to imitate - that is, of the contagious character of taboo. If

one  person  succeeds  in  gratifying  the  repressed  desire,  the  same

desire  is  bound  to  be  kindled  in  all  the  other  members  of  the

community.  In  order  to  keep  the  temptation  down,  the  envied

transgressor must be deprived of the fruit of his enterprise; and thepunishment  will  not  infrequently  give  those  who  carry  it  out  an

opportunity of committing the same outrage under colour of an act of

expiation. This is indeed one of the foundations of the human penal

system and it is based, no doubt correctly, on the assumption that the

prohibited  impulses  are  present  alike  in  the  criminal  and  in  the

avenging  community.  In  this,  psycho-analysis  is  no  more  than

confirming  the  habitual  pronouncement  of  the  pious:  we  are  all

miserable sinners.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2716

 

   How, then, are we to account for the unexpected nobility of mind of

the neurotic, who fears nothing on his own account but everything for

someone he loves? Analytical inquiry shows that this attitude is not

primary. Originally, that is to say at the beginning of the illness, the

threat of punishment applied, as in the case of savages, to the patient

himself; he was invariably in fear for his own life; it was not until later

that the mortal fear was displaced on to another and a loved person.

The process is a little complicated, but we can follow it perfectly. At

the root of the prohibition there is invariably a hostile impulse against

someone the patient loves - a wish that that person should die. This

impulse is repressed by a prohibition and the prohibition is attached to

some particular act, which, by displacement, represents, it may be, a

hostile act against the loved person. There is a threat of death if this

act is performed. But the process goes further, and the original wish

that the loved person may die is replaced by fear that he may die. So

that when the neurosis appears to be so tenderly altruistic, it is merely

compensating for an underlying contrary attitude of brutal egoism. We

may  describe  as  ‘social’  the  emotions  which  are  determined  by

showing  consideration  for  another  person  without  taking  him  as  a

sexual  object.  The  receding  into  the  background  of  these  social

factors  may  be  stressed  as  a  fundamental  characteristic  of  the

neurosis, though one which is later disguised by overcompensation.

   I do not propose to linger over the origin of these social impulses

and their relation to the other basic human instincts but shall proceedto illustrate the second main characteristic of the neurosis by means of

another example. In the forms which it assumes, taboo very closely

resembles the neurotic’s fear of touching, his ‘touching phobia’. Now,

in the case of the neurosis the prohibition invariably relates to touching

of a sexual kind, and psycho-analysis has shown that it is in general

true  that  the  instinctual  forces  that  are  diverted  and  displaced  in

neuroses  have  a  sexual  origin.  In  the  case  of  taboo  the  prohibited

touching is obviously not to be understood in an exclusively sexual

sense but in the more general sense of attacking, of getting control,

and of asserting oneself. If there is a prohibition against touching a

chief or anything that has been in contact with him, this means that an

inhibition is to be laid on the same impulse which expresses itself on

other occasions in keeping a suspicious watch upon the chief or even

in ill-treating him physically before his coronation. (See above.) Thus

the fact which is characteristic of the neurosis is the preponderance of

the sexual over the social instinctual elements. The social instincts,

however, are themselves derived from a combination of egoistic and

erotic components into wholes of a special kind.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2717

 

   This single comparison between taboo and obsessional neurosis is

enough to enable us to gather the nature of the relation between the

different forms of neurosis and cultural institutions, and to see how it is

that the study of the psychology of the neuroses is important for an

understanding of the growth of civilization.

      The  neuroses  exhibit  on  the  one  hand  striking  and  far-reaching

points of agreement with those great social institutions, art, religion

and philosophy. But on the other hand they seem like distortions of

them. It might be maintained that a case of hysteria is a caricature of a

work of art, that an obsessional neurosis is a caricature of a religion

and that a paranoic delusion is a caricature of a philosophical system.

The divergence resolves itself ultimately into the fact that the neuroses

are asocial structures; they endeavour to achieve by private means

what  is  effected  in  society  by  collective  effort.  If  we  analyse  theinstincts  at  work  in  the  neuroses,  we  find  that  the  determining

influence in them is exercised by instinctual forces of sexual origin; the

corresponding cultural formations, on the other hand, are based upon

social instincts, originating from the combination of egoistic and erotic

elements. Sexual needs are not capable of uniting men in the same

way as are the demands of self-preservation. Sexual satisfaction is

essentially the private affair of each individual.

   The asocial nature of neuroses has its genetic origin in their most

fundamental  purpose,  which  is  to  take  flight  from  an  unsatisfying

reality  into  a  more  pleasurable  world  of  phantasy.  The  real  world,

which is avoided in this way by neurotics, is under the sway of human

society and of the institutions collectively created by it. To turn away

from reality is at the same time to withdraw from the community of

man.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2718

 

                                            III

 

    ANIMISM, MAGIC AND THE OMNIPOTENCE OF THOUGHTS

 

                                          (1)

 

Writings that seek to apply the findings of psycho-analysis to topics in

the field of the mental sciences have the inevitable defect of offering

too little to readers of both classes. Such writings can only be in the

nature  of  an  instigation:  they  put  before  the  specialist  certain

suggestions for him to take into account in his own work. This defect is

bound to be extremely evident in an essay which will attempt to deal

with the immense domain of what is known as ‘animism’.¹

 

   Animism is, in its narrower sense, the doctrine of souls, and, in its

wider  sense,  the  doctrine  of  spiritual  beings  in  general.  The  term

‘animatism’  has  also  been  used  to  denote  the  theory  of  the  living

character of what appear to us to be inanimate objects, and the terms‘animalism’ and ‘manism’ occur as well in this connection. The word

‘animism’,  originally  used  to  describe  a  particular  philosophical

system, seems to have been given its present meaning by Tylor.²

 

   ¹ The  necessity  for  a  concise  treatment  of  the  material  involves  the  omission  of  any

elaborate bibliography. Instead, I will merely refer to the standard works of Herbert Spencer,
J. G. Frazer, Andrew Lang, E. B. Tylor and Wilhelm Wundt, from which all that I have to say
about animism and magic is derived. My own contribution is visible only in my selection both
of material and of opinions.

   ² Cf. Tylor (1891, 1, 425), Wundt (1906, 173)..

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2719

 

   What led to the introduction of these terms was a realization of the

highly  remarkable  view  of  nature  and  the  universe  adopted  by  the

primitive races of whom we have knowledge, whether in past history

or  at  the  present  time.  They  people  the  world  with  innumerable

spiritual beings both benevolent and malignant; and these spirits and

demons they regard as the causes of natural phenomena and they

believe that not only animals and plants but all the inanimate objects

in  the  world  are  animated  by  them.  A  third,  and  perhaps  the  most

important, article of this primitive ‘philosophy of nature’ strikes us as

less strange, since, while we have retained only a very limited belief in

the existence of spirits and explain natural phenomena by the agency

of impersonal physical forces, we ourselves are not very far removed

from  this  third  belief.  For  primitive  peoples  believe  that  human

individuals are inhabited by similar spirits. These souls which live in

human  beings  can  leave  their  habitations  and  migrate  into  other

human beings; they are the vehicle of mental activities and are to a

certain  extent  independent  of  their  bodies.  Originally  souls  were

pictured as very similar to persons and only in the course of a long

development have they lost their material characteristics and become

to a high degree ‘spiritualized’.¹

   Most authorities incline to the view that these ideas of a soul are the

original nucleus of the animistic system, that spirits are only souls that

have made themselves independent, and that the souls of animals,

plants and objects were constructed on the analogy of human souls.   How did primitive men arrive at the peculiar dualistic views on which

the  animistic  system  is  based?  It  is  supposed  that  they  did  so  by

observing the phenomena of sleep (including dreams) and of death

which  so  much  resembles  it,  and  by  attempting  to  explain  those

states,  which  are  of  such  close  concern  to  every  one.  The  chief

starting-point of this theorizing must have been the problem of death.

What primitive man regarded as the natural thing was the indefinite

prolongation of life - immortality. The idea of death was only accepted

late, and with hesitancy. Even for us it is lacking in content and has no

clear  connotation.  There  have  been  very  lively  but  inconclusive

discussions upon the part that may have been played in the formation

of  the  basic  doctrines  of  animism  by  such  other  observed  or

experienced facts as dream-pictures, shadows, mirror images, and so

on.²

 

   ¹ Wundt (1906), Chapter IV, ‘Die Seelenvorstellungen’.

    ² Cf.  Wundt,  Herbert  Spencer,  as  well  as  the  general  articles  in  the Encyclopaedia

Britannica (1910-11) on ‘Animism’, ‘Mythology’, etc.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2720

 

      It  has  been  regarded  as  perfectly  natural  and  not  in  the  least

puzzling that primitive man should have reacted to the phenomena

which aroused his speculations by forming the idea of the soul and

then of extending it to objects in the external world. In discussing the

fact  that  the  same  animistic  ideas  have  emerged  among  the  most

various races and at every period, Wundt (1906, 154) declares that

‘they  are  the  necessary  psychological  product  of  a  mythopoeic

consciousness  .  .  .  and  in  this  sense,  therefore,  primitive  animism

must be regarded as the spiritual expression of the natural state of

man, so far as it is accessible to our observation’. The justification for

attributing life to inanimate objects was already stated by Hume in his

Natural History of Religion:  ‘There  is  an  universal  tendency  among

mankind  to  conceive  all  beings  like  themselves,  and  to  transfer  to

every object those qualities with which they are familiarly acquainted,

and of which they are intimately conscious.’¹      Animism  is  a  system  of  thought.  It  does  not  merely  give  an

explanation of a particular phenomenon, but allows us to grasp the

whole  universe  as  a  single  unity  from  a  single  point  of  view.  The

human race, if we are to follow the authorities, have in the course of

ages developed three such systems of thought - three great pictures

of the universe: animistic (or mythological), religious and scientific. Of

these, animism, the first to be created, is perhaps the one which is

most  consistent  and  exhaustive  and  which  gives  a  truly  complete

explanation  of  the  nature  of  the  universe.  This  first  human

Weltanschauung is a psychological  theory.  It  would  go  beyond  our

present purpose to show how much of it still persists in modern life,

either in the debased form of superstition or as the living basis of our

speech, our beliefs and our philosophies.

   With these three stages in mind, it may be said that animism itself is

not yet a religion but contains the foundations on which religions are

later  built.  It  is  obvious,  too,  that  myths  are  based  on  animistic

premises,  though  the  details  of  the  relation  between  myths  and

animism seem to be unexplained in some essential respects.

 

   ¹ Quoted by Tylor (1891, 1, 477).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2721

 

                                          (2)

 

      Our  psycho-analytic  approach  to  the  subject,  however,  is  from

another side. It is not to be supposed that men were inspired to create

their first system of the universe by pure speculative curiosity. The

practical need for controlling the world around them must have played

its part. So we are not surprised to learn that, hand in hand with the

animistic system, there went a body of instructions upon how to obtain

mastery  over  men,  beasts  and  things  -  or  rather,  over  their  spirits.

These instructions go by the names of ‘sorcery [Zauberei]’ and ‘magic

[Magie]’. Reinach (1905-12, 2, xv) describes them as the ‘strategy of

animism’;  I  should  prefer,  following  Hubert  and  Mauss  (1904),  to

regard them as its technique.   Can the concepts of sorcery and magic be distinguished? Perhaps -

if  we  are  prepared  to  show  a  somewhat  arbitrary  disregard  for  the

fluctuations of linguistic usage. Sorcery, then, is essentially the art of

influencing spirits by treating them in the same way as one would treat

men in like circumstances: appeasing them, making amends to them,

propitiating  them,  intimidating  them,  robbing  them  of  their  power,

subduing them to one’s will - by the same methods that have proved

effective  with  living  men.  Magic,  on  the  other  hand,  is  something

different: fundamentally, it disregards spirits and makes use of special

procedures and not of everyday psychological methods. It is easy to

guess that magic is the earlier and more important branch of animistic

technique; for magical methods can, among others, be used in dealing

with spirits,¹ and magic can be applied as well in cases where, as it

seems  to  us,  the  process  of  spiritualizing  Nature  has  not  yet  been

carried out.

      Magic  has  to  serve  the  most  varied  purposes  -  it  must  subject

natural phenomena to the will of man, it must protect the individual

from his enemies and from dangers and it must give him power to

injure  his  enemies.  But  the  principle  on  the  presumption  of  which

magical action is based - or, more properly, the principle of magic - is

so striking that none of the authorities has failed to recognize it. Tylor,

if we leave on one side an accompanying moral judgement, states it in

its most succinct form as mistaking an ideal connection for a real one.

I will illustrate this feature from two groups of magical acts.

 

   ¹ If a spirit is scared away by making a noise and shouting, the action is one purely of

sorcery; if compulsion is applied to it by getting hold of its name, magic has been used against
it.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2722

 

 

      One  of  the  most  widespread  magical  procedures  for  injuring  an

enemy is by making an effigy of him from any convenient material.

Whether the effigy resembles him is of little account: any object can

be ‘made into’ an effigy of him. Whatever is then done to the effigy,the same thing happens to the detested original; whatever part of the

former’s  body  is  damaged,  the  same  part  of  the  latter’s  becomes

diseased. The same magical technique may be employed, not only for

purposes of private enmity, but also for pious ends and for giving help

to gods against malignant demons. I will quote from Frazer (1911a, 1,

67): ‘Every night when the sun-god Ra sank down to his home in the

glowing  west  he  was  assailed  by  hosts  of  demons  under  the

leadership of the arch-fiend Apepi. All night long he fought them, and

sometimes by day the powers of darkness sent up clouds even into

the blue Egyptian sky to obscure his light and weaken his power. To

aid the sun-god in this daily struggle, a ceremony was daily performed

in his temple at Thebes. A figure of his foe Apepi, represented as a

crocodile with a hideous face or a serpent with many coils, was made

of wax, and on it the demon’s name was written in green ink. Wrapt in

a papyrus case, on which another likeness of Apepi had been drawn

in green ink, the figure was then tied up with black hair, spat upon,

hacked with a stone knife, and cast on the ground. There the priest

trod on it with his left foot again and again, and then burnt it in a fire

made of a certain plant or grass. When Apepi himself had thus been

effectually disposed of, waxen effigies of each of his principal demons,

and of their fathers, mothers and children, were made and burnt in the

same  way.  The  service,  accompanied  by  the  recitation  of  certain

prescribed spells, was repeated not merely morning, noon and night,

but whenever a storm was raging, or heavy rain had set in, or black

clouds were stealing across the sky to hide the sun’s bright disc. The

fiends of darkness, clouds, and rain felt the injuries inflicted on their

images as if they had been done to themselves; they passed away, at

least  for  a  time,  and  the  beneficent  sun-god  shone  out  triumphant

once more.¹

 

   ¹ It seems probable that the biblical prohibition against making an image of any living thing

originated, not from any objection to the plastic arts, but from a desire to deprive magic (which
was abominated by the Hebrew religion) of one of its tools. Cf. Frazer (1911a, 1, 87 n.).
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2723

    From the vast number of magical acts having a similar basis I will

only  draw  attention  to  two  more,  which  have  played  a  large  part

among  primitive  peoples  of  every  age  and  which  persist  to  some

degree in the myths and cults of higher stages of civilization - that is,

rituals for producing rain and fertility. Rain is produced magically by

imitating it or the clouds and storms which give rise to it, by ‘playing at

rain’, one might almost say. In Japan, for instance, ‘a party of Ainos

will  scatter  water  by  means  of  sieves,  while  others  will  take  a

porringer, fit it up with sails and oars as if it were a boat, and then

push or draw it about the village and gardens’. In the same way, the

fertility of the earth is magically promoted by a dramatic representation

of human intercourse. Thus, to take one from a countless number of

instances, ‘in some parts of Java, at the season when the bloom will

soon be on the rice, the husbandman and his wife visit their fields by

night and there engage in sexual intercourse’ to encourage the fertility

of  the  rice  by  their  example.¹  There  is  a  dread,  however,  that

prohibited,  incestuous  sexual  relations  may  cause  a  failure  of  the

crops and make the earth sterile.²

   Certain negative observances, that is, magical precautions, must be

included in this first group. ‘When a Dyak village has turned out to

hunt wild pigs in the jungle, the people who stay at home may not

touch oil or water with their hands during the absence of their friends;

for if they did so, the hunters would all be "butter-fingered" and the

prey would slip through their hands.’³ Or again, ‘while a Gilyak hunter

is pursuing game in the forest, his children at home are forbidden to

make drawings on wood or on sand; for they fear that if the children

did so, the paths in the forest would become as perplexed as the lines

in  the  drawings,  so  that  the  hunter  might  lose  his  way  and  never

      4
return.’

 

   ¹ Frazer (1911a, 2, 98).

   ² An echo of this is to be found in the Oedipus Rex of Sophocles.

   ³ Frazer (1911a, 1, 120).

4
    Frazer (1911a, 1, 122).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo                                                                                      2724

 

      In  these  last,  as  in  so  many  other  instances  of  the  workings  of

magic,  the  element  of  distance  is  disregarded;  in  other  words,

telepathy is taken for granted. We shall find no difficulty, therefore, in

understanding this characteristic of magic.

   There can be no doubt what is to be regarded as the operative

factor  in  all  these  examples.  It  is  the similarity  between  the  act

performed and the result expected. For this reason Frazer describes

this sort of magic as ‘imitative’ or ‘homoeopathic’. If I wish it to rain, I

have only to do something that looks like rain or is reminiscent of rain.

At a later stage of civilization, instead of this rain-magic, processions

will be made to a temple and prayers for rain will be addressed to the

deity living in it. Finally, this religious technique will in its turn be given

up and attempts will be made to produce effects in the atmosphere

which will lead to rain.

 

   In a second group of magical acts the principle of similarity plays no

part, and its place is taken by another one, the nature of which will at

once become clear from the following examples.

   There is another procedure by which an enemy can be injured. One

gets possession of some of his hair or nails or other waste products or

even a piece of his clothing, and treats them in some hostile way. It is

then exactly as though one had got possession of the man himself;

and he himself experiences whatever it is that has been done to the

objects that originated from him. In the view of primitive man, one of

the most important parts of a person is his name. So that if one knows

the name of a man or of a spirit, one has obtained a certain amount of

power over the owner of the name. This is the origin of the remarkable

precautions  and  restrictions  in  the  use  of  names  which  we  have

already touched upon in the essay on taboo. (See p. 2699 ff.) In these

examples the place of similarity is evidently taken by affinity.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2725

 

   The higher motives for cannibalism among primitive races have asimilar origin. By incorporating parts of a person’s body through the

act of eating, one at the same time acquires the qualities possessed

by  him.  This  leads  in  certain  circumstances  to  precautions  and

restrictions  in  regard  to  diet.  A  woman  who  is  with  child  will  avoid

eating  the  flesh  of  certain  animals  for  fear  that  any  undesirable

qualities  they  may  have  (cowardice,  for  instance)  might  be  passed

over to the child that is nourished by her. The magical power is not

affected even if the connection between the two objects has already

been  severed  or  even  if  the  contact  occurred  only  on  a  single

important  occasion.  For  instance,  the  belief  that  there  is  a  magical

bond  between  a  wound  and  the  weapon  which  caused  it  may  be

traced unaltered for thousands of years. If a Melanesian can obtain

possession  of  the  bow  which  caused  his  wound,  he  will  keep  it

carefully  in  a  cool  place  so  as  to  reduce  the  inflammation  of  the

wound.  But  if  the  bow  was  left  in  the  enemy’s  possession,  it  will

undoubtedly  be  hung  up  close  to  the  fire  so  that  the  wound  may

become  thoroughly  hot  and  inflamed.  Pliny  (in  his Natural  History,

Book xxviii) tells us that ‘if you have wounded a man and are sorry for

it, you have only to spit on the hand that gave the wound, and the pain

of the sufferer will be instantly alleviated’. Francis Bacon (in his Sylva

Sylvarum) mentions that ‘it is constantly received and avouched that

the  anointing  of  the  weapon  that  maketh  the  wound  will  heal  the

wound itself’. English country people are said even to day to follow

this prescription, and if they cut themselves with a scythe carefully

keep the instrument clean, to prevent the wound from festering. ‘At

Norwich in June 1902 a woman named Matilda Henry accidentally ran

a nail into her foot. Without examining the wound, or even removing

her stocking, she caused her daughter to grease the nail, saying that if

this  were  done  no  harm  would  come  of  the  hurt.  A  few  days

afterwards  she  died  of  lockjaw’  -  as  a  result  of  this  displaced

antisepsis. (Frazer, ibid., 203.)

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2726

 

       The  last  group  of  instances  exemplify  what  Frazer  distinguishes

from ‘imitative’ magic under the name of ‘contagious’ magic. What is

believed to be their effective principle is no longer similarity but spatial

connection, contiguity, or at least imagined contiguity - the recollection

of it. Since, however, similarity and contiguity are the two essential

principles  of  processes  of  association,  it  appears  that  the  true

explanation of all the folly of magical observances is the domination of

the association of ideas. The aptness of Tylor’s description of magic

which I have already quoted now becomes evident: mistaking an ideal

connection for a real one. Frazer (1911a, 1, 420) has put it almost in

the same words: ‘Men mistook the order of their ideas for the order of

nature, and hence imagined that the control which they have, or seem

to  have,  over  their  thoughts,  permitted  them  to  exercise  a

corresponding control over things.’

      We  shall  at  first  be  surprised  to  learn  that  this  illuminating

explanation  of  magic  has  been  rejected  by  some  writers  as

unsatisfactory (e.g. Thomas, 1910-11a). On reflection, however, it will

be seen that the criticism is justified. The associative theory of magic

merely explains the paths along which magic proceeds; it does not

explain its true essence, namely the misunderstanding which leads it

to replace the laws of nature by psychological ones. Some dynamic

factor is evidently missing. But whereas the critics of Frazer’s theory

have gone astray in their search for it, it will be easy to arrive at a

satisfactory explanation of magic merely by carrying the associative

theory further and deeper.

   Let us consider first the simpler and more important case of imitative

magic. According to Frazer (1911a, 1, 54) it can be practised by itself,

whereas contagious magic as a rule presupposes the other. It is easy

to perceive the motives which lead men to practise magic: they are

human wishes. All we need to suppose is that primitive man had an

immense belief in the power of his wishes. The basic reason why what

he sets about by magical means comes to pass is, after all, simply

that he wills it. To begin with, therefore, the emphasis is only upon his

wish.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo                                                                                      2727

 

   Children are in an analogous psychical situation, though their motor

efficiency is still undeveloped. I have elsewhere (1911b) put forward

the  hypothesis  that,  to  begin  with,  they  satisfy  their  wishes  in  a

hallucinatory  manner,  that  is,  they  create  a  satisfying  situation  by

means  of  centrifugal  excitations  of  their  sense  organs.  An  adult

primitive man has an alternative method open to him. His wishes are

accompanied by a motor impulse, the will, which is later destined to

alter the whole face of the earth in order to satisfy his wishes. This

motor  impulse  is  at  first  employed  to  give  a  representation  of  the

satisfying  situation  in  such  a  way  that  it  becomes  possible  to

experience the satisfaction by means of what might be described as

motor hallucinations. This kind of representation of a satisfied wish is

quite  comparable  to  children’s  play,  which  succeeds  their  earlier

purely sensory technique of satisfaction. If children and primitive men

find play and imitative representation enough for them, that is not a

sign  of  their  being  unassuming  in  our  sense  or  of  their  resignedly

accepting their actual impotence. It is the easily understandable result

of the paramount virtue they ascribe to their wishes, of the will that is

associated  with  those  wishes  and  of  the  methods  by  which  those

wishes operate. As time goes on, the psychological accent shifts from

the motives  for  the  magical  act  on  to  the measures  by  which  it  is

carried out - that is, on to the act itself. (It would perhaps be more

correct to say that it is only these measures that reveal to the subject

the excessive valuation which he attaches to his psychical acts.) It

thus  comes  to  appear  as  though  it  is  the  magical  act  itself  which,

owing  to  its  similarity  with  the  desired  result,  alone  determines  the

occurrence  of  that  result.  There  is  no  opportunity,  at  the  stage  of

animistic thinking, for showing any objective evidence of the true state

of  affairs.  But  a  possibility  of  doing  so does  arrive  at  a  later  time,

when, though all of these procedures are still being carried out, the

psychical  phenomenon  of  doubt  has  begun  to  emerge  as  an

expression  of  a  tendency  to  repression.  At  that  point,  men  will  be

ready  to  admit  that  conjuring  up  spirits  has  no  result  unless  it  is

accompanied by faith, and that the magical power of prayer fails if

there is no piety at work behind it.¹ 

   ¹ Cf. the King in Hamlet (III. 3):

                My words fly up, my thoughts remain below:
                Words without thoughts never to heaven go.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2728

 

      The  fact  that  it  has  been  possible  to  construct  a  system  of

contagious  magic  on  associations  of  contiguity  shows  that  the

importance attached to wishes and to the will has been extended from

them on to all those psychical acts which are subject to the will. A

general overvaluation has thus come about of all mental processes -

an attitude towards the world, that is, which, in view of our knowledge

of the relation between reality and thought, cannot fail to strike us as

an  overvaluation  of  the  latter.  Things  become  less  important  than

ideas of things: whatever is done to the latter will inevitably also occur

to the former. Relations which hold between the ideas of things are

assumed  to  hold  equally  between  the  things  themselves.  Since

distance is of no importance in thinking - since what lies furthest apart

both in time and space can without difficulty be comprehended in a

single  act  of  consciousness  -  so,  too,  the  world  of  magic  has  a

telepathic disregard for spatial distance and treats past situations as

though they were present. In the animistic epoch the reflection of the

internal world is bound to blot out the other picture of the world - the

one which we seem to perceive.

   It is further to be noticed that the two principles of association -

similarity  and  contiguity  -  are  both  included  in  the  more

comprehensive  concept  of  ‘contact’.  Association  by  contiguity  is

contact in the literal sense; association by similarity is contact in the

metaphorical sense. The use of the same word for the two kinds of

relation is no doubt accounted for by some identity in the psychical

processes concerned which we have not yet grasped. We have here

the same range of meaning of the idea of ‘contact’ as we found in our

analysis of taboo. (Cf. p. 2675.)

   By way of summary, then, it may be said that the principle governing

magic, the technique of the animistic mode of thinking, is the principleof the ‘omnipotence of thoughts’.

 

                                          (3)

 

   I have adopted the term ‘omnipotence of thoughts’ from a highly

intelligent man who suffered from obsessional ideas and who, after

having been set right by psycho-analytic treatment, was able to give

evidence of his efficiency and good sense. (Cf. Freud, 1909d.) He had

coined the phrase as an explanation of all the strange and uncanny

events by which he, like others afflicted with the same illness, seemed

to be pursued. If he thought of someone, he would be sure to meet

that very person immediately afterwards, as though by magic. If he

suddenly asked after the health of an acquaintance whom he had not

seen for a long time, he would hear that he had just died, so that it

would look as though a telepathic message had arrived from him. If,

without any really serious intention, he swore at some stranger, he

might  be  sure  that  the  man  would  die  soon  afterwards,  so  that  he

would feel responsible for his death. In the course of the treatment he

himself was able to tell me how the deceptive appearance arose in

most of these cases, and by what contrivances he himself had helped

to strengthen his own superstitious beliefs. All obsessional neurotics

are superstitious in this way, usually against their better judgement.¹

 

   ¹ We  appear  to  attribute  an  ‘uncanny’  quality  to  impressions  that  seek  to  confirm  the

omnipotence of thoughts and the animistic mode of thinking in general, after we have reached
a stage at which, in our judgement, we have abandoned such beliefs.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2729

 

   It is in obsessional neuroses that the survival of the omnipotence of

thoughts  is  most  clearly  visible  and  that  the  consequences  of  this

primitive  mode  of  thinking  come  closest  to  consciousness.  But  we

must not be misled into supposing that it is a distinguishing feature of

this  particular  neurosis,  for  analytic  investigation  reveals  the  same

thing in the other neuroses as well. In all of them what determines the

formation of symptoms is the reality not of experience but of thought.Neurotics live in a world apart, where, as I have said elsewhere, only

‘neurotic currency’ is legal tender; that is to say, they are only affected

by what is thought with intensity and pictured with emotion, whereas

agreement  with  external  reality  is  a  matter  of  no  importance.  What

hysterics repeat in their attacks and fix by means of their symptoms

are  experiences  which  have  occurred  in  that  form  only  in  their

imagination  though  it  is  true  that  in  the  last  resort  those  imagined

experiences go back to actual events or are based upon them. To

attribute the neurotic sense of guilt to real misdeeds would show an

equal  misunderstanding.  An  obsessional  neurotic  may  be  weighed

down  by  a  sense  of  guilt  that  would  be  appropriate  in  a  mass-

murderer, while in fact, from his childhood onwards, he has behaved

to his fellow-men as the most considerate and scrupulous member of

society.  Nevertheless,  his  sense  of  guilt  has  a  justification:  it  is

founded on the intense and frequent death wishes against his fellows

which are unconsciously at work in him. It has a justification if what we

take into account are unconscious thoughts and not intentional deeds.

Thus  the  omnipotence  of  thoughts,  the  overvaluation  of  mental

processes as compared with reality, is seen to have unrestricted play

in the emotional life of neurotic patients and in everything that derives

from  it.  If  one  of  them  undergoes  psycho-analytic  treatment,  which

makes  what  is  unconscious  in  him  conscious,  he  will  be  unable  to

believe  that  thoughts  are  free  and  will  constantly  be  afraid  of

expressing  evil  wishes,  as  though  their  expression  would  lead

inevitably  to  their  fulfilment.  This  behaviour,  as  well  as  the

superstitions  which  he  practises  in  ordinary  life,  reveals  his

resemblance to the savages who believe they can alter the external

world by mere thinking.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2730

 

   The primary obsessive acts of these neurotics are of an entirely

magical  character.  If  they  are  not  charms,  they  are  at  all  events

counter-charms, designed to ward off the expectations of disaster with

which  the  neurosis  usually  starts.  Whenever  I  have  succeeded  inpenetrating the mystery, I have found that the expected disaster was

death. Schopenhauer has said that the problem of death stands at the

outset of every philosophy; and we have already seen that the origin

of the belief in souls and in demons, which is the essence of animism,

goes back to the impression which is made upon men by death. It is

difficult to judge whether the obsessive or protective acts performed

by obsessional neurotics follow the law of similarity (or, as the case

may be, of contrast); for as a rule, owing to the prevailing conditions of

the  neurosis,  they  have  been  distorted  by  being  displaced  on  to

something very small, some action in itself of the greatest triviality.¹

The  protective  formulas  of  obsessional  neuroses,  too,  have  their

counterpart  in  the  formulas  of  magic.  It  is  possible,  however,  to

describe the course of development of obsessive acts: we can show

how they begin by being as remote as possible from anything sexual -

magical defences against evil wishes - and how they end by being

substitutes  for  the  forbidden  sexual  act  and  the  closest  possible

imitations of it.

 

   ¹ A further motive for such displacement on to a very small action will appear in what

follows.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2731

 

 

      If  we  are  prepared  to  accept  the  account  given  above  of  the

evolution of human views of the universe - an animistic phase followed

by a religious phase and this in turn by a scientific one - it will not be

difficult  to  follow  the  vicissitudes  of  the  ‘omnipotence  of  thoughts’

through  these  different  phases.  At  the  animistic  stage  men  ascribe

omnipotence to themselves. At the religious stage they transfer it to

the gods but do not seriously abandon it themselves, for they reserve

the power of influencing the gods in a variety of ways according to

their wishes. The scientific view of the universe no longer affords any

room  for  human  omnipotence;  men  have  acknowledged  their

smallness  and  submitted  resignedly  to  death  and  to  the  other

necessities of nature. None the less some of the primitive belief inomnipotence still survives in men’s faith in the power of the human

mind, which grapples with the laws of reality.

   If we trace back the development of libidinal trends as we find them

in  the  individual  from  their  adult  forms  to  the  first  beginnings  in

childhood, an important distinction emerges, which I have described in

my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d). Manifestations

of the sexual instincts can be observed from the very first, but to begin

with  they  are  not  yet  directed  towards  any  external  object.  The

separate  instinctual  components  of  sexuality  work  independently  of

one another to obtain pleasure and find satisfaction in the subject’s

own  body.  This  stage  is  known  as  that  of  auto-erotism  and  it  is

succeeded by one in which an object is chosen.

      Further  study  has  shown  that  it  is  expedient  and  indeed

indispensable to insert a third stage between these two, or, putting it in

another way, to divide the first stage, that of auto-erotism, into two. At

this intermediate stage, the importance of which is being made more

and more evident by research, the hitherto isolated sexual instincts

have already come together into a single whole and have also found

an object. But this object is not an external one, extraneous to the

subject, but it is his own ego, which has been constituted at about this

same time. Bearing in mind pathological fixations of this new stage,

which  become  observable  later,  we  have  given  it  the  name  of

‘narcissism’.  The  subject  behaves  as  though  he  were  in  love  with

himself;  his  egoistic  instincts  and  his  libidinal  wishes  are  not  yet

separable under our analysis.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2732

 

   Although we are not yet in a position to describe with sufficient

accuracy  the  characteristics  of  this  narcissistic  stage,  at  which  the

hitherto dissociated sexual instincts come together into a single unity

and  cathect  the  ego  as  an  object,  we  suspect  already  that  this

narcissistic organization is never wholly abandoned. A human being

remains to some extent narcissistic even after he has found external

objects for his libido. The cathexes of objects which he effects are as itwere emanations of the libido that still remains in his ego and can be

drawn back into it once more. The state of being in love, which is

psychologically  so  remarkable  and  is  the  normal  prototype  of  the

psychoses, shows these emanations at their maximum compared to

the level of self-love.

      Primitive  men  and  neurotics,  as  we  have  seen,  attach  a  high

valuation  -  in  our  eyes  an over-valuation  -  to  psychical  acts.  This

attitude  may  plausibly  be  brought  into  relation  with  narcissism  and

regarded  as  an  essential  component  of  it.  It  may  be  said  that  in

primitive  men  the  process  of  thinking  is  still  to  a  great  extent

sexualized.  This  is  the  origin  of  their  belief  in  the  omnipotence  of

thoughts, their unshakable confidence in the possibility of controlling

the  world  and  their  inaccessibility  to  the  experiences,  so  easily

obtainable,  which  could  teach  them  man’s  true  position  in  the

universe.  As  regards  neurotics,  we  find  that  on  the  one  hand  a

considerable  part  of  this  primitive  attitude  has  survived  in  their

constitution, and on the other hand that the sexual repression that has

occurred in them has brought about a further sexualization of their

thinking  processes.  The  psychological  results  must  be  the  same  in

both  cases,  whether  the  libidinal  hypercathexis  of  thinking  is  an

original  one  or  has  been  produced  by  regression:  intellectual

narcissism and the omnipotence of thoughts.¹

 

   ¹ ‘It is almost an axiom with writers on this subject, that a sort of Solipsism, or Berkleianism

(as Professor Sully terms it as he finds it in the Child), operates in the savage to make him
refuse to recognize death as a fact.’ (Marett, 1900, 178.)
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2733

 

      If  we  may  regard  the  existence  among  primitive  races  of  the

omnipotence of thoughts as evidence in favour of narcissism, we are

encouraged  to  attempt  a  comparison  between  the  phases  in  the

development  of  men’s  view  of  the  universe  and  the  stages  of  an

individual’s  libidinal  development.  The  animistic  phase  would

correspond to narcissism both chronologically and in its content; the

religious  phase  would  correspond  to  the  stage  of  object-choice  ofwhich the characteristic is a child’s attachment to his parents; while

the scientific phase would have an exact counterpart in the stage at

which an individual has reached maturity, has renounced the pleasure

principle, adjusted himself to reality and turned to the external world

for the object of his desires.¹

      In  only  a  single  field  of  our  civilization  has  the  omnipotence  of

thoughts been retained, and that is in the field of art. Only in art does it

still  happen  that  a  man  who  is  consumed  by  desires  performs

something resembling the accomplishment of those desires and that

what he does in play produces emotional effects - thanks to artistic

illusion  -  just  as  though  it  were  something  real.  People  speak  with

justice of the ‘magic of art’ and compare artists to magicians. But the

comparison is perhaps more significant than it claims to be. There can

be  no  doubt  that  art  did  not  begin  as  art  for  art’s  sake.  It  worked

originally in the service of impulses which are for the most part extinct

to-day.  And  among  them  we  may  suspect  the  presence  of  many

magical purposes.²

 

   ¹ I will only briefly allude here to the fact that the original narcissism of children has a

decisive  influence  upon  our  view  of  the  development  of  their  character  and  excludes  the
possibility of their having any primary sense of inferiority.

   ² Cf. Reinach, ‘L’art et la magie’ (1905-12, 1, 125-36). In Reinach’s opinion the primitive

artists who left behind the carvings and paintings of animals in the French caves, did not
desire to ‘please’ but to ‘evoke’ or conjure up. He thus explains why it is that these pictures
are  situated  in  the  darkest  and  most  inaccessible  parts  of  the  caves  and  that  dangerous
beasts of prey do not appear among them. ‘Les modernes parlent souvent, par hyperbole, de
la magie du pinceau ou du ciseau d’un grand artiste et, en général, de la magie de l’art.
Entendu au sens propre, qui est celui d’une contrainte mystique exercée par la volonté de
l’homme sur d’autres volontés ou sur les choses, cette expression n’est plus admissible; mais
nous  avons  vu  qu’elle  était  autrefois  rigoureusement  vraie,  du  moins  dans  l’opinion  des
artistes.’ (Ibid., 136.) [‘In modern times people often speak metaphorically of the magic of a
great artist’s brush or chisel, or more generally of the magic of art. This expression is no
longer permissible in its proper sense of a mystical force brought to bear by the human will
upon other wills or upon objects; but, as we have seen, there was a time when it was literally
true - at least in the artists’ opinion.’]
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2734

 

                                          (4) 

   Thus the first picture which man formed of the world - animism - was

a psychological one. It needed no scientific basis as yet, since science

only begins after it has been realized that the world is unknown and

that means must therefore be sought for getting to know it. Animism

came to primitive man naturally and as a matter of course. He knew

what things were like in the world, namely just as he felt himself to be.

We  are  thus  prepared  to  find  that  primitive  man  transposed  the

structural conditions of his own mind¹ into the external world; and we

may attempt to reverse the process and put back into the human mind

what animism teaches as to the nature of things.

   The technique of animism, magic, reveals in the clearest and most

unmistakable way an intention to impose the laws governing mental

life  upon  real  things;  in  this,  spirits  need  not  as  yet  play  any  part,

though spirits may be taken as objects of magical treatment. Thus the

assumptions  of  magic  are  more  fundamental  and  older  than  the

doctrine of spirits, which forms the kernel of animism. Our psycho-

analytic point of view coincides here with a theory put forward by R. R.

Marett (1900), who postulates a pre-animistic stage before animism,

the character of which is best indicated by the term ‘animatism’, the

doctrine of the universality of life. Experience has little light to throw on

pre-animism, since no race has yet been discovered which is without

the concept of spirits. (Cf. Wundt, 1906, 171 ff.)

      Whereas  magic  still  reserves  omnipotence  solely  for  thoughts,

animism hands some of it over to spirits and so prepares the way for

the construction of a religion. What, we may ask, can have induced a

primitive man to make this first act of renunciation? It can scarcely

have  been  a  recognition  of  the  falseness  of  his  premises,  for  he

continued to practise the magical technique.

 

   ¹ Which he was aware of by what is known as endopsychic perception.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2735

 

 

   Spirits and demons, as I have shown in the last essay, are onlyprojections of man’s own emotional impulses.¹ He turns his emotional

cathexes into persons, he peoples the world with them and meets his

internal mental processes again outside himself - in just the same way

as  that  intelligent  paranoic,  Schreber,  found  a  reflection  of  the

attachments and detachments of his libido in the vicissitudes of his

confabulated ‘rays of God’.²

   I propose to avoid (as I have already done elsewhere³) entering into

the general problem of the origin of the tendency to project mental

processes into the outside. It is, however, safe to assume that that

tendency will be intensified when projection promises to bring with it

the advantage of mental relief. Such an advantage may be expected

with certainty where a conflict has arisen between different impulses

all of which are striving towards omnipotence - for they clearly cannot

all become omnipotent. The pathological process in paranoia in fact

makes use of the mechanism of projection in order to deal with mental

conflicts of this kind. The typical case of such a conflict is one between

the two members of a pair of opposites - the case of an ambivalent

attitude, which we have examined in detail as it appears in someone

mourning the death of a loved relative. This kind of case must seem

particularly likely to provide a motive for the creation of projections.

Here again we are in agreement with the writers who maintain that the

first born spirits were evil spirits, and who derive the idea of a soul

from  the  impression  made  by  death  upon  the  survivors.  The  only

difference is that we do not lay stress on the intellectual problem with

which death confronts the living; in our view the force which gives the

impetus to research is rather to be attributed to the emotional conflict

into which the survivors are plunged.

   Thus man’s first theoretical achievement - the creation of spirits -

seems  to  have  arisen  from  the  same  source  as  the  first  moral

restrictions to which he was subjected - the observances of taboo. The

fact that they had the same origin need not imply, however, that they

arose simultaneously. If the survivors’ position in relation to the dead

was really what first caused primitive man to reflect, and compelled

him  to  hand  over  some  of  his  omnipotence  to  the  spirits  and  to

sacrifice some of his freedom of action, then these cultural products

would constitute a first acknowledgement of ’Ανάγκη [Necessity], which

opposes human narcissism. Primitive man would thus be submitting tothe supremacy of death with the same gesture with which he seemed

to be denying it.

 

   ¹ I assume that at this early narcissistic stage cathexes arising from libidinal and from other

sources of excitation may still be indistinguishable from one another.

   ² Cf. Schreber (1903) and Freud (1911c).

   ³ In my paper on Schreber (Freud, 1911c).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2736

 

 

   If we may venture to exploit our hypothesis still further, we may

inquire which essential part of our psychological structure is reflected

and reproduced in the projective creation of souls and spirits. It could

scarcely be disputed that the primitive conception of a soul, however

much  it  may  differ  from  the  later,  purely  immaterial  soul,  is

nevertheless intrinsically the same; that is to say, it assumes that both

persons  and  things  are  of  a  double  nature  and  that  their  known

attributes  and  modifications  are  distributed  between  their  two

component  portions.  This  original  ‘duality’,  to  borrow  an  expression

from Herbert Spencer (1893), is identical with the dualism proclaimed

by  our  current  distinction  between  soul  and  body  and  by  such

ineradicable  linguistic  expressions  of  it  as  the  use  of  phrases  like

‘beside  himself’  or  ‘coming  to  himself’  in  relation  to  fits  of  rage  or

fainting (ibid., 144).

      When  we,  no  less  than  primitive  man,  project  something  into

external  reality,  what  is  happening  must  surely  be  this:  we  are

recognizing the existence of two states - one in which something is

directly given to the senses and to consciousness (that is, is present

to them), and alongside it another, in which the same thing is latent

but  capable  of  re-appearing.  In  short,  we  are  recognizing  the  co-

existence of perception and memory, or, putting it more generally, the

existence of unconscious mental processes alongside the conscious

ones.¹ It might be said that in the last analysis the ‘spirit’ of persons or

things comes down to their capacity to be remembered and imagined

after perception of them has ceased.   It is not, of course, to be expected that either the primitive or the

present-day concept of a ‘soul’ will be separated from that of the other

portion of the personality by the same line of demarcation which our

modern science draws between conscious and unconscious mental

activity.  The  animistic  soul  unites  properties  from  both  sides.  Its

volatile and mobile quality, its power of leaving the body and of taking

possession, temporarily or permanently, of another body - these are

characteristics  which  remind  us  unmistakably  of  the  nature  of

consciousness. But the way in which it remains concealed behind the

manifest  personality  is  reminiscent  of  the  unconscious;  immutability

and  indestructibility  are  qualities  which  we  no  longer  attribute  to

conscious but rather to unconscious processes, and we regard the

latter as the true vehicle of mental activity.

 

   ¹ Cf. my short paper on the use of the concept ‘unconscious’ in psycho-analysis, first

published in the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research in 1912.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2737

 

 

   I have said that animism is a system of thought, the first complete

theory  of  the  universe,  and  I  shall  now  go  on  to  draw  certain

conclusions from the psycho-analytic view of such systems. Every day

of our lives our experience is in a position to show us the principal

characteristics of a ‘system’. We have dreams during the night and we

have learnt how to interpret them during the day. Dreams may, without

contradicting  their  nature,  appear  confused  and  disconnected.  But

they may, on the contrary, simulate the orderly impressions of a real

experience, they may make one event follow from another and make

one  portion  of  their  content  refer  to  another.  Such  a  result  can  be

more or less successfully achieved; but it scarcely ever succeeds so

completely as to leave no absurdity, no rift in its texture, visible. When

we come to submit a dream to interpretation, we find that the erratic

and irregular arrangement of its constituent parts is quite unimportant

from the point of view of our understanding it. The essential elements

in  a  dream  are  the  dream-thoughts,  and  these  have  meaning,connection  and  order.  But  their  order  is  quite  other  than  that

remembered by us as present in the manifest dream. In the latter the

connection  between  the  dream-thoughts  has  been  abandoned  and

may  either  remain  completely  lost  or  be  replaced  by  the  new

connection  exhibited  in  the  manifest  content.  The  elements  of  the

dream,  apart  from  their  being  condensed,  are  almost  invariably

arranged  in  a  new  order  more  or  less  independent  of  their  earlier

arrangement.  Finally,  it  must  be  added  that  whatever  the  original

material of the dream-thoughts has been turned into by the dream-

work is then subjected to a further influence. This is what is known as

‘secondary  revision’,  and  its  purpose  is  evidently  to  get  rid  of  the

disconnectedness  and  unintelligibility  produced  by  the  dream-work

and replace it by a new ‘meaning’. But this new meaning, arrived at by

secondary revision, is no longer the meaning of the dream-thoughts.

      The  secondary  revision  of  the  product  of  the  dream-work  is  an

admirable example of the nature and pretensions of a system. There

is an intellectual function in us which demands unity, connection and

intelligibility from any material, whether of perception or thought, that

comes within its grasp; and if, as a result of special circumstances, it

is  unable  to  establish  a  true  connection,  it  does  not  hesitate  to

fabricate a false one. Systems constructed in this way are known to us

not only from dreams, but also from phobias, from obsessive thinking

and  from  delusions.  The  construction  of  systems  is  seen  most

strikingly in delusional disorders (in paranoia), where it dominates the

symptomatic  picture;  but  its  occurrence  in  other  forms  of  neuro-

psychosis must not be overlooked. In all these cases it can be shown

that a rearrangement of the psychical material has been made with a

fresh  aim  in  view;  and  the  rearrangement  may  often  have  to  be  a

drastic one if the outcome is to be made to appear intelligible from the

point of view of the system. Thus a system is best characterized by

the fact that at least two reasons can be discovered for each of its

products: a reason based upon the premises of the system (a reason,

then, which may be delusional) and a concealed reason, which we

must judge to be the truly operative and the real one.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo                                                                                      2738

 

   This may be illustrated by an example from a neurosis. In my essay

on taboo I mentioned a woman patient of mine whose obsessional

prohibitions showed the most perfect agreement with a Maori taboo

(p.  2676).  This  woman’s  neurosis  was  aimed  at  her  husband  and

culminated in her defence against an unconscious wish that he should

die. Her manifest, systematic phobia, however, related to the mention

of death in general, while her husband was entirely excluded from it

and was never an object of her conscious solicitude. One day she

heard her husband giving instructions that his razors, which had lost

their edge, were to be taken to a particular shop to be re-set. Driven

by  a  strange  uneasiness,  she  herself  set  off  for  the  shop.  After

reconnoitring  the  ground,  she  came  back  and  insisted  that  her

husband should get rid of the razors for good and all, since she had

discovered that next door to the shop he had named there was an

undertaker’s establishment: owing to the plan he had made, she said,

the razors had become inextricably involved with thoughts of death.

This, then, was the systematic reason for her prohibition. We may be

quite sure that, even without her discovery of the next-door shop, the

patient would have come home with a prohibition against the razors. It

would have been enough if she had met a hearse on her way to the

shop, or someone dressed in mourning or carrying a funeral wreath.

The net of possible determinants for the prohibition was spread wide

enough to catch the quarry in any event; it merely depended on her

decision whether to draw it together or not. It could be shown that on

other occasions she would not put the determinants into operation,

and she would explain this by saying it had been ‘a better day’. The

real cause of her prohibition upon the razors was, of course, as it was

easy to discover, her repugnance to attaching any pleasurable feeling

to the idea that her husband might cut his throat with the newly ground

razors.

   In just the same may, an inhibition upon movement (an abasia or an

agoraphobia) will gradually become more complete and more detailed,

when  once  that  system  has  succeeded  in  installing  itself  as  a

representative of an unconscious wish and of the defence against the

wish.  Whatever  other  unconscious  phantasies  and  operativereminiscences  may  be  present  in  the  patient  force  their  way  to

expression  as  symptoms  along  this  same  path,  once  it  has  been

opened, and group themselves into an appropriate new arrangement

within the framework of the inhibition upon movement. Thus it would

be  a  vain  and  indeed  a  foolish  task  to  attempt  to  understand  the

complexities  and  details  of  the  symptoms  of  (for  example)  an

agoraphobia  on  the  basis  of  its  underlying  premises;  for  the  whole

consistency and strictness of the combination are merely apparent.

Just as with the façades of dreams, if we look more attentively we find

the  most  blatant  inconsistency  and  arbitrariness  in  the  structure  of

symptoms. The real reason for the details of a systematic phobia of

this kind lies in concealed determinants, which need have nothing to

do  with  an  inhibition  upon  movement;  and  that,  too,  is  why  these

phobias  take  such  various  and  contradictory  shapes  in  different

people.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2739

 

   Let us now return to the animistic system with which we are dealing.

The insight we have gained into other psychological systems enables

us to conclude that with primitive man, too, ‘superstition’ need not be

the only or the real reason for some particular custom or observance

and  does  not  excuse  us  from  the  duty  of  searching  for  its  hidden

motives. Under the domination of an animistic system it is inevitable

that  every  observance  and  every  activity  shall  have  a  systematic

basis, which nowadays we describe as ‘superstitious’. ‘Superstition’ -

like  ‘anxiety’,  ‘dreams’  and  ‘demons’  -  is  one  of  those  provisional

psychological  concepts  which  have  crumbled  under  the  impact  of

psycho-analytic  research.  Once  we  have  penetrated  behind  these

constructions,  which  are  like  screens  erected  as  defences  against

correct  understanding,  we  begin  to  realize  that  the  mental  life  and

cultural level of savages have not hitherto had all the recognition they

deserve.

      If  we  take  instinctual  repression  as  a  measure  of  the  level  of

civilization that has been reached, we shall have to admit that evenunder the animistic system advances and developments took place

which are unjustly despised on account of their superstitious basis.

When  we  are  told  that  the  warriors  in  a  savage  tribe  practise  the

greatest continence and cleanliness when they go on the war-path,

the  explanation  is  put  forward  that  their  motive  is  ‘a  fear  lest  the

enemy should obtain the refuse of their persons, and thus be enabled

to  work  their  destruction  by  magic’  (Frazer,  1911b,  157);  and  an

analogous  superstitious  reason  could  be  suggested  for  their

continence. None the less the fact remains that they have made an

instinctual renunciation; and we can understand the position better if

we suppose that the savage warrior submits to these restrictions as a

counter-measure because he is on the point of yielding completely to

the  satisfaction  of  cruel  and  hostile  impulses  which  are  as  a  rule

prohibited to him. The same is true of the numerous cases of sexual

restrictions being imposed on anyone who is engaged on difficult or

responsible work (ibid., 200 f.). Though the grounds alleged for these

prohibitions  may  belong  to  a  magical  context,  yet  the  fundamental

idea  of  gaining  greater  strength  by  renouncing  some  instinctual

satisfaction  remains  unmistakable;  and  the  hygienic  root  of  the

prohibition which lies alongside its magical rationalization must not be

overlooked. When the men of a savage tribe go out on an expedition

to hunt, to fish, to fight or to gather precious plants, their wives left at

home  are  subjected  to  many  oppressive  restrictions,  to  which  the

savages  themselves  ascribe  a  favourable  influence,  operating  at  a

distance upon the success of the expedition. But it requires very little

penetration  to  see  that  this  factor  which  operates  at  a  distance  is

nothing other than the absent men’s longing thoughts of home, and

that behind these disguises lies a sound piece of psychological insight

that the men will only do their best if they feel completely secure about

the women whom they have left behind them unguarded. Sometimes

they  will  even  themselves  declare,  without  alleging  any  magical

reasons, that a wife’s infidelity in marriage will bring to nothing the

efforts of an absent husband engaged on some responsible work.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2740 

      The  countless  taboo  regulations  to  which  the  women  in  savage

communities are subject during menstruation are said to be due to a

superstitious horror of blood, and this is no doubt in fact one of their

determinants. But it would be wrong to overlook the possibility that in

this  case  the  horror  of  blood  also  serves  aesthetic  and  hygienic

purposes, which are obliged in every case to cloak themselves behind

magical motives.

      I  am  under  no  illusion  that  in  putting  forward  these  attempted

explanations  I  am  laying  myself  open  to  the  charge  of  endowing

modern  savages  with  a  subtlety  in  their  mental  activities  which

exceeds all probability. It seems to me quite possible, however, that

the same may be true of our attitude towards the psychology of those

races  that  have  remained  at  the  animistic  level  as  is  true  of  our

attitude towards the mental life of children, which we adults no longer

understand  and  whose  fullness  and  delicacy  of  feeling  we  have  in

consequence so greatly underestimated.

 

   One further group of taboo observances, which have not hitherto

been  accounted  for,  deserve  mention,  since  they  admit  of  an

explanation which is familiar to psycho-analysts. Among many savage

peoples  there  is  a  prohibition  against  keeping  sharp  weapons  or

cutting instruments in a house. Frazer (1911b, 238) quotes a German

superstition to the effect that a knife should not be left edge upwards,

for fear that God and the angels might be injured on it. May we not

recognize  in  this  taboo  a  premonitory  warning  against  possible

‘symptomatic acts’ in the execution of which a sharp weapon might be

employed by unconscious evil impulses?

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2741

 

                                            IV

 

              THE RETURN OF TOTEMISM IN CHILDHOOD

 There  are  no  grounds  for  fearing  that  psycho-analysis,  which  first

discovered  that  psychical  acts  and  structures  are  invariably

overdetermined,  will  be  tempted  to  trace  the  origin  of  anything  so

complicated  as  religion  to  a  single  source.  If  psycho-analysis  is

compelled - and is, indeed, in duty bound - to lay all the emphasis

upon one particular source, that does not mean it is claiming either

that that source is the only one or that it occupies first place among

the numerous contributory factors. Only when we can synthesize the

findings in the different fields of research will it become possible to

arrive at the relative importance of the part played in the genesis of

religion by the mechanism discussed in these pages. Such a task lies

beyond  the  means  as  well  as  beyond  the  purposes  of  a  psycho-

analyst.

 

                                          (1)

 

   In the first of this series of essays we became acquainted with the

concept of totemism. We heard that totemism is a system which takes

the place of a religion among certain primitive peoples of Australia,

America and Africa, and provides the basis of their social organization.

As we have heard, it was a Scotsman, McLennan, who in 1869 first

drew  general  attention  to  the  phenomena  of  totemism  (which  had

hitherto  been  regarded  as  mere  curiosities)  by  giving  voice  to  a

suspicion  that  a  large  number  of  customs  and  usages  current  in

various  societies  ancient  and  modern  were  to  be  explained  as

remnants of a totemic age. Since that date science has fully accepted

his estimate of totemism. Let me quote, as one of the most recent

statements  on  the  subject,  a  passage  from  Wundt’s Elemente  der

Völkerpsychologie  (1912,  139):  ‘In  the  light  of  all  these  facts,  the

conclusion appears highly probable that at some time totemic culture

everywhere paved the way for a more advanced civilization, and, thus,

that it represents a transitional stage between the age of primitive men

and the era of heroes and gods.’

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2742 

 

   The purpose of the present essays obliges us to enter more deeply

into the nature of totemism. For reasons which will presently become

clear I will begin with an account given by Reinach, who, in 1900,¹

sketched out a ‘Code du totémisme’ in twelve Articles - a catechism,

as it were, of the totemic religion:

   (1) Certain animals may neither be killed nor eaten, but individual

members of the species are reared by human beings and cared for by

them.

   (2) An animal which has died an accidental death is mourned over

and buried with the same honours as a member of the clan.

   (3) In some instances the eating prohibition extends only to one

particular part of the animal’s body.

   (4) When one of the animals which are usually spared has to be

killed under the stress of necessity, apologies are offered to it and an

attempt is made by means of various artifices and evasions to mitigate

the violation of the taboo - that is to say, the murder.

   (5) When the animal is made the victim of a ritual sacrifice, it is

solemnly bewailed.

   (6) On particular solemn occasions and at religious ceremonies the

skins of certain animals are worn. Where totemism is still in force, they

are the totem animals.

   (7) Clans and individuals adopt the names of animals - viz. of the

totem animals.

   (8) Many clans make use of representations of animals on their

standards and weapons; the men have pictures of animals painted or

tattooed on their bodies.

   (9) If the totem is a formidable or dangerous animal, it is supposed

to spare members of the clan named after it.

   (10) The totem animal protects and gives warning to members of its

clan.

   (11) The totem animal foretells the future to the loyal members of its

clan and serves them as guide.

   (12) The members of the totemic clan often believe that they are

related to the totem animal by the bond of a common ancestry.

   This catechism of the totemic religion can only be seen at its propervalue if we take into account the fact that Reinach has included in it all

the indications and traces from which the earlier existence of a totemic

system can be inferred. The author’s peculiar attitude to the problem

is shown by his partial neglect of the essential features of totemism.

As we shall see, he has relegated one of the two principal articles of

the totemic catechism to the background and entirely overlooked the

other.

 

   ¹ Cf. Reinach (1905-12, 1, 17 ff.).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2743

 

 

   To obtain a correct picture of the nature of totemism we must turn to

another author, who has devoted a four-volume work to the subject,

which combines the fullest collection of the relevant observations with

the  most  detailed  discussion  of  the  problems  they  raise.  We  shall

remain indebted to J. G. Frazer, the author of Totemism and Exogamy

(1910),  both  for  enjoyment  and  instruction,  even  if  psycho-analytic

research may lead to conclusions which differ widely from his.¹

 

   ¹ It may be as well, however, to warn the reader, in advance, of the difficulties with which

any statements on the subject have to contend.
      In  the  first  place,  those  who  collect  the  observations  are  not  the  same  as  those  who
examine and discuss them. The former are travellers and missionaries while the latter are
students  who  may  never  have  set  eyes  on  the  objects  of  their  researches.  Again,
communication with savages is not an easy matter. The observers are not always acquainted
with the native language but may be obliged to rely on the help of interpreters or to conduct
their inquiries through the medium of pidgin-English. Savages are not communicative on the
subject of the most intimate details of their cultural life and they talk openly only to those
foreigners who have lived among them for many years. They often give false or misleading
information  for  a  great  variety  of  motives.  (Cf.  Frazer,  1910, 1,  150  f.)  It  should  not  be
forgotten that primitive races are not young races but are in fact as old as civilized races.
There is no reason to suppose that, for the benefit of our information, they have retained their
original ideas and institutions undeveloped and undistorted. On the contrary, it is certain that
there have been profound changes in every direction among primitive races, so that it is never
possible  to  decide  without  hesitation  how  far  their  present-day  conditions  and  opinions
preserve  the  primaeval  past  in  a  petrified  form  and  how  far  they  are  distortions  and
modifications of it. Hence arise the all-too-frequent disputes among the authorities as to which
characteristics of a primitive civilization are to be regarded as primary and as to which are
later  and  secondary  developments.  The  determination  of  the  original  state  of  things  thusinvariably  remains  a  matter  of  construction.  Finally,  it  is  not  easy  to  feel  one’s  way  into
primitive modes of thinking. We misunderstand primitive men just as easily as we do children,
and we are always apt to interpret their actions and feelings according to our own mental
constellations.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2744

 

   ‘A totem’, wrote Frazer in his first essay on the subject,¹ ‘is a class of

material objects which a savage regards with superstitious respect,

believing that there exists between him and every member of the class

an  intimate  and  altogether  special  relation  .  .  .  The  connection

between  a  man  and  his  totem  is  mutually  beneficent;  the  totem

protects  the  man,  and  the  man  shows  his  respect  for  the  totem  in

various ways, by not killing it if it be an animal, and not cutting or

gathering it if it be a plant. As distinguished from a fetish, a totem is

never an isolated individual, but always a class of objects, generally a

species  of  animals  or  of  plants,  more  rarely  a  class  of  inanimate

natural objects, very rarely a class of artificial objects. . . .

   ‘Totems are of at least three kinds: (1) the clan totem, common to a

whole clan, and passing by inheritance from generation to generation;

(2) the sex totem, common either to all the males or to all the females

of  a  tribe,  to  the  exclusion  in  either  case  of  the  other  sex;  (3)  the

individual totem, belonging to a single individual and not passing to his

descendants. . . .’

   The last two kinds of totem do not compare in significance with the

clan totem. Unless we are quite mistaken, they are late developments

and of little importance for the essential nature of the totem.

   ‘The clan totem is reverenced by a body of men and women who

call themselves by the name of the totem, believe themselves to be of

one  blood,  descendants  of  a  common  ancestor,  and  are  bound

together by common obligations to each other and by a common faith

in the totem. Totemism is thus both a religious and a social system. In

its religious aspect it consists of the relations of mutual respect and

protection between a man and his totem; in its social aspect it consists

of the relations of the clansmen to each other and to men of other

clans. In the later history of totemism these two sides, the religious

and the social, tend to part company; the social system sometimessurvives  the  religious;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  religion  sometimes

bears traces of totemism in countries where the social system based

on totemism has disappeared. How in the origin of totemism these two

sides were related to each other it is, in our ignorance of that origin,

impossible to say with certainty. But on the whole the evidence points

strongly  to  the  conclusion  that  the  two  sides  were  originally

inseparable; that, in other words, the farther we go back, the more we

should find that the clansman regards himself and his totem as beings

of the same species, and the less he distinguishes between conduct

towards his totem and towards his fellow-clansmen.’

 

   ¹ Totemism, Edinburgh, 1887, reprinted in Frazer (1910, 1, 3 ff.).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2745

 

   In giving particulars of totemism as a religious system, Frazer begins

by stating that the members of a totem clan call themselves by the

name of their totem, and commonly believe themselves to be actually

descended from it. It follows from this belief that they will not hunt the

totem  animal  or  kill  or  eat  it  and,  if  it  is  something  other  than  an

animal, they refrain from making use of it in other ways. The rules

against killing or eating the totem are not the only taboos; sometimes

they are forbidden to touch it, or even to look at it; in a number of

cases  the  totem  may  not  be  spoken  of  by  its  proper  name.  Any

violation  of  the  taboos  that  protect  the  totem  are  automatically

punished by severe illness or death.¹

   Specimens of the totem animal are occasionally reared by the clan

and  cared  for  in  captivity.²  A  totem  animal  that  is  found  dead  is

mourned for and buried like a dead clansman. If it is necessary to kill a

totem animal, this is done according to a prescribed ritual of apologies

and ceremonies of expiation.

   The clan expects to receive protection and care from its totem. If it is

a dangerous animal (such as a beast of prey or a venomous snake)

there is a presumption that it will do no harm to its clansmen; and if

that expectation is not fulfilled the injured man is expelled from the

clan. Oaths, in Frazer’s opinion, were originally ordeals; thus, manytests  of  descent  and  legitimacy  were  submitted  for  decision  to  the

totem.  The  totem  gives  help  in  sickness  and  delivers  omens  and

warnings to its clan. The appearance of the totem in or about a house

is often regarded as an omen of death; the totem has come to fetch

his kinsman.³

 

   ¹ Cf. my earlier essay on taboo.

   ² As is done to this day with the she-wolf in her cage beside the steps leading up to the

Capitol in Rome and with the bears in their den at Berne.

   ³ Like the White Lady in certain aristocratic families.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2746

 

      In  particular  important  circumstances  the  clansman  seeks  to

emphasize his kinship with the totem by making himself resemble it

externally, by dressing in the skin of the animal, by incising a picture of

the totem upon his own body, and so on. This identification with the

totem is carried into effect in actions and words on the ceremonial

occasions of birth, initiation and burial. Various magical and religious

purposes are served by dances in which all the clansmen disguise

themselves as their totem and imitate its behaviour. Lastly, there are

ceremonies in which the totem animal is ceremoniously killed.¹

   The social aspect of totemism is principally expressed in a severely

enforced injunction and a sweeping restriction.

      The  members  of  a  totem  clan  are  brothers  and  sisters  and  are

bound to help and protect one another. If a member of a clan is killed

by someone outside it, the whole clan of the aggressor is responsible

for the deed and the whole clan of the murdered man is at one in

demanding satisfaction for the blood that has been shed. The totem

bond is stronger than that of the family in our sense. The two do not

coincide, since the totem is as a rule inherited through the female line,

and it is possible that paternal descent may originally have been left

entirely out of account.

   The corresponding taboo restriction prohibits members of the same

totem clan from marrying or having sexual intercourse with each other.

Here we have the notorious and mysterious correlate of totemism -exogamy. I have devoted the whole of the first essay in the present

work to that subject, so that here I need only repeat that it originates

from the intensification among savages of the horror of incest, that it

would  be  fully  explained  as  an  assurance  against  incest  under

conditions  of  group  marriage,  and  that  it  is  primarily  aimed  at

restraining the younger generation from incest and that only as a later

development does it interfere with the older generation.

 

   ¹ Frazer (1910, 1, 45). See my discussion of sacrifice below.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2747

 

 

   To Frazer’s account of totemism - one of the earliest in the literature

of the subject - I will add a few extracts from one of the most recent

ones. In his Elemente der Völkerpsychologie, Wundt (1912, 116 ff.)

writes as follows: ‘The totem animal is also usually regarded as the

ancestral animal of the group in question. "Totem" is, on the one hand

a group name, and, on the other, a name indicative of ancestry. In the

latter connection it has also a mythological significance. These various

ideas, however, interplay in numerous ways. Some of the meanings

may  recede,  so  that  totems  have  frequently  become  a  mere

nomenclature  of  tribal  divisions,  while  at  other  times  the  idea  of

ancestry, or, perhaps also, the cult significance, predominates. . . .’

The concept of the totem has a decisive influence upon tribal division

and tribal organization, which are subject to certain norms of custom.

‘These norms, and their fixed place in the beliefs and feelings of the

tribal  members,  are  connected  with  the  fact  that  originally,  at  all

events, the totem animal was regarded, for the most part, as having

not merely given its name to a group of tribal members but as having

actually been its fore father. . . . Bound up with this is the further fact

that these animal ancestors possessed a cult. . . . Aside from specific

ceremonies and ceremonial festivals, this animal cult originally found

expression  primarily  in  the  relations  maintained  towards  the  totem

animal.  It  was  not  merely  a  particular  animal  that  was  to  a  certain

extent held sacred, but every representative of the species. The totemmembers were forbidden to eat the flesh of the totem animal, or were

allowed to do so only under specific conditions. A significant counter-

phenomenon, not irreconcilable with this, is the fact that on certain

occasions  the  eating  of  the  totem  flesh  constituted  a  sort  of

ceremony. . . .’

      ‘.  .  .  The  most  important  social  aspect  of  this  totemic  tribal

organization,  however,  consists  in  the  fact  that  it  involved  certain

norms  of  custom  regulating  the  intercourse  of  the  separate  groups

with one another. Of these norms, those governing marriage relations

were  of  first  importance.  The  tribal  organization  of  this  period  was

bound up with an important institution, exogamy, which originated in

the totemic age.’

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2748

 

 

   If we seek to penetrate to the original nature of totemism, without

regard  to  subsequent  accretions  or  attenuations,  we  find  that  its

essential characteristics are these: Originally, all totems were animals,

and were regarded as the ancestors of the different clans. Totems

were inherited only through the female line. There was a prohibition

against killing the totem (or - which, under primitive conditions, is the

same  thing  -  against  eating  it). Members  of  a  totem  clan  were

forbidden to practise sexual intercourse with one another.¹

   We shall now, perhaps, be struck by the fact that in Reinach’s Code

du totémisme one of the two principal taboos, that of exogamy, is not

mentioned  at  all,  while  the  belief  upon  which  the  second  one  is

founded, namely descent from the totem animal, is only referred to in

passing.  My  reason,  however,  for  selecting  the  account  given  by

Reinach  (a  writer,  incidentally,  who  has  made  very  valuable

contributions to the subject) was to prepare us for the differences of

opinion between the authorities - differences into which we must now

enter.

 

    ¹ The  picture  of  totemism  given  by  Frazer  in  his  second  work  on  it  (‘The  Origin  of

Totemism’, published in the Fortnightly Revue in 1899) agrees with what I have written above:‘Thus, Totemism has commonly been treated as a primitive system both of religion and of
society. As a system of religion it embraces the mystic union of the savage with his totem; as
a system of society it comprises the relations in which men and women of the same totem
stand to each other and to the members of other totemic groups. And corresponding to these
two sides of the system are two rough and ready tests or canons of Totemism: first, the rule
that a man may not kill or eat his totem animal or plant; and second, the rule that he may not
marry or cohabit with a woman of the same totem.’ Frazer then proceeds (thus plunging us
into the middle of the controversies on totemism): ‘Whether the two sides - the religious and
the social - have always co-existed or are essentially independent, is a question which has
been variously answered.’
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2749

 

                                          (2)

 

      The  more  incontestable  became  the  conclusion  that  totemism

constitutes a regular phase in all cultures, the more urgent became

the need for arriving at an understanding of it and for throwing light

upon  the  puzzle  of  its  essential  nature.  Everything  connected  with

totemism seems to be puzzling: the decisive problems concern the

origin  of  the  idea  of  descent  from  the  totem  and  the  reasons  for

exogamy (or rather for the taboo upon incest of which exogamy is the

expression),  as  well  as  the  relation  between  these  two  institutions,

totemic  organization  and  prohibition  of  incest.  Any  satisfactory

explanation should be at once a historical and a psychological one. It

should tell us under what conditions this peculiar institution developed

and to what psychical needs in men it has given expression.

   My readers will, I am sure, be astonished to hear of the variety of

angles  from  which  attempts  have  been  made  to  answer  these

questions,  and  of  the  wide  divergences  of  opinion  upon  them  put

forward by the experts. Almost any generalization that could be made

on  the  subject  of  totemism  and  exogamy  seems  open  to  question.

Even  the  account  that  I  have  just  given,  derived  from  the  book

published by Frazer in 1887, is open to the criticism that it expresses

the  present  writer’s  arbitrary  preferences;  and  indeed  it  would  be

contested to-day by Frazer himself, who has repeatedly changed his

opinions on the subject.¹

    ¹ He makes the following admirable comment upon such changes of opinion: ‘That my

conclusions on these difficult questions are final, I am not so foolish as to pretend. I have
changed my views repeatedly, and I am resolved to change them again with every change of
the evidence, for like a chameleon the candid inquirer should shift his colours with the shifting
colours of the ground he treads.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, xiii.)
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2750

 

   It is plausible to suppose that an understanding of the essential

nature of totemism and exogamy would best be arrived at, if it were

possible to come nearer to the origins of the two institutions. But in

this  connection  we  must  bear  in  mind  Andrew  Lang’s  warning  that

even primitive peoples have not retained the original forms of those

institutions  nor  the  conditions  which  gave  rise  to  them;  so  that  we

have  nothing  whatever  but  hypotheses  to  fall  back  upon  as  a

substitute  for  the  observations  which  we  are  without.¹  Some  of  the

attempted  explanations  seem,  in  the  judgement  of  a  psychologist,

inadequate  at  the  very  outset:  they  are  too  rational  and  take  no

account  of  the  emotional  character  of  the  matters  to  be  explained.

Others  are  based  on  assumptions  which  are  unconfirmed  by

observation.  Yet  others  rely  upon  material  which  would  be  better

interpreted in another way. There is generally little difficulty in refuting

the  various  views  put  forward:  the  authorities  are  as  usual  more

effective  in  their  criticisms  of  one  another’s  work  than  in  their  own

productions. The conclusion upon most of the points raised must be a

non  liquet.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that  in  the  most  recent

literature on the subject (which is for the most part passed over in the

present  work)  an  unmistakable  tendency  emerges  to  reject  any

general  solution  of  totemic  problems  as  impracticable.  (See,  for

instance, Goldenweiser, 1910.) In the discussion of these conflicting

hypotheses  which  follows,  I  have  ventured  to  disregard  their

chronological sequence.

 

                            (a) THE ORIGIN OF TOTEMISM

 

   The question of the origin of totemism may be put in another way:

how did it come about that primitive men called themselves (and theirclans) after animals, plants and inanimate objects?²

   McLennan (1865 and 1869-70), the Scot who discovered totemism

and exogamy for the world of science, refrained from publishing any

opinion on the origin of totemism. According to Andrew Lang (1905,

34) he was at one time inclined to think that it originated from the

custom of tattooing. I propose to divide the published theories on the

origin  of  totemism  into  three  groups  -  (α)  the  nominalist,  (β)  the

sociological and (γ) the psychological.

 

   ¹ ‘By the nature of the case, as the origin of totemism lies far beyond our powers of

historical examination or of experiment, we must have recourse as regards this matter to
conjecture.’ (Lang, 1905, 27.) ‘Nowhere do we see absolutely primitive man, and a totemic
system in the making.’ (Ibid., 29.)

   ² In the first instance probably after animals only.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2751

 

                              (α) Nominalist Theories

 

   My accounts of these theories will justify my having brought them

together under the title I have adopted.

   Garcilasso de la Vega, a descendant of the Peruvian Incas, who

wrote  a  history  of  his  people  in  the  seventeenth  century,  seems

already  to  have  attributed  the  origin  of  what  he  knew  of  totemic

phenomena to the need felt by clans to distinguish themselves from

one  another  by  the  use  of  names.  (Lang,  1905,  34.)  Hundreds  of

years later the same idea was again proposed. Keane¹ regards totems

as ‘heraldic badges’ by means of which individuals, families and clans

sought to distinguish themselves from one another. The same idea is

expressed once more by Max-Müller (1897):² ‘A totem is a clan mark,

then a clan name, then the name of the ancestor of a clan, and lastly

the name of something worshipped by a clan.’ Julius Pikler,³ writing

later,  declares:  ‘Mankind  required  both  for  communities  and  for

individuals a permanent name which could be fixed in writing. . . .

Thus totemism did not arise from the religious needs of men but from

their practical, everyday needs. The core of totemism, nomenclature,is a result of the primitive technique of writing. In its nature a totem is

like  an  easily  drawn  pictograph.  But  when  once  savages  bore  the

name of an animal, they went on to form the idea of kinship with it.’

   In the same way, Herbert Spencer (1870 and 1893, 331-46) regards

the giving of names as the decisive factor in the origin of totemism.

The  personal  characteristics  of  particular  individuals,  he  argues,

prompted the idea of calling them after animals, and in that way they

acquired  laudatory  names  or  nicknames  which  were  handed  on  to

their descendants. As a result of the vagueness and unintelligibility of

primitive  speech,  later  generations  interpreted  these  names  as

evidence of descent from the actual animals. Totemism would thus be

shown to be a misunderstood form of ancestor worship.

 

   ¹ Quoted by Lang.

   ² Quoted by Lang.

   ³ Pikler and Somló. These authors justly describe their attempted explanation of the origin

of totemism as ‘a contribution to the materialist theory of history’.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2752

 

      Lord  Avebury  (better  known  under  his  earlier  name  of  Sir  John

Lubbock)  gives  a  very  similar  account  of  the  origin  of  totemism,

though without insisting upon the element of misunderstanding. If, he

says, we wish to explain animal-worship, we must not forget how often

human names are borrowed from animals. The children and followers

of a man who was called ‘Bear’ or ‘Lion’ naturally turned his name into

a clan-name. Thence it came about that the animal itself would come

to be regarded ‘first with interest, then with respect and at length with

a sort of awe’.

      What  would  seem  to  be  an  incontrovertible  objection  to  this

derivation of totem names from the names of individuals was brought

forward  by  Fison.¹  He  showed  from  conditions  in  Australia  that  the

totem is invariably ‘the badge of a group, not of an individual’. But

even if this were not so, and the totem was originally the name of an

individual,  it  could  never  -  since  totems  are  inherited  through  the

female line - be transmitted to his children.   Moreover, the theories which I have so far discussed are obviously

inadequate. They might perhaps explain the fact that primitive peoples

adopt animal names for their clans, but they could never explain the

importance that has become attached to this nomenclature - namely,

the totemic system. The theory belonging to this group which most

deserves attention is that proposed by Andrew Lang (1903 and 1905).

He, too, regards the giving of names as the heart of the problem, but

he introduces two interesting psychological factors and may thus claim

to  have  led  the  way  towards  the  final  solution  of  the  enigma  of

totemism.

   Andrew Lang regards it as initially a matter of indifference how clans

obtained their animal names. It is only necessary to assume that they

awoke one day to the consciousness that they bore such names and

could give no account of how this had come about. The origin of the

names had been forgotten. They would then attempt to arrive at an

explanation by speculating on the subject; and, in view of their belief in

the  importance  of  names,  they  were  bound  to  reach  all  the  ideas

contained in the totemic system. Primitive races (as well as modern

savages and even our own children²) do not, like us, regard names as

something  indifferent  and  conventional,  but  as  significant  and

essential. A man’s name is a principal component of his personality,

perhaps even a portion of his soul. The fact of a primitive man bearing

the same name as an animal must lead him to assume the existence

of  a  mysterious  and  significant  bond  between  himself  and  that

particular species of animal. What other bond could it be than one of

blood  relationship?  Once  the  similarity  of  names  had  led  to  this

conclusion, the blood taboo would immediately involve all the totemic

ordinances, including exogamy. ‘No more than these three things - a

group  animal  name  of  unknown  origin;  belief  in  a  transcendental

connection  between  all  bearers,  human  and  bestial,  of  the  same

name; and belief in the blood superstitions - was needed to give rise

to  all  the  totemic  creeds  and  practices,  including  exogamy.’  (Lang,

1905, 125 f.)

 

   ¹ Fison and Howitt (1880, 165), quoted by Lang (1905).

   ² See the discussion of taboo above, p. 2699 ff.

                                     Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2753

 

   Lang’s explanation falls into two parts. One part of it traces the

totemic system as a matter of psychological necessity from the fact of

the totems having animal names - always presupposing that the origin

of these names had been forgotten. The second part of his theory

goes on to try to explain how the names in fact originated; as we shall

see, it is of a very different character from the first part.

   This second part of Lang’s theory differs in no essential way from

the  other  theories  which  I  have  called  ‘nominalist’.  The  practical

necessity  for  differentiation  compelled  the  various  clans  to  adopt

names, and they therefore acquiesced in the names by which each

clan  was  called  by  another  clan.  This  ‘naming  from  without’  is  the

special  feature  of  Lang’s  construction.  The  fact  that  the  names

adopted in this way were borrowed from animals needs no special

comment and there is no reason why they should have been regarded

in primitive times as insulting or derisive. Moreover, Lang has adduced

not a few instances from later historical times in which names that

were originally given in derision by outsiders have been accepted and

willingly  adopted  (e.g.  ‘Les  Gueux’,  ‘Whigs’  and  ‘Tories’).  The

hypothesis that in the course of time the origin of these names was

forgotten connects this part of Lang’s theory with the other part which I

have already discussed.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2754

 

                            (β) Sociological Theories

 

   Reinach, who has been successful in tracing survivals of the totemic

system in the cults and usages of later periods but who has always

attached  small  importance  to  the  factor  of  descent  from  the  totem,

remarks  confidently  in  one  passage  that  in  his  opinion  totemism  is

nothing  more  than  ‘un  hypertrophie  de  l’instinct  social’.  (Reinach,

1905-12, 1, 41.) A similar view seems to run through the recent book

by  Durkheim  (1912).  The  totem,  he  argues,  is  the  visiblerepresentative  of  social  religion  among  the  races  concerned:  it

embodies the community, which is the true object of their worship.

      Other  writers  have  sought  to  find  a  more  precise  basis  for  the

participation  of  the  social  instincts  in  the  formation  of  totemic

institutions. Thus Haddon (1902)¹ supposes that each primitive clan

originally subsisted upon some one species of animal or plant and

perhaps traded in that particular article of food and exchanged it with

other clans. It would inevitably follow that this clan would be known to

the others by the name of the animal which was of such importance to

it. At the same time the clan would be bound to become especially

familiar with the animal and develop a peculiar interest in it, though

this would be founded on no psychical motive other than the most

elementary and urgent of human needs, that is, on hunger.

   Against this most ‘rational’ of all the theories of totemism it has been

objected that feeding conditions of this kind are never found among

primitive  races  and  have  probably  never  existed.  Savages  are

omnivorous, and the more so the lower their condition. Nor is it easy

to see how an exclusive diet such as this could have developed into

an  almost  religious  attitude  to  the  totem,  culminating  in  absolute

abstention from the favourite food.

 

   ¹ Quoted by Frazer (1910, 4, 50).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2755

 

   The first of the three theories on the origin of totemism which Frazer

himself has supported at different times was a psychological one, and

I shall deal with it later. His second theory, with which we are here

concerned, took form under the influence of a momentous publication

by two men who had made researches among the natives of Central

Australia.

      Spencer  and  Gillen  (1899)  described  a  number  of  peculiar

observances, usages and beliefs found in a group of tribes known as

the  Arunta  nation;  and  Frazer  agreed  with  their  opinion  that  these

peculiarities were to be regarded as features of a primitive condition of

things and might throw light upon the original and true meaning oftotemism.

   The peculiarities found in the Arunta tribe (a portion of the Arunta

nation) are as follows:

   (1) The Arunta are divided into totem clans, but the totem is not

hereditary  but  determined  for  each  individual  in  a  manner  to  be

described presently.

   (2) The totem clans are not exogamous; but the restrictions upon

marriage are based upon a highly developed division into marriage-

classes, which have no connection with the totem.

      (3)  The  function  of  the  totem  clans  lies  in  their  performing  a

ceremony which has as its aim the multiplication of the edible totem

object  by  a  characteristically  magical  method.  (This  ceremony  is

known as intichiuma.)

      (4)  The  Arunta  have  a  peculiar  theory  of  conception  and

reincarnation. They believe that there are places scattered over the

country at each of which the spirits of the dead of some one totem

await reincarnation and enter the body of any woman who passes by

the spot. When a child is born, the mother reports at which of these

places  she  thinks  it  was  conceived,  and  the  child’s  totem  is

determined accordingly. It is further believed that the spirits (both of

the  dead  and  of  the  reborn)  are  intimately  associated  with  certain

peculiar stone amulets, known as churinga, which are found at these

same centres.

      Two  factors  seem  to  have  led  Frazer  to  suppose  that  the

observances among the Arunta constitute the oldest form of totemism.

First, there was the existence of certain myths which declared that the

ancestors of the Arunta regularly ate their totem and always married

women  of  their  own  totem.  Secondly,  there  was  the  apparent

disregard of the sexual act in their theory of conception. People who

had  not  yet  discovered  that  conception  is  the  result  of  sexual

intercourse  might  surely  be  regarded  as  the  most  backward  and

primitive of living men.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2756

       By  focusing  his  judgement  of  totemism  upon  the intichiuma

ceremony, Frazer came all at once to see the totemic system in an

entirely new light: as a purely practical organization for meeting the

most  natural  of  human  needs.  (Cf.  Haddon’s  theory  above.)¹  The

system was simply an example upon a large scale of ‘co-operative

magic’. Primitive men set up what might be described as a magical

producers’  and  consumers’  union.  Each  totem  clan  undertook  the

business of guaranteeing the plentiful supply of one particular article

of  food.  Where  non-edible  totems  were  concerned  (such  as

dangerous animals, or rain, wind, etc.) the duty of the totem clan lay in

controlling  the  natural  force  in  question  and  in  counteracting  its

injurious  possibilities.  The  achievements  of  each  clan  were  to  the

advantage of all the rest. Since each clan might eat none, or only very

little, of its own totem, it provided that valuable material for the other

clans and was itself provided in exchange with what they produced as

their  social  totemic  duty.  In  the  light  of  the  insight  which  he  thus

obtained from the intichiuma ceremony, Frazer came to believe that

the prohibition against eating one’s own totem had blinded people to

the more important element in the situation, namely the injunction to

produce as much as possible of an edible totem to meet the needs of

other people.

      Frazer  accepted  the  Arunta  tradition  that  each  totem  clan  had

originally  eaten  its  own  totem  without  restriction.  But  it  was  then

difficult  to  understand  the  next  stage  in  development,  at  which  the

clansmen  became  content  with  assuring  a  supply  of  the  totem  for

others, while themselves renouncing its enjoyment almost completely.

He  supposed  that  this  restriction  had  arisen,  not  from  any  kind  of

religious deference, but perhaps from observing that animals never

fed  upon  their  own  kind:  to  do  so  might  imply  a  breach  in  their

identification with their totem and consequently reduce their power of

controlling it. Or it might be that by sparing the creatures they hoped to

conciliate them. Frazer, however, makes no disguise of the difficulties

involved in these explanations (1910, 1, 121 ff.); nor does he venture

to suggest by what means the custom described in the Arunta myths

of marrying within the totem was transformed into exogamy.

 

   ¹ ‘There is nothing vague or mystical about it, nothing of that metaphysical haze whichsome writers love to conjure up over the humble beginnings of human speculation, but which
is  utterly  foreign  to  the  simple,  sensuous  and  concrete  modes  of  thought  of  the  savage.’
(Frazer, 1910, 1, 117.)
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2757

 

   The theory based by Frazer on the intichiuma ceremony stands or

falls  with  the  assertion  of  the  primitive  character  of  the  Arunta

institutions.  But  in  face  of  the  objections  raised  by  Durkheim¹  and

Lang  (1903  and  1905),  that  assertion  appears  untenable.  On  the

contrary,  the  Arunta  seem  to  be  the  most  highly  developed  of  the

Australian tribes and to represent a stage of totemism in dissolution

rather  than  its  beginnings.  The  myths  which  impressed  Frazer  so

deeply because, in contrast to the conditions that rule to-day, they lay

stress upon liberty to eat the totem and to marry within the totem -

these myths are easily explicable as wishful phantasies which, like the

myth of a Golden Age, have been projected back into the past.

 

                            (γ) Psychological Theories

 

      Frazer’s  first  psychological  theory,  formed  before  he  became

acquainted with Spencer and Gillen’s observations, was based on the

belief  in  an  ‘external  soul’.²  The  totem,  according  to  this  view,

represented  a  safe  place  of  refuge  in  which  the  soul  could  be

deposited and so escape the dangers which threatened it. When a

primitive  man  had  deposited  his  soul  in  his  totem  he  himself  was

invulnerable,  and  he  naturally  avoided  doing  any  injury  to  the

receptacle  of  his  soul.  Since,  however,  he  did  not  know  in  which

particular individual of the animal species concerned his own soul was

lodged, it was reasonable for him to spare the whole species.

 

   ¹ In L’année socialogique (1898, 1902, 1905, etc.); see especially ‘Sur le totémisme’ (1902).

   ² See Frazer, The Golden Bough, First Edition (1890), 2, 332 ff.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2758 

   Frazer himself subsequently abandoned this theory that totemism

was  derived  from  a  belief  in  souls;  and,  after  coming  to  know  of

Spencer  and  Gillen’s  observations,  adopted  the  sociological  theory

which I have already discussed. But he came to see himself that the

motive  from  which  that  second  theory  derived  totemism  was  too

‘rational’  and  that  it  implied  a  social  organization  which  was  too

complicated to be described as primitive.¹ The magical co-operative

societies now seemed to him to be the fruit rather than the seed of

totemism.  He  sought  for  some  simpler  factor,  some  primitive

superstition behind these structures, to which the origin of totemism

might  be  traced  back.  At  last  he  found  this  original  factor  in  the

Arunta’s remarkable story of conception.

   The Arunta, as I have already explained, eliminate the connection

between the sexual act and conception. At the moment at which a

woman  feels  she  is  a  mother,  a  spirit,  which  has  been  awaiting

reincarnation in the nearest totem centre where the spirits of the dead

collect, has entered her body. She will bear this spirit as a child, and

the child will have the same totem as all the spirits waiting at that

particular centre. This theory of conception cannot explain totemism,

since it presupposes the existence of totems. But let us go back a step

further  and  suppose  that  originally  the  woman  believed  that  the

animal, plant, stone or other object, with which her imagination was

occupied at the moment when she first felt she was a mother, actually

made its way into her and was later born in human form. In that case

the identity between a man and his totem would have a factual basis

in his mother’s belief and all the remaining totem ordinances (with the

exception of exogamy) would follow. A man would refuse to eat this

animal or plant because to do so would amount to eating himself. He

would, however, have a reason for occasionally partaking of his totem

in a ceremonial manner, because in that way he might strengthen his

identification with the totem, which is the essence of totemism. Some

observations made by Rivers upon the natives of the Banks’ Islands²

seemed  to  prove  a  direct  identification  of  human  beings  with  their

totem on the basis of a similar theory of conception.

 

   ¹ ‘It is unlikely that a community of savages should deliberately parcel out the realm ofnature into provinces, assign each province to a particular band of magicians, and bid all the
bands to work their magic and weave their spells for the common good.’ (Frazer, 1910, 4, 57.)

   ² Quoted by Frazer (1910, 2, 89 ff. and 4, 59).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2759

 

   Accordingly, the ultimate source of totemism would be the savages’

ignorance of the process by which men and animals reproduce their

kind; and, in particular, ignorance of the part played by the male in

fertilization.  This  ignorance  must  have  been  facilitated  by  the  long

interval between the act of fertilization and the birth of the child (or the

first perception of its movements). Thus totemism would be a creation

of the feminine rather than of the masculine mind: its roots would lie in

‘the sick fancies of pregnant women’. ‘Anything indeed that struck a

woman at that mysterious moment of her life when she first knows

herself to be a mother might easily be identified by her with the child in

her  womb.  Such  maternal  fancies,  so  natural  and  seemingly  so

universal, appear to be the root of totemism.’ (Frazer, 1910, 4, 63.)

   The main objection to this third of Frazer’s theories is the same as

has already been brought against the second or sociological one. The

Arunta seem to be far removed from the beginnings of totemism. Their

denial of paternity does not appear to rest upon primitive ignorance; in

some  respects  they  themselves  make  use  of  descent  through  the

father. They seem to have sacrificed paternity for the sake of some

sort of speculation designed to honour the souls of their ancestors.¹

They have enlarged the myth of the impregnation of a virgin by the

spirit into a general theory of conception; but that is no reason why

ignorance of the conditions governing fertilization should be imputed

to them any more than to the peoples of antiquity at the time of the

origin of the Christian myths.

   Another psychological theory of the origin of totemism has been

advanced by a Dutchman, G. A. Wilken. It connects totemism with the

belief in the transmigration of souls. ‘The animal in which the souls of

the  dead  are  thought  by  preference  to  be  incarnate  becomes  a

kinsman, an ancestor, and as such is revered.’² It seems more likely,

however, that the belief in transmigration was derived from totemismthan vice versa.

 

   ¹ ‘That belief is a philosophy far from primitive.’ (Lang, 1905, 192.)

   ² Quoted by Frazer (1910, 4, 45 f.).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2760

 

   Yet another theory of totemism is held by some eminent American

ethnologists, Franz Boas, C. Hill-Tout, and others. It is based upon

observations on North American Indian totemic clans and maintains

that the totem was originally the guardian spirit of an ancestor, who

acquired it in a dream and transmitted it to his descendants. We have

already heard the difficulties which stand in the way of the view that

totems are inherited from single individuals; but apart from this, the

Australian evidence lends no support to the theory that totems are

derived from guardian spirits. (Frazer, 1910, 4, 48 ff.)

   The last of the psychological theories, that put forward by Wundt

(1912, 190), is based upon two facts. ‘In the first place, the original

totem, and the one which continues to remain most common, is the

animal;  and,  secondly,  the  earliest  totem  animals  are  identical  with

soul animals.’ Soul animals (such as birds, snakes, lizards and mice)

are  appropriate  receptacles  of  souls  which  have  left  the  body,  on

account of their rapid movements or flight through the air or of other

qualities  likely  to  produce  surprise  or  alarm.  Totem  animals  are

derived  from  the  transformations  of  the  ‘breath-soul’  into  animals.

Thus,  according  to  Wundt,  totemism  is  directly  connected  with  the

belief in spirits, that is to say with animism.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2761

 

    (b) and (c) THE ORIGIN OF EXOGAMY AND ITS RELATION TO TOTEMISM

 

   I have set out the different theories about totemism in some detail,

though even so compression has been inevitable and I fear that myaccount may have suffered in consequence. In what follows, however,

I shall venture, for my readers’ sake, to be still more condensed. The

discussions on the exogamy practised by totemic peoples are, owing

to  the  nature  of  the  material  with  which  they  deal,  particularly

complicated and diffuse one might even say confused. The purposes

of the present work make it possible for me to limit myself to tracing

certain of the main lines of dispute, while referring those who wish to

enter  into  the  subject  more  deeply  to  the  specialized  writings  from

which I have so frequently quoted.

   The attitude taken by an author on the problems of exogamy must

naturally  depend  to  some  extent  on  the  position  he  has  adopted

towards the various theories of totemism. Some of the explanations of

totemism  exclude  any  connection  with  exogamy,  so  that  the  two

institutions  fall  completely  apart.  Thus  we  find  two  opposing  views:

one which seeks to maintain the original presumption that exogamy

forms  an  inherent  part  of  the  totemic  system,  and  the  other  which

denies  that  there  is  any  such  connection  and  holds  that  the

convergence between these two features of the oldest cultures is a

chance one. This latter opinion has been adopted without qualification

by  Frazer  in  his  later  works:  ‘I  must  request  the  reader  to  bear

constantly in mind’, he writes, ‘that the two institutions of totemism and

exogamy are fundamentally distinct in origin and nature, though they

have accidentally crossed and blended in many tribes.’ (Frazer, 1910,

1, xii.) He gives an explicit warning that the opposite view must be a

source of endless difficulties and misunderstandings.

   Other writers have, on the contrary, found a means of regarding

exogamy  as  an  inevitable  consequence  of  the  basic  principles  of

totemism. Durkheim (1898, 1902 and 1905) has put forward the view

that  the  taboo  attached  to  totems  was  bound  to  involve  prohibition

against practising sexual intercourse with a woman of the same totem.

The totem is of the same blood as the man and consequently the ban

upon shedding blood (in connection with defloration and menstruation)

prohibits  him  from  sexual  relations  with  a  woman  belonging  to  his

totem.¹ Andrew Lang (1905, 125), who agrees with Durkheim on this

subject, believes that the prohibition against women of the same clan

might operate even without any blood taboo. The general totem taboo

(which, for instance, forbids a man to sit under his own totem tree)would,  in  Lang’s  opinion,  have  been  sufficient.  Incidentally,  he

complicates this with another explanation of exogamy (see below) and

omits to show how the two explanations are related to each other.

 

   ¹ See the criticisms of Durkheim’s views by Frazer (1910, 4, 100 ff.).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2762

 

   As regards the chronological relations between the two institutions,

most of the authorities agree that totemism is the older of them and

that exogamy arose later.¹

   Of the theories which seek to show that exogamy is independent of

totemism I shall only draw attention to a few which throw light on the

attitude of the different authors to the problem of incest.

   McLennan (1865) ingeniously inferred the existence of exogamy

from  the  vestiges  of  customs  which  seemed  to  indicate  the  earlier

practice of marriage by capture. He formed a hypothesis that in the

earliest  times  it  had  been  a  general  usage  for  men  to  obtain  their

wives from another group and that marriage with a woman of their

own group gradually ‘came to be considered improper because it was

unusual’. He accounted for the prevalence of exogamy by supposing

that the practice of killing the majority of female children at birth had

led  to  a  scarcity  of  women  in  primitive  societies.  We  are  not  here

concerned  with  the  question  of  how  far  these  assumptions  of

McLennan’s are supported by the actual findings. What interests us

far more is the fact that his hypotheses fail to explain why the male

members  of  a  group  should  refuse  themselves  access  to  the  few

remaining  women  of  their  own  blood  -  the  fact  that  he  entirely

overlooks the problem of incest. (Frazer, 1910, 4, 71-92.)

      Other  students  of  exogamy,  on  the  contrary,  and  evidently  with

greater justice, have seen in exogamy an institution for the prevention

of incest.² When one considers the gradually increasing complication

of  the  Australian  restrictions  upon  marriage,  it  is  impossible  not  to

accept the opinions of Morgan (1877), Frazer (1910, 4, 105 ff.), Howitt

and Baldwin Spencer that those regulations bear (in Frazer’s words)

‘the impress of deliberate design’ and that they aimed at achieving theresult  they  have  in  fact  achieved.  ‘In  no  other  way  does  it  seem

possible to explain in all its details a system at once so complex and

so regular.’ (Frazer, ibid., 106.)

   It is interesting to observe that the first restrictions produced by the

introduction  of  marriage-classes  affected  the  sexual  freedom  of  the

younger generation (that is, incest between brothers and sisters and

between  sons  and  mothers)  whereas  incest  between  fathers  and

daughters  was  only  prevented  by  a  further  extension  of  the

regulations.

 

   ¹ See, for instance, Frazer (1910, 4, 75): ‘The totemic clan is a totally different social

organism from the exogamous clan, and we have good grounds for thinking that it is far older.’

   ² Cf. the first essay in this work.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2763

 

      But  the  fact  that  exogamous  sexual  restrictions  were  imposed

intentionally throws no light on the motive which led to their imposition.

What  is  the  ultimate  source  of  the  horror  of  incest  which  must  be

recognized as the root of exogamy? To explain it by the existence of

an instinctive dislike of sexual intercourse with blood relatives - that is

to say, by an appeal to the fact that there is a horror of incest - is

clearly unsatisfactory; for social experience shows that, in spite of this

supposed instinct, incest is no uncommon event even in our present-

day society, and history tells us of cases in which incestuous marriage

between privileged persons was actually the rule.

   Westermarck (1906-8, 2, 368)¹ has explained the horror of incest on

the  ground  that  ‘there  is  an  innate  aversion  to  sexual  intercourse

between  persons  living  very  closely  together  from  early  youth,  and

that, as such persons are in most cases related by blood, this feeling

would  naturally  display  itself  in  custom  and  law  as  a  horror  of

intercourse between near kin’. Havelock Ellis, though he disputed the

instinctiveness of the aversion, subscribed to this explanation in the

main: ‘The normal failure of the pairing instinct to manifest itself in the

case of brothers and sisters, or of boys and girls brought up together

from infancy, is a merely negative phenomenon due to the inevitableabsence  in  those  circumstances  of  the  conditions  which  evoke  the

pairing  instinct.  .  .  .  Between  those  who  have  been  brought  up

together from childhood all the sensory stimuli of vision, hearing and

touch have been dulled by use, trained to the calm level of affection,

and  deprived  of  their  potency  to  arouse  the  erethistic  excitement

which produces sexual tumescence.’

 

   ¹ In the same chapter he replies to various objections which have been raised against his

views.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2764

 

   It seems to me very remarkable that Westermarck should consider

that this innate aversion to sexual intercourse with those with whom

one has been intimate in childhood is also the equivalent in psychical

terms  of  the  biological  fact  that  inbreeding  is  detrimental  to  the

species.  A  biological  instinct  of  the  kind  suggested  would  scarcely

have gone so far astray in its psychological expression that, instead of

applying to blood relatives (intercourse with whom might be injurious

to reproduction), it affected persons who were totally innocuous in this

respect, merely because they shared a common home. I cannot resist

referring, too, to Frazer’s admirable criticism of Westermarck’s theory.

Frazer finds it inexplicable that to-day there should be scarcely any

sexual aversion to intercourse with house-mates, whereas the horror

of incest, which on Westermarck’s theory is only a derivative of that

aversion,  should  have  increased  so  enormously.  But  some  further

comments of Frazer’s go deeper, and these I shall reproduce in full,

since they are in essential agreement with the arguments which I put

forward in my essay on taboo:

   ‘It is not easy to see why any deep human instinct should need to be

reinforced by law. There is no law commanding men to eat and drink

or forbidding them to put their hands in the fire. Men eat and drink and

keep their hands out of the fire instinctively for fear of natural not legal

penalties, which would be entailed by violence done to these instincts.

The law only forbids men to do what their instincts incline them to do;

what nature itself prohibits and punishes, it would be superfluous forthe  law  to  prohibit  and  punish.  Accordingly  we  may  always  safely

assume  that  crimes  forbidden  by  law  are  crimes  which  many  men

have a natural propensity to commit. If there was no such propensity

there would be no such crimes, and if no such crimes were committed

what need to forbid them? Instead of assuming, therefore, from the

legal prohibition of incest that there is a natural aversion to incest, we

ought rather to assume that there is a natural instinct in favour of it,

and that if the law represses it, as it represses other natural instincts, it

does so because civilized men have come to the conclusion that the

satisfaction  of  these  natural  instincts  is  detrimental  to  the  general

interests of society.’ (Frazer, 1910, 4, 97 f.)

   I may add to these excellent arguments of Frazer’s that the findings

of  psycho-analysis  make  the  hypothesis  of  an  innate  aversion  to

incestuous  intercourse  totally  untenable.  They  have  shown,  on  the

contrary, that the earliest sexual excitations of youthful human beings

are invariably of an incestuous character and that such impulses when

repressed play a part that can scarcely be over-estimated as motive

forces of neuroses in later life.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2765

 

      Thus  the  view  which  explains  the  horror  of  incest  as  an  innate

instinct  must  be  abandoned.  Nor  can  anything  more  favourable  be

said  of  another,  widely  held  explanation  of  the  law  against  incest,

according  to  which  primitive  peoples  noticed  at  an  early  date  the

dangers with which their race was threatened by inbreeding and for

that reason deliberately adopted the prohibition. There are a host of

objections  to  this  theory.  (Cf.  Durkheim,  1898.)  Not  only  must  the

prohibition against incest be older than any domestication of animals

which might have enabled men to observe the effects of inbreeding

upon  racial  characters,  but  even  to-day  the  detrimental  results  of

inbreeding  are  not  established  with  certainty  and  cannot  easily  be

demonstrated  in  man.  Moreover,  everything  that  we  know  of

contemporary  savages  makes  it  highly  improbable  that  their  most

remote  ancestors  were  already  concerned  with  the  question  ofpreserving their later progeny from injury. Indeed it is almost absurd to

attribute  to  such  improvident  creatures  motives  of  hygiene  and

eugenics to which consideration is scarcely paid in our own present-

day civilization.¹

   Lastly, account must be taken of the fact that a prohibition against

inbreeding, based upon practical motives of hygiene, on the ground of

its tending to racial enfeeblement, seems quite inadequate to explain

the profound abhorrence shown towards incest in our society. As I

have shown elsewhere,² this feeling seems to be even more active

and  intense  among  contemporary  primitive  peoples  than  among

civilized ones.

   It might have been expected that here again we should have before

us  a  choice  between  sociological,  biological  and  psychological

explanations.  (In  this  connection  the  psychological  motives  should

perhaps be regarded as representing biological forces.) Nevertheless,

at the end of our inquiry, we can only subscribe to Frazer’s resigned

conclusion. We are ignorant of the origin of the horror of incest and

cannot even tell in what direction to look for it. None of the solutions of

the enigma that have been proposed seems satisfactory.³

 

   ¹ Darwin  writes  of  savages  that  they  ‘are  not  likely  to  reflect  on  distant  evils  to  their

progeny’.

   ² See the first essay in this work.

   ³ ‘Thus the ultimate origin of exogamy, and with it of the law of incest - since exogamy was

devised to prevent incest - remains a problem nearly as dark as ever.’ (Frazer, 1910, 1, 165.)
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2766

 

 

   I must, however, mention one other attempt at solving it. It is of a

kind quite different from any that we have so far considered, and might

be described as ‘historical’.

   This attempt is based upon a hypothesis of Charles Darwin’s upon

the social state of primitive men. Darwin deduced from the habits of

the higher apes that men, too, originally lived in comparatively small

groups or hordes within which the jealousy of the oldest and strongestmale prevented sexual promiscuity. ‘We may indeed conclude from

what we know of the jealousy of all male quadrupeds, armed, as many

of them are, with special weapons for battling with their rivals, that

promiscuous  intercourse  in  a  state  of  nature  is  extremely

improbable. . . . Therefore, if we look far enough back in the stream of

time, . . . judging from the social habits of man as he now exists . . .

the  most  probable  view  is  that  primaeval  man  aboriginally  lived  in

small communities, each with as many wives as he could support and

obtain, whom he would have jealously guarded against all other men.

Or he may have lived with several wives by himself, like the Gorilla; for

all the natives "agree that but one adult male is seen in a band; when

the young male grows up, a contest takes place for mastery, and the

strongest, by killing and driving out the others, establishes himself as

the head of the community". (Dr. Savage, in Boston Journal of Nat.

Hist., vol. v, 1845-7, p. 423.) The younger males, being thus expelled

and  wandering  about,  would,  when  at  last  successful  in  finding  a

partner, prevent too close interbreeding within the limits of the same

family.’ (Darwin, 1871, 2, 362 f.)

   Atkinson (1903) seems to have been the first to realize that the

practical consequence of the conditions obtaining in Darwin’s primal

horde must be exogamy for the young males. Each of them might,

after being driven out, establish a similar horde, in which the same

prohibition upon sexual intercourse would rule owing to its leader’s

jealousy.  In  course  of  time  this  would  produce  what  grew  into  a

conscious  law:  ‘No  sexual  relations  between  those  who  share  a

common  home.’  After  the  establishment  of  totemism  this  regulation

would assume another form and would run: ‘No sexual relations within

the totem.’

      Andrew  Lang  (1905,  114  and  143)  accepted  this  explanation  of

exogamy. In the same volume, however, he supports the other theory

(held by Durkheim), according to which exogamy was a resultant of

the totemic laws. It is a little difficult to bring these two points of view

into  harmony:  according  to  the  first  theory  exogamy  would  have

originated  before  totemism,  while  according  to  the  second  it  would

have been derived from it.¹

 

   ¹ ‘If it be granted that exogamy existed in practice, on the lines of Mr. Darwin’s theory,before the totem beliefs lent to the practice a sacred sanction, our task is relatively easy. The
first practical rule would be that of the jealous Sire, "No males to touch the females in my
camp", with expulsion of adolescent sons. In efflux of time that rule, become habitual, would
be, "No marriage within the local group". Next, let the local groups receive names, such as
Emus, Crows, Opossums, Snipes, and the rule becomes, "No marriage within the local group
of animal name; no Snipe to marry Snipe". But, if the primal groups were not exogamous, they
would become so, as soon as totemic myths and tabus were developed out of the animal,
vegetable, and other names of local groups.’ (Lang, 1905, 143.) (The italics in the middle of
this passage are mine.) In his last discussion of this subject, moreover, Lang (1911) states
that  he  has  ‘abandoned  the  idea  that  exogamy  is  a  consequence  of  the  general  totemic
taboo’.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2767

 

                                          (3)

 

   Into this obscurity one single ray of light is thrown by psycho-analytic

observation.

      There  is  a  great  deal  of  resemblance  between  the  relations  of

children and of primitive men towards animals. Children show no trace

of the arrogance which urges adult civilized men to draw a hard-and-

fast  line  between  their  own  nature  and  that  of  all  other  animals.

Children have no scruples over allowing animals to rank as their full

equals. Uninhibited as they are in the avowal of their bodily needs,

they  no  doubt  feel  themselves  more  akin  to  animals  than  to  their

elders, who may well be a puzzle to them.

      Not  infrequently,  however,  a  strange  rift  occurs  in  the  excellent

relations between children and animals. A child will suddenly begin to

be  frightened  of  some  particular  species  of  animal  and  to  avoid

touching or seeing any individual of that species. The clinical picture of

an animal phobia emerges - a very common, and perhaps the earliest,

form of psychoneurotic illness occurring in childhood. As a rule the

phobia is attached to animals in which the child has hitherto shown a

specially  lively  interest  and  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  any  particular

individual  animal.  There  is  no  large  choice  of  animals  that  may

become objects of a phobia in the case of children living in towns:

horses, dogs, cats, less often birds, and with striking frequency very

small creatures such as beetles and butterflies. The senseless andimmoderate  fear  shown  in  these  phobias  is  sometimes  attached  to

animals only known to the child from picture books and fairy tales. On

a  few  rare  occasions  it  is  possible  to  discover  what  has  led  to  an

unusual  choice  of  this  kind;  and  I  have  to  thank  Karl  Abraham  for

telling me of a case in which the child himself explained that his fear of

wasps was due to their colour and stripes reminding him of tigers,

which from all accounts were beasts to be feared.

   No detailed analytic examination has yet been made of children’s

animal phobias, though they would greatly repay study. This neglect

has no doubt been due to the difficulty of analysing children of such a

tender age. It cannot therefore be claimed that we know the general

meaning of these disorders and I myself am of the opinion that this

may not turn out to be of a uniform nature. But a few cases of phobias

of  this  kind  directed  towards  the  larger  animals  have  proved

accessible  to  analysis  and  have  thus  yielded  their  secret  to  the

investigator.  It  was  the  same  in  every  case:  where  the  children

concerned were boys, their fear related at bottom to their father and

had merely been displaced on to the animal.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2768

 

   Everyone with psycho-analytic experience will no doubt have come

across cases of the sort and have derived the same impression from

them. Yet I can quote only a few detailed publications on the subject.

This paucity of literature is an accidental circumstance and it must not

be  supposed  that  our  conclusions  are  based  on  a  few  scattered

observations. I may mention, for instance, a writer who has studied

the neuroses of childhood with great understanding - Dr. M. Wulff, of

Odessa.  In  the  course  of  a  case  history  of  a  nine-year-old  boy  he

reports that at the age of four the patient had suffered from a dog-

phobia. ‘When he saw a dog running past in the street, he would weep

and  call  out:  "Dear  doggie,  don’t  bite  me!  I’II  be  good!"  By  "being

good" he meant "not playing on the fiddle" - not masturbating. (Wulff,

1912, 15.) ‘The boy’s dog-phobia’, the author explains, ‘was in reality

his fear of his father displaced on to dogs; for his curious exclamation"Doggie, I’II be good!" - that is, "I won’t masturbate" - was directed to

his  father,  who  had  forbidden  him  to  masturbate.’  Wulff  adds  a

footnote which is in complete agreement with my views and at the

same  time  bears  witness  to  the  frequent  occurrence  of  such

experiences:  ‘Phobias  of  this  type  (phobias  of  horses,  dogs,  cats,

fowls  and  other  domestic  animals)  are,  in  my  opinion,  at  least  as

common in childhood as pavor nocturnus; and in analysis they almost

invariably turn out to be a displacement on to the animals of the child’s

fear of one of his parents. I should not be prepared to maintain that

the same mechanism applies to the widespread phobias of rats and

mice.’

   I recently published (1909b) an ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-

Old  Boy’,  the  material  of  which  was  supplied  to  me  by  the  little

patient’s father. The boy had a phobia of horses, and as a result he

refused to go out in the street. He expressed a fear that the horse

would come into the room and bite him; and it turned out that this must

be the punishment for a wish that the horse might fall down (that is,

die).  After  the  boy’s  fear  of  his  father  had  been  removed  by

reassurances,  it  became  evident  that  he  was  struggling  against

wishes which had as their subject the idea of his father being absent

(going away on a journey, dying). He regarded his father (as he made

all too clear) as a competitor for the favours of his mother, towards

whom the obscure foreshadowings of his budding sexual wishes were

aimed. Thus he was situated in the typical attitude of a male child

towards his parents to which we have given the name of the ‘Oedipus

complex’ and which we regard in general as the nuclear complex of

the neuroses. The new fact that we have learnt from the analysis of

‘little Hans’ - a fact with an important bearing upon totemism - is that in

such circumstances children displace some of their feelings from their

father on to an animal.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2769

 

      Analysis  is  able  to  trace  the  associative  paths  along  which  this

displacement  passes  -  both  the  fortuitous  paths  and  those  with  asignificant content. Analysis also enables us to discover the motives

for the displacement. The hatred of his father that arises in a boy from

rivalry for his mother is not able to achieve uninhibited sway over his

mind;  it  has  to  contend  against  his  old-established  affection  and

admiration for the very same person. The child finds relief from the

conflict  arising  out  of  this  double-sided,  this  ambivalent  emotional

attitude towards his father by displacing his hostile and fearful feelings

on to a substitute for his father. The displacement cannot, however,

bring  the  conflict  to  an  end,  it  cannot  effect  a  clear-cut  severance

between the affectionate and the hostile feelings. On the contrary, the

conflict  is  resumed  in  relation  to  the  object  on  to  which  the

displacement  has  been  made:  the  ambivalence  is  extended  to it.

There could be no doubt that little Hans was not only frightened of

horses;  he  also  approached  them  with  admiration  and  interest.  As

soon as his anxiety began to diminish, he identified himself with the

dreaded creature: he began to jump about like a horse and in his turn

bit his father.¹ At another stage in the resolution of his phobia he did

not hesitate to identify his parents with some other large animals.²

 

   ¹ Freud (1909b).

   ² In his giraffe phantasy.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2770

 

   It may fairly be said that in these children’s phobias some of the

features of totemism reappear, but reversed into their negative. We

are, however, indebted to Ferenczi (1913a) for an interesting history of

a single case which can only be described as an instance of positive

totemism in a child. It is true that in the case of little Árpád (the subject

of Ferenczi’s report) his totemic interests did not arise in direct relation

with  his  Oedipus  complex  but  on  the  basis  of  its  narcissistic

precondition,  the  fear  of  castration.  But  any  attentive  reader  of  the

story of little Hans will find abundant evidence that he, too, admired

his father as possessing a big penis and feared him as threatening his

own. The same part is played by the father alike in the Oedipus and

the castration complexes - the part of a dreaded enemy to the sexualinterests  of  childhood.  The  punishment  which  he  threatens  is

castration, or its substitute, blinding.¹

   When little Árpád was two and a half years old, he had once, while

he was on a summer holiday, tried to micturate into the fowl-house

and a fowl had pecked, or pecked at his penis. A year later, when he

was back in the same place, he himself turned into a fowl; his one

interest  was  in  the  fowl-house  and  in  what  went  on  there  and  he

abandoned human speech in favour of cackling and crowing. At the

time at which the observation was made (when he was five years old)

he  had  recovered  his  speech,  but  his  interests  and  his  talk  were

entirely concerned with chickens and other kinds of poultry. They were

his only toys and he only sang songs that had some mention of fowls

in  them.  His  attitude  towards  his  totem  animal  was  superlatively

ambivalent:  he  showed  both  hatred  and  love  to  an  extravagant

degree.  His  favourite  game  was  playing  slaughtering  fowls.  ‘The

slaughtering of poultry was a regular festival for him. He would dance

round the animals’ bodies for hours at a time in a state of intense

excitement.’ But afterwards he would kiss and stroke the slaughtered

animal or would clean and caress the toy fowls that he had himself ill-

treated.

      Little  Árpád  himself  saw  to  it  that  the  meaning  of  his  strange

behaviour should not remain hidden. From time to time he translated

his wishes from the totemic language into that of everyday life. ‘My

father’s the cock’, he said on one occasion, and another time: ‘Now

I’m small, now I’m a chicken. When I get bigger I’lI be a fowl. When

I’m bigger still I’II be a cock.’ On another occasion he suddenly said he

would  like  to  eat  some  ‘fricassee  of  mother’  (on  the  analogy  of

fricassee  of  chicken).  He  was  very  generous  in  threatening  other

people with castration, just as he himself had been threatened with it

for his masturbatory activities.

 

   ¹ For the substitution of blinding for castration - a substitution that occurs, too, in the myth of

Oedipus - see Reitler (1913), Ferenczi (1913b), Rank (1913) and Eder (1913).
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2771

    There was no doubt, according to Ferenczi, as to the sources of

Árpád’s  interest  in  events  in  the  poultry-yard:  ‘the  continual  sexual

activity  between  the  cock  and  hens,  the  laying  of  eggs  and  the

hatching out of the young brood’ gratified his sexual curiosity, the real

object of which was human family-life. He showed that he had formed

his own choice of sexual objects on the model of life in the hen-run, for

he said one day to the neighbour’s wife: ‘I’II marry you and your sister

and my three cousins and the cook; no, not the cook, I’II marry my

mother instead.’

   Later on we shall be able to assess the worth of this observation

more completely. At the moment I will only emphasize two features in

it which offer valuable points of agreement with totemism: the boy’s

complete  identification  with  his  totem  animal¹  and  his  ambivalent

emotional attitude to it. These observations justify us, in my opinion, in

substituting the father for the totem animal in the formula for totemism

(in the case of males). It will be observed that there is nothing new or

particularly daring in this step forward. Indeed, primitive men say the

very same thing themselves, and, where the totemic system is still in

force to-day, they describe the totem as their common ancestor and

primal  father.  All  we  have  done  is  to  take  at  its  literal  value  an

expression used by these people, of which the anthropologists have

been able to make very little and which they have therefore been glad

to keep in the background. Psycho-analysis, on the contrary, leads us

to  put  special  stress  upon  this  same  point  and  to  take  it  as  the

starting-point of our attempt at explaining totemism.²

 

   ¹ This,  according  to  Frazer  (1910, 4,  5),  constitutes  ‘the  whole  essence  of  totemism’:

‘totemism is an identification of a man with his totem.’

   ² I have to thank Otto Rank for bringing to my notice a dog-phobia in an intelligent young

man. His explanation of the way in which he acquired his illness sounds markedly like the
totemic theory of the Arunta which I mentioned on page 2755: he thought he had heard from
his father that his mother had had a severe fright from a dog during her pregnancy.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2772

 

   The first consequence of our substitution is most remarkable. If the

totem  animal  is  the  father,  then  the  two  principal  ordinances  oftotemism, the two taboo prohibitions which constitute its core - not to

kill the totem and not to have sexual relations with a woman of the

same totem - coincide in their content with the two crimes of Oedipus,

who killed his father and married his mother, as well as with the two

primal  wishes  of  children,  the  insufficient  repression  or  the  re-

awakening  of  which  forms  the  nucleus  of  perhaps  every

psychoneurosis. If this equation is anything more than a misleading

trick of chance, it must enable us to throw a light upon the origin of

totemism in the inconceivably remote past. In other words, it would

enable  us  to  make  it  probable  that  the  totemic  system  -  like  little

Hans’s  animal  phobia  and  little  Árpád’s  poultry  perversion  -  was  a

product of the conditions involved in the Oedipus complex. In order to

pursue this possibility, we shall have, in the following pages, to study a

feature  of  the  totemic  system  (or,  as  we  might  say,  of  the  totemic

religion)  which  I  have  hitherto  scarcely  found  an  opportunity  of

mentioning.

 

                                          (4)

 

   William Robertson Smith, who died in 1894 - physicist, philologist,

Bible critic and archaeologist - was a man of many-sided interests,

clear-sighted and liberal-minded. In his book on the Religion of the

Semites (first published in 1889) he put forward the hypothesis that a

peculiar ceremony known as the ‘totem meal’ had from the very first

formed an integral part of the totemic system. At that time he had only

a single piece of evidence in support of his theory: an account of a

procedure  of  the  kind  dating  from  the  fifth  century  A.D.  But  by  an

analysis of the nature of sacrifice among the ancient Semites he was

able to lend his hypothesis a high degree of probability. Since sacrifice

implies  a  divinity,  it  was  a  question  of  arguing  back  from  a

comparatively high phase of religious ritual to the lowest one, that is,

to totemism.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2773

    I will now attempt to extract from Robertson Smith’s admirable work

those  of  his  statements  on  the  origin  and  meaning  of  the  ritual  of

sacrifice which are of decisive interest for us. In so doing I must omit

all  the  details,  often  so  fascinating,  and  neglect  all  the  later

developments. It is quite impossible for an abstract such as this to

give my readers any notion of the lucidity and convincing force of the

original.

   Robertson Smith explains that sacrifice at the altar was the essential

feature in the ritual of ancient religions. It plays the same part in all

religions, so that its origin must be traced back to very general causes,

operating everywhere in the same manner. Sacrifice - the sacred act

par  excellence  (sacrificium, ίερουργία)  -  originally  had  a  somewhat

different meaning, however, from its later one of making an offering to

the  deity  in  order  to  propitiate  him  or  gain  his  favour.  (The  non-

religious  usage  of  the  word  followed  from  this  subsidiary  sense  of

‘renunciation’.)  It  can  be  shown  that,  to  begin  with,  sacrifice  was

nothing  other  than  ‘an  act  of  fellowship  between  the  deity  and  his

worshippers’.

   The materials offered for sacrifice were things that can be eaten or

drunk;  men  sacrificed  to  their  deity  the  things  on  which  they

themselves lived: flesh, cereals, fruit, wine and oil. Only in the case of

flesh  were  there  limitations  and  exceptions.  The  god  shared  the

animal sacrifices with his worshippers, the vegetable offerings were

for him alone. There is no doubt that animal sacrifices were the older

and were originally the only ones. Vegetable sacrifices arose from the

offering of first-fruits and were in the nature of a tribute to the lord of

the earth and of the land; but animal sacrifices are more ancient than

agriculture.

   Linguistic survivals make it certain that the portion of the sacrifice

allotted to the god was originally regarded as being literally his food.

As  the  nature  of  gods  grew  progressively  less  material,  this

conception became a stumbling-block. It was avoided by assigning to

the deity only the liquid part of the meal. Later, the use of fire, which

caused  the  flesh  of  the  sacrifice  upon  the  altar  to  rise  in  smoke,

afforded a method of dealing with human food more appropriate to the

divine nature. The drink-offering consisted originally of the blood of the

animal victim. This was later replaced by wine. In ancient times winewas regarded as ‘the blood of the grape’, and it has been so described

by modern poets.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2774

 

   The oldest form of sacrifice, then, older than the use of fire or the

knowledge of agriculture, was the sacrifice of animals, whose flesh

and blood were enjoyed in common by the god and his worshippers. It

was essential that each one of the participants should have his share

of the meal.

   A sacrifice of this kind was a public ceremony, a festival celebrated

by the whole clan. Religion in general was an affair of the community

and  religious  duty  was  a  part  of  social  obligation.  Everywhere  a

sacrifice involves a feast and a feast cannot be celebrated without a

sacrifice. The sacrificial feast was an occasion on which individuals

rose  joyously  above  their  own  interests  and  stressed  the  mutual

dependence existing between one another and their god.

      The  ethical  force  of  the  public  sacrificial  meal  rested  upon  very

ancient  ideas  of  the  significance  of  eating  and  drinking  together.

Eating and drinking with a man was a symbol and a confirmation of

fellowship and mutual social obligations. What was directly expressed

by  the  sacrificial  meal  was  only  the  fact  that  the  god  and  his

worshippers were ‘commensals’, but every other point in their mutual

relations was included in this. Customs still in force among the Arabs

of the desert show that what is binding in a common meal is not a

religious factor but the act of eating itself. Anyone who has eaten the

smallest morsel of food with one of these Bedouin or has swallowed a

mouthful of his milk need no longer fear him as an enemy but may feel

secure in his protection and help. Not, however, for an unlimited time;

strictly speaking, only so long as the food which has been eaten in

common remains in the body. Such was the realistic view of the bond

of  union.  It  needed  repetition  in  order  to  be  confirmed  and  made

permanent.

                                     Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2775

 

      But  why  is  this  binding  force  attributed  to  eating  and  drinking

together? In primitive societies there was only one kind of bond which

was absolute and inviolable - that of kinship. The solidarity of such a

fellowship was complete. ‘A kin was a group of persons whose lives

were so bound up together, in what must be called a physical unity,

that they could be treated as parts of one common life. . . . In a case

of homicide Arabian tribesmen do not say, "The blood of M. or N. has

been spilt", naming the man; they say, "Our blood has been spilt". In

Hebrew the phrase by which one claims kinship is "I am your bone

and  your  flesh".’  Thus  kinship  implies  participation  in  a  common

substance. It is therefore natural that it is not merely based on the fact

that a man is a part of his mother’s substance, having been born of

her and having been nourished by her milk, but that it can be acquired

and strengthened by food which a man eats later and with which his

body  is  renewed.  If  a  man  shared  a  meal  with  his  god  he  was

expressing  a  conviction  that  they  were  of  one  substance;  and  he

would never share a meal with one whom he regarded as a stranger.

      The  sacrificial  meal,  then,  was  originally  a  feast  of  kinsmen,  in

accordance with the law that only kinsmen eat together. In our own

society the members of a family have their meals in common; but the

sacrificial meal bears no relation to the family. Kinship is an older thing

than family life, and in the most primitive societies known to us the

family  contained  members  of  more  than  one  kindred.  The  man

married  a  woman  of  another  clan  and  the  children  inherited  their

mother’s clan; so that there was no communion of kin between the

man and the other members of the family. In a family of such a kind

there was no common meal. To this day, savages eat apart and alone

and  the  religious  food  prohibitions  of  totemism  often  make  it

impossible for them to eat in common with their wives and children.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2776

 

   Let us now turn to the sacrificial animal. As we have heard, there isno gathering of a clan without an animal sacrifice, nor - and this now

becomes significant - any slaughter of an animal except upon these

ceremonial occasions. While game and the milk of domestic animals

might be consumed without any qualms, religious scruples made it

impossible to kill a domestic animal for private purposes. There cannot

be the slightest doubt, says Robertson Smith, that the slaughter of a

victim was originally among the acts which ‘are illegal to an individual,

and can only be justified when the whole clan shares the responsibility

of the deed.’¹  So  far  as  I  know,  there  is  only  one  class  of  actions

recognized  by  early  nations  to  which  this  description  applies,  viz.

actions which involve an invasion of the sanctity of the tribal blood. In

fact, a life which no single tribesman is allowed to invade, and which

can be sacrificed only by the consent and common action of the kin,

stands on the same footing with the life of the fellow-tribesman.’ The

rule that every participant at the sacrificial meal must eat a share of

the flesh of the victim has the same meaning as the provision that the

execution of a guilty tribesman must be carried out by the tribe as a

whole. In other words, the sacrificial animal was treated as a member

of  the  tribe; the  sacrificing  community,  the  god  and  the  sacrificial

animal were of the same blood and members of one clan.

   Robertson Smith brings forward copious evidence for identifying the

sacrificial  animal  with  the  primitive  totem  animal.  In  later  antiquity

there  were  two  classes  of  sacrifice:  one  in  which  the  victims  were

domestic animals of the kinds habitually used for eating, and the other

extraordinary  sacrifices  of  animals  which  were  unclean  and  whose

consumption was forbidden. Investigation shows that these unclean

animals were sacred animals, that they were offered as sacrifices to

the gods to whom they were sacred, that originally they were identical

with  the  gods  themselves,  and  that  by  means  of  the  sacrifice  the

worshippers in some way laid stress upon their blood kinship with the

animal and the god. But in still earlier times this distinction between

ordinary and ‘mystic’ sacrifices disappears. Originally all animals were

sacred, their flesh was forbidden meat and might only be consumed

on ceremonial occasions and with the participation of the whole clan.

The slaughter of an animal was equivalent to a shedding of the tribal

blood and could occur subject only to the same precautions and the

same insurances against incurring reproach. 

   ¹ [This sentence is italicized by Freud.]

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2777

 

   The domestication of animals and the introduction of cattle-breeding

seems  everywhere  to  have  brought  to  an  end  the  strict  and

unadulterated totemism of primaeval days.¹ But such sacred character

as  remained  to  domestic  animals  under  what  had  then  become

‘pastoral’  religion  is  obvious  enough  to  allow  us  to  infer  its  original

totemic nature. Even in late classical times ritual prescribed in many

places that the sacrificial priest must take to flight after performing the

sacrifice, as though to escape retribution. The idea that slaughtering

oxen  was  a  crime  must  at  one  time  have  prevailed  generally  in

Greece.  At  the  Athenian  festival  of  Buphonia  a  regular  trial  was

instituted  after  the  sacrifice,  and  all  the  participants  were  called  as

witnesses. At the end of it, it was agreed that the responsibility for the

murder should be placed upon the knife; and this was accordingly cast

into the sea.

   In spite of the ban protecting the lives of sacred animals in their

quality of fellow-clansmen, a necessity arose for killing one of them

from time to time in solemn communion and for dividing its flesh and

blood among the members of the clan. The compelling motive for this

deed reveals the deepest meaning of the nature of sacrifice. We have

heard  how  in  later  times,  whenever  food  is  eaten  in  common,  the

participation  in  the  same  substance  establishes  a  sacred  bond

between those who consume it when it has entered their bodies. In

ancient  times  this  result  seems  only  to  have  been  effected  by

participation in the substance of a sacrosanct victim. The holy mystery

of sacrificial death ‘is justified by the consideration that only in this way

can the sacred cement be procured which creates or keeps alive a

living bond of union between the worshippers and their god’.²(Ibid.,

313.)

   This bond is nothing else than the life of the sacrificial animal, which

resides in its flesh and in its blood and is distributed among all the

participants in the sacrificial meal. A notion of this kind lies at the rootof all the blood covenants by which men made compacts with each

other even at a late period of history. This completely literal way of

regarding  blood-kinship  as  identity  of  substance  makes  it  easy  to

understand  the  necessity  for  renewing  it  from  time  to  time  by  the

physical process of the sacrificial meal.

 

   ¹ ‘The inference is that the domestication to which totemism inevitably leads (when there

are any animals capable of domestication) is fatal to totemism.’ (Jevons, 1902, 120.)

   ² [This sentence is italicized by Freud.]

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2778

 

   At this point I will interrupt my survey of Robertson Smith’s line of

thought and restate the gist of it in the most concise terms. With the

establishment  of  the  idea  of  private  property  sacrifice  came  to  be

looked upon as a gift to the deity, as a transference of property from

men  to  the  god.  But  this  interpretation  left  unexplained  all  the

peculiarities of the ritual of sacrifice. In the earliest times the sacrificial

animal had itself been sacred and its life untouchable; it might only be

killed  if  all  the  members  of  the  clan  participated  in  the  deed  and

shared  their  guilt  in  the  presence  of  the  god,  so  that  the  sacred

substance could be yielded up and consumed by the clansmen and

thus  ensure  their  identity  with  one  another  and  with  the  deity.  The

sacrifice  was  a  sacrament  and  the  sacrificial  animal  was  itself  a

member  of  the  clan.  It  was  in  fact  the  ancient  totem  animal,  the

primitive god himself, by the killing and consuming of which the clans

men renewed and assured their likeness to the god.

   From this analysis of the nature of sacrifice Robertson Smith draws

the conclusion that the periodic killing and eating of the totem in times

before the worship of anthropomorphic deities had been an important

element in totemic religion. The ceremonial of a totem meal of this

kind  is,  he  suggests,  to  be  found  in  a  description  of  a  sacrifice  of

comparatively  late  date.  St.  Nilus  records  a  sacrificial  ritual  current

among the Bedouin of the Sinai Desert at the end of the fourth century

A.D. The victim of the sacrifice, a camel, ‘is bound upon a rude altar of

stones piled together, and when the leader of the band has thrice ledthe worshippers round the altar in a solemn procession accompanied

with chants, he inflicts the first wound . . . and in all haste drinks of the

blood that gushes forth. Forthwith the whole company fall on the victim

with  their  swords,  hacking  off  pieces  of  the  quivering  flesh  and

devouring  them  raw  with  such  wild  haste,  that  in  the  short  interval

between  the  rise  of  the  day  star¹  which  marked  the  hour  for  the

service to begin, and the disappearance of its rays before the rising

sun, the entire camel, body and bones, skin, blood and entrails, is

wholly  devoured.’  All  the  evidence  goes  to  show  that  this  barbaric

ritual, which bears every sign of extreme antiquity, was no isolated

instance  but  was  everywhere  the  original  form  taken  by  totemic

sacrifice, though later toned down in many different directions.

 

   ¹ To which the sacrifice was offered.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2779

 

   Many authorities have refused to attach importance to the concept

of  the  totem  meal,  because  it  was  not  supported  by  any  direct

observation at the level of totemism. Robertson Smith himself pointed

to  instances  in  which  the  sacramental  significance  of  the  sacrifice

seemed  to  be  assured:  for  instance,  the  human  sacrifices  of  the

Aztecs, and others which recall the circumstances of the totem meal -

the  sacrifice  of  bears  by  the  Bear  clan  of  the  Ouataouak  tribe  in

America and the bear feast of the Aino in Japan. These and similar

cases have been reported in detail by Frazer in the Fifth Part of his

great work (1912, 2).  An  American  Indian  tribe  in  California,  which

worship a large bird of prey (a buzzard), kill it once a year at a solemn

festival,  after  which  it  is  mourned  and  its  skin  and  feathers  are

preserved. The Zuni Indians of New Mexico behave in a similar way to

their sacred turtles.

   A feature has been observed in the intichiuma ceremonies of the

Central  Australian  tribes  which  agrees  admirably  with  Robertson

Smith’s conjectures. Each clan, when it is performing magic for the

multiplication of its totem (which it itself is normally prohibited from

consuming), is obliged during the ceremony to eat a small portion ofits own totem before making it accessible to the other clans. According

to  Frazer  (ibid., 2,  590)  the  clearest  example  of  a  sacramental

consumption of an otherwise prohibited totem is to be found among

the Bini of West Africa in connection with their funeral ceremonies.

      Accordingly,  I  propose  that  we  should  adopt  Robertson  Smith’s

hypothesis that the sacramental killing and communal eating of the

totem  animal,  whose  consumption  was  forbidden  on  all  other

occasions, was an important feature of totemic religion.¹

 

   ¹ I am not unaware of the objections to this theory of sacrifice which have been brought

forward  by  various  writers  (such  as  Marillier,  Hubert  and  Mauss,  etc.);  but  they  have  not
diminished to any important extent the impression produced by Robertson Smith’s hypothesis.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2780

 

                                          (5)

 

   Let us call up the spectacle of a totem meal of the kind we have

been discussing, amplified by a few probable features which we have

not yet been able to consider. The clan is celebrating the ceremonial

occasion by the cruel slaughter of its totem animal and is devouring it

raw - blood, flesh and bones. The clansmen are there, dressed in the

likeness  of  the  totem  and  imitating  it  in  sound  and  movement,  as

though they are seeking to stress their identity with it. Each man is

conscious that he is performing an act forbidden to the individual and

justifiable only through the participation of the whole clan; nor may any

one absent himself from the killing and the meal. When the deed is

done, the slaughtered animal is lamented and bewailed. The mourning

is  obligatory,  imposed  by  dread  of  a  threatened  retribution.  As

Robertson Smith (1894, 412) remarks of an analogous occasion, its

chief purpose is to disclaim responsibility for the killing.

   But the mourning is followed by demonstrations of festive rejoicing:

every  instinct  is  unfettered  and  there  is  licence  for  every  kind  of

gratification. Here we have easy access to an understanding of the

nature of festivals in general. A festival is a permitted, or rather an

obligatory, excess, a solemn breach of a prohibition. It is not that mencommit the excesses because they are feeling happy as a result of

some injunction they have received. It is rather that excess is of the

essence of a festival; the festive feeling is produced by the liberty to

do what is as a rule prohibited.

   What are we to make, though, of the prelude to this festive joy - the

mourning over the death of the animal? If the clansmen rejoice over

the killing of the totem - a normally forbidden act - why do they mourn

over it as well?

   As we have seen, the clansmen acquire sanctity by consuming the

totem: they reinforce their identification with it and with one another.

Their  festive  feelings  and  all  that  follows  from  them  might  well  be

explained by the fact that they have taken into themselves the sacred

life of which the substance of the totem is the vehicle.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2781

 

   Psycho-analysis has revealed that the totem animal is in reality a

substitute for the father; and this tallies with the contradictory fact that,

though the killing of the animal is as a rule forbidden, yet its killing is a

festive occasion - with the fact that it is killed and yet mourned. The

ambivalent  emotional  attitude,  which  to  this  day  characterizes  the

father-complex in our children and which often persists into adult life,

seems to extend to the totem animal in its capacity as substitute for

the father.

      If,  now,  we  bring  together  the  psycho-analytic  translation  of  the

totem with the fact of the totem meal and with Darwin’s theories of the

earliest  state  of  human  society,  the  possibility  of  a  deeper

understanding emerges - a glimpse of a hypothesis which may seem

fantastic  but  which  offers  the  advantage  of  establishing  an

unsuspected  correlation  between  groups  of  phenomena  that  have

hitherto been disconnected.

      There  is,  of  course,  no  place  for  the  beginnings  of  totemism  in

Darwin’s primal horde. All that we find there is a violent and jealous

father who keeps all the females for himself and drives away his sons

as  they  grow  up.  This  earliest  state  of  society  has  never  been  anobject of observation. The most primitive kind of organization that we

actually come across - and one that is in force to this day in certain

tribes  -  consists  of  bands  of  males;  these  bands  are  composed  of

members with equal rights and are subject to the restrictions of the

totemic  system,  including  inheritance  through  the  mother.  Can  this

form of organization have developed out of the other one? and if so

along what lines?

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2782

 

   If we call the celebration of the totem meal to our help, we shall be

able to find an answer. One day¹ the brothers who had been driven

out came together, killed and devoured their father and so made an

end of the patriarchal horde. United, they had the courage to do and

succeeded  in  doing  what  would  have  been  impossible  for  them

individually. (Some cultural advance, perhaps, command over some

new weapon, had given them a sense of superior strength.) Cannibal

savages as they were, it goes without saying that they devoured their

victim as well as killing him. The violent primal father had doubtless

been the feared and envied model of each one of the company of

brothers:  and  in  the  act  of  devouring  him  they  accomplished  their

identification with him, and each one of them acquired a portion of his

strength. The totem meal, which is perhaps mankind’s earliest festival,

would thus be a repetition and a commemoration of this memorable

and criminal deed, which was the beginning of so many things - of

social organization, of moral restrictions and of religion.¹

 

   ¹ To avoid possible misunderstanding, I must ask the reader to take into account the final

sentences of the following footnote as a corrective to this description.

     ² This  hypothesis,  which  has  such  a  monstrous  air,  of  the  tyrannical  father  being

overwhelmed and killed by a combination of his exiled sons, was also arrived at by Atkinson
(1903, 220 f.) as a direct implication of the state of affairs in Darwin’s primal horde: ‘The
patriarch had only one enemy whom he should dread . . . a youthful band of brothers living
together  in  forced  celibacy,  or  at  most  in  polyandrous  relation  with  some  single  female
captive. A horde as yet weak in their impubescence they are, but they would, when strength
was gained with time, inevitably wrench by combined attacks, renewed again and again, both
wife and life from the paternal tyrant.’ Atkinson, who incidentally passed his whole life in New
Caledonia and had unusual opportunities for studying the natives, also pointed out that theconditions which Darwin assumed to prevail in the primal horde may easily be observed in
herds of wild oxen and horses and regularly lead to the killing of the father of the herd. He
further supposed that, after the father had been disposed of, the horde would be disintegrated
by a bitter struggle between the victorious sons. Thus any new organization of society would
be precluded: there would be ‘an ever-recurring violent succession to the solitary paternal
tyrant, by sons whose parricidal hands were so soon again clenched in fratricidal strife.’ (Ibid.,
228.)  Atkinson,  who  had  no  psycho-analytic  hints  to  help  him  and  who  was  ignorant  of
Robertson Smith’s studies, found a less violent transition from the primal horde to the next
social stage, at which numbers of males live together in a peaceable community. He believed
that through the intervention of maternal love the sons - to begin with only the youngest, but
later  others  as  well  -  were  allowed  to  remain  with  the  horde,  and  that  in  return  for  this
toleration the sons acknowledged their father’s sexual privilege by renouncing all claim to their
mother and sisters.
   Such is the highly remarkable theory put forward by Atkinson. In its essential feature it is in
agreement with my own; but its divergence results in its failing to effect a correlation with
many other issues.
   The lack of precision in what I have written in the text above, its abbreviation of the time
factor  and  its  compression  of  the  whole  subject  matter,  may  be  attributed  to  the  reserve
necessitated by the nature of the topic. It would be as foolish to aim at exactitude in such
questions as it would be unfair to insist upon certainty.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2783

 

   In order that these latter consequences may seem plausible, leaving

their premises on one side, we need only suppose that the tumultuous

mob of brothers were filled with the same contradictory feelings which

we can see at work in the ambivalent father-complexes of our children

and of our neurotic patients. They hated their father, who presented

such a formidable obstacle to their craving for power and their sexual

desires; but they loved and admired him too. After they had got rid of

him, had satisfied their hatred and had put into effect their wish to

identify themselves with him, the affection which had all this time been

pushed under was bound to make itself felt.¹ It did so in the form of

remorse. A sense of guilt made its appearance, which in this instance

coincided with the remorse felt by the whole group. The dead father

became stronger than the living one had been - for events took the

course we so often see them follow in human affairs to this day. What

had  up  to  then  been  prevented  by  his  actual  existence  was

thenceforward prohibited by the sons themselves, in accordance with

the  psychological  procedure  so  familiar  to  us  in  psycho-analyses

under the name of ‘deferred obedience’. They revoked their deed byforbidding the killing of the totem, the substitute for their father; and

they renounced its fruits by resigning their claim to the women who

had now been set free. They thus created out of their filial sense of

guilt  the  two  fundamental  taboos  of  totemism,  which  for  that  very

reason  inevitably  corresponded  to  the  two  repressed  wishes  of  the

Oedipus complex. Whoever contravened those taboos be came guilty

of the only two crimes with which primitive society concerned itself.²

 

   ¹ This fresh emotional attitude must also have been assisted by the fact that the deed

cannot have given complete satisfaction to those who did it. From one point of view it had
been done in vain. Not one of the sons had in fact been able to put his original wish - of taking
his father’s place - into effect. And, as we know, failure is far more propitious for a moral
reaction than satisfaction.

   ² ‘Murder and incest, or offences of a like kind against the sacred laws of blood, are in

primitive society the only crimes of which the community as such takes cognizance.’ (Smith,
1894, 419.)
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2784

 

      The  two  taboos  of  totemism  with  which  human  morality  has  its

beginning are not on a par psychologically. The first of them, the law

protecting the totem animal, is founded wholly on emotional motives:

the father had actually been eliminated, and in no real sense could the

deed be undone. But the second rule, the prohibition of incest, has a

powerful practical basis as well. Sexual desires do not unite men but

divide  them.  Though  the  brothers  had  banded  together  in  order  to

overcome their father, they were all one another’s rivals in regard to

the women. Each of them would have wished, like his father, to have

all the women to himself. The new organization would have collapsed

in a struggle of all against all, for none of them was of such over-

mastering  strength  as  to  be  able  to  take  on  his  father’s  part  with

success.  Thus  the  brothers  had  no  alternative,  if  they  were  to  live

together,  but  -  not,  perhaps,  until  they  had  passed  through  many

dangerous crises - to institute the law against incest, by which they all

alike renounced the women whom they desired and who had been

their chief motive for despatching their father. In this way they rescued

the organization which had made them strong - and which may havebeen  based  on  homosexual  feelings  and  acts,  originating  perhaps

during the period of their expulsion from the horde. Here, too, may

perhaps have been the germ of the institution of matriarchy, described

by  Bachofen,  which  was  in  turn  replaced  by  the  patriarchal

organization of the family.

   On the other hand, the claim of totemism to be regarded as a first

attempt at a religion is based on the first of these two taboos - that

upon taking the life of the totem animal. The animal struck the sons as

a natural and obvious substitute for their father; but the treatment of it

which they found imposed on themselves expressed more than the

need to exhibit their remorse. They could attempt, in their relation to

this  surrogate  father,  to  allay  their  burning  sense  of  guilt,  to  bring

about  a  kind  of  reconciliation  with  their  father.  The  totemic  system

was, as it were, a covenant with their father, in which he promised

them everything that a childish imagination may expect from a father -

protection, care and indulgence - while on their side they undertook to

respect  his  life,  that  is  to  say,  not  to  repeat  the  deed  which  had

brought  destruction  on  their  real  father.  Totemism,  moreover,

contained an attempt at self-justification: ‘If our father had treated us in

the way the totem does, we should never have felt tempted to kill him.’

In this fashion totemism helped to smooth things over and to make it

possible to forget the event to which it owed its origin.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2785

 

      Features  were  thus  brought  into  existence  which  continued

thenceforward  to  have  a  determining  influence  on  the  nature  of

religion.  Totemic  religion  arose  from  the  filial  sense  of  guilt,  in  an

attempt  to  allay  that  feeling  and  to  appease  the  father  by  deferred

obedience to him. All later religions are seen to be attempts at solving

the same problem. They vary according to the stage of civilization at

which they arise and according to the methods which they adopt; but

all have the same end in view and are reactions to the same great

event with which civilization began and which, since it occurred, has

not allowed mankind a moment’s rest.   There is another feature which was already present in totemism and

which  has  been  preserved  unaltered  in  religion.  The  tension  of

ambivalence was evidently too great for any contrivance to be able to

counteract it; or it is possible that psychological conditions in general

are unfavourable to getting rid of these antithetical emotions. However

that  may  be,  we  find  that  the  ambivalence  implicit  in  the  father-

complex  persists  in  totemism  and  in  religions  generally.  Totemic

religion not only comprised expressions of remorse and attempts at

atonement, it also served as a remembrance of the triumph over the

father.  Satisfaction  over  that  triumph  led  to  the  institution  of  the

memorial  festival  of  the  totem  meal,  in  which  the  restrictions  of

deferred obedience no longer held. Thus it became a duty to repeat

the crime of parricide again and again in the sacrifice of the totem

animal, whenever, as a result of the changing conditions of life, the

cherished fruit of the crime - appropriation of the paternal attributes -

threatened to disappear. We shall not be surprised to find that the

element of filial rebelliousness also emerges, in the later products of

religion, often in the strangest disguises and transformations.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2786

 

      Hitherto  we  have  followed  the  developments  of  the affectionate

current of feeling towards the father, transformed into remorse, as we

find them in religion and in moral ordinances (which are not sharply

distinguished in totemism). But we must not overlook the fact that it

was in the main with the impulses that led to parricide that the victory

lay.  For  a  long  time  afterwards,  the  social  fraternal  feelings,  which

were the basis of the whole transformation, continued to exercise a

profound  influence  on  the  development  of  society.  They  found

expression in the sanctification of the blood tie, in the emphasis upon

the solidarity of all life within the same clan. In thus guaranteeing one

another’s lives, the brothers were declaring that no one of them must

be treated by another as their father was treated by them all jointly.

They  were  precluding  the  possibility  of  a  repetition  of  their  father’s

fate. To the religiously-based prohibition against killing the totem wasnow added the socially-based prohibition against fratricide. It was not

until  long  afterwards  that  the  prohibition  ceased  to  be  limited  to

members of the clan and assumed the simple form: ‘Thou shalt do no

murder.’ The patriarchal horde was replaced in the first instance by

the  fraternal  clan,  whose  existence  was  assured  by  the  blood  tie.

Society was now based on complicity in the common crime; religion

was based on the sense of guilt and the remorse attaching to it; while

morality was based partly on the exigencies of this society and partly

on the penance demanded by the sense of guilt.

 

   Thus psycho-analysis, in contradiction to the more recent views of

the totemic system but in agreement with the earlier ones, requires us

to assume that totemism and exogamy were intimately connected and

had a simultaneous origin.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2787

 

                                          (6)

 

   A great number of powerful motives restrain me from any attempt at

picturing  the  further  development  of  religions  from  their  origin  in

totemism to their condition to-day. I will only follow two threads whose

course I can trace with especial clarity as they run through the pattern:

the theme of the totemic sacrifice and the relation of son to father.¹

   Robertson Smith has shown us that the ancient totem meal recurs in

the  original  form  of  sacrifice.  The  meaning  of  the  act  is  the  same:

sanctification through participation in a common meal. The sense of

guilt, which can only be allayed by the solidarity of all the participants,

also  persists.  What  is  new  is  the  clan  deity,  in  whose  supposed

presence the sacrifice is performed, who participates in the meal as

though he were a clansman, and with whom those who consume the

meal become identified. How does the god come to be in a situation to

which he was originally a stranger?

   The answer might be that in the meantime the concept of God had

emerged - from some unknown source - and had taken control of thewhole  of  religious  life;  and  that,  like  everything  else  that  was  to

survive, the totem meal had been obliged to find a point of contact

with the new system. The psycho-analysis of individual human beings,

however, teaches us with quite special insistence that the god of each

of  them  is  formed  in  the  likeness  of  his  father,  that  his  personal

relation to God depends on his relation to his father in the flesh and

oscillates and changes along with that relation, and that at bottom God

is nothing other than an exalted father. As in the case of totemism,

psycho-analysis recommends us to have faith in the believers who call

God their father, just as the totem was called the tribal ancestor. If

psycho-analysis  deserves  any  attention,  then  -  without  prejudice  to

any other sources or meanings of the concept of God, upon which

psycho-analysis  can  throw  no  light  -  the  paternal  element  in  that

concept must be a most important one. But in that case the father is

represented twice over in the situation of primitive sacrifice: once as

God and once as the totemic animal victim. And, even granting the

restricted number of explanations open to psycho-analysis, one must

ask whether this is possible and what sense it can have.

   We know that there are a multiplicity of relations between the god

and the sacred animal (the totem or the sacrificial victim). (1) Each

god usually has an animal (and quite often several animals) sacred to

him.  (2)  In  the  case  of  certain  specially  sacred  sacrifices  -  ‘mystic’

sacrifices  -  the  victim  was  precisely  the  animal  sacred  to  the  god

(Smith, 1894). (3) The god was often worshipped in the shape of an

animal (or, to look at it in another way, animals were worshipped as

gods)  long  after  the  age  of  totemism.  (4)  In  myths  the  god  often

transforms himself into an animal, and frequently into the animal that

is sacred to him.

 

   ¹ Cf. the discussion by C. G. Jung (1912), which is governed by views differing in certain

respects from mine.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2788

 

   It therefore seems plausible to suppose that the god himself was the

totem  animal,  and  that  he  developed  out  of  it  at  a  later  stage  ofreligious  feeling.  But  we  are  relieved  from  the  necessity  for  further

discussion by the consideration that the totem is nothing other than a

surrogate of the father. Thus, while the totem may be the first form of

father-surrogate, the god will be a later one, in which the father has

regained his human shape. A new creation such as this, derived from

what constitutes the root of every form of religion - a longing for the

father  -  might  occur  if  in  the  process  of  time  some  fundamental

change had taken place in man’s relation to the father, and perhaps,

too, in his relation to animals.

   Signs of the occurrence of changes of this kind may easily be seen,

even if we leave on one side the beginning of a mental estrangement

from animals and the disrupting of totemism owing to domestication.

(See above, p2777 f.)  There  was  one  factor  in  the  state  of  affairs

produced  by  the  elimination  of  the  father  which  was  bound  in  the

course of time to cause an enormous increase in the longing felt for

him. Each single one of the brothers who had banded together for the

purpose of killing their father was inspired by a wish to become like

him  and  had  given  expression  to  it  by  incorporating  parts  of  their

father’s  surrogate  in  the  totem  meal.  But,  in  consequence  of  the

pressure exercised upon each participant by the fraternal clan as a

whole, that wish could not be fulfilled. For the future no one could or

might ever again attain the father’s supreme power, even though that

was what all of them had striven for. Thus after a long lapse of time

their  bitterness  against  their  father,  which  had  driven  them  to  their

deed, grew less, and their longing for him increased; and it became

possible for an ideal to emerge which embodied the unlimited power

of the primal father against whom they had once fought as well as

their  readiness  to  submit  to  him.  As  a  result  of  decisive  cultural

changes, the original democratic equality that had prevailed among all

the individual clansmen became untenable; and there developed at

the same time an inclination, based on veneration felt for particular

human  individuals,  to  revive  the  ancient  paternal  ideal  by  creating

gods. The notion of a man becoming a god or of a god dying strikes

us to-day as shockingly presumptuous; but even in classical antiquity

there was nothing revolting in it.¹ The elevation of the father who had

once been murdered into a god from whom the clan claimed descent

was  a  far  more  serious  attempt  at  atonement  than  had  been  theancient covenant with the totem.

 

   ¹ ‘To  us  moderns,  for  whom  the  breach  which  divides  the  human  and  the  divine  has

deepened into an impassable gulf, such mimicry may appear impious, but it was otherwise
with the ancients. To their thinking gods and men were akin, for many families traced their
descent from a divinity, and the deification of a man probably seemed as little extraordinary to
them as the canonization of a saint seems to a modern Catholic.’ (Frazer, 1911, 2, 177 f.)
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2789

 

   I cannot suggest at what point in this process of development a

place  is  to  be  found  for  the  great  mother-goddesses,  who  may

perhaps in general have preceded the father-gods. It seems certain,

however, that the change in attitude to the father was not restricted to

the sphere of religion but that it extended in a consistent manner to

that other side of human life which had been affected by the father’s

removal - to social organization. With the introduction of father-deities

a  fatherless  society  gradually  changed  into  one  organized  on  a

patriarchal basis. The family was a restoration of the former primal

horde and it gave back to fathers a large portion of their former rights.

There  were  once  more  fathers,  but  the  social  achievements  of  the

fraternal clan had not been abandoned; and the gulf between the new

fathers of a family and the unrestricted primal father of the horde was

wide enough to guarantee the continuance of the religious craving, the

persistence of an unappeased longing for the father.

   We see, then, that in the scene of sacrifice before the god of the

clan the father is in fact represented twice over - as the god and as the

totemic  animal  victim.  But  in  our  attempts  at  understanding  this

situation we must beware of interpretations which seek to translate it

in a two-dimensional fashion as though it were an allegory, and which

in so doing forget its historical stratification. The two-fold presence of

the  father  corresponds  to  the  two  chronologically  successive

meanings of the scene. The ambivalent attitude towards the father has

found a plastic expression in it, and so, too, has the victory of the

son’s affectionate emotions over his hostile ones. The scene of the

father’s vanquishment, of his greatest defeat, has become the stuff for

the representation of his supreme triumph. The importance which iseverywhere, without exception, ascribed to sacrifice lies in the fact that

it offers satisfaction to the father for the outrage inflicted on him in the

same act in which that deed is commemorated.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2790

 

      As  time  went  on,  the  animal  lost  its  sacred  character  and  the

sacrifice lost its connection with the totem feast; it became a simple

offering to the deity, an act of renunciation in favour of the god. God

Himself had become so far exalted above mankind that He could only

be approached through an intermediary the priest. At the same time

divine  kings  made  their  appearance  in  the  social  structure  and

introduced the patriarchal system into the state. It must be confessed

that  the  revenge  taken  by  the  deposed  and  restored  father  was  a

harsh  one:  the  dominance  of  authority  was  at  its  climax.  The

subjugated sons made use of the new situation in order to unburden

themselves still further of their sense of guilt. They were no longer in

any  way  responsible  for  the  sacrifice  as  it  now  was.  It  was  God

Himself who demanded it and regulated it. This is the phase in which

we  find  myths  showing  the  god  himself  killing  the  animal  which  is

sacred to him and which is in fact himself. Here we have the most

extreme denial of the great crime which was the beginning of society

and of the sense of guilt. But there is a second meaning to this last

picture of sacrifice which is unmistakable. It expresses satisfaction at

the earlier father-surrogate having been abandoned in favour of the

superior  concept  of  God.  At  this  point  the  psycho-analytic

interpretation  of  the  scene  coincides  approximately  with  the

allegorical,  surface  translation  of  it,  which  represents  the  god  as

overcoming the animal side of his own nature.¹

 

   ¹ It is generally agreed that when, in mythologies, one generation of gods is overcome by

another, what is denoted is the historical replacement of one religious system by a new one,
whether as a result of foreign conquest or of psychological development. In the latter case
myth  approximates  to  what  Silberer  has  described  as  ‘functional  phenomena’.  The  view
maintained by Jung (1912) that the god who kills the animal is a libidinal symbol implies a
concept  of  libido  other  than  that  which  has  hitherto  been  employed  and  seems  to  me
questionable from every point of view. 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2791

 

      Nevertheless  it  would  be  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  hostile

impulses  inherent  in  the  father-complex  were  completely  silenced

during this period of revived paternal authority. On the contrary, the

first phases of the dominance of the two new father surrogates - gods

and kings - show the most energetic signs of the ambivalence that

remains a characteristic of religion.

   In his great work, The Golden Bough, Frazer puts forward the view

that the earliest kings of the Latin tribes were foreigners who played

the part of a god and were solemnly executed at a particular festival.

The annual sacrifice (or, as a variant, self-sacrifice) of a god seems to

have  been  an  essential  element  in  the  Semitic  religions.  The

ceremonials of human sacrifice, performed in the most different parts

of the inhabited globe, leave very little doubt that the victims met their

end as representatives of the deity; and these sacrificial rites can be

traced into late times, with an inanimate effigy or puppet taking the

place of the living human being. The theanthropic sacrifice of the god,

into which it is unfortunately impossible for me to enter here as fully as

into animal sacrifice, throws a searching retrospective light upon the

meaning of the older forms of sacrifice. It confesses, with a frankness

that could hardly be excelled, to the fact that the object of the act of

sacrifice has always been the same - namely what is now worshipped

as God, that is to say, the father. The problem of the relation between

animal  and  human  sacrifice  thus  admits  of  a  simple  solution.  The

original animal sacrifice was already a substitute for a human sacrifice

-  for  the  ceremonial  killing  of  the  father;  so  that,  when  the  father-

surrogate once more resumed its human shape, the animal sacrifice

too could be changed back into a human sacrifice.

      The  memory  of  the  first  great  act  of  sacrifice  thus  proved

indestructible, in spite of every effort to forget it; and at the very point

at which men sought to be at the farthest distance from the motives

that led to it, its undistorted reproduction emerged in the form of the

sacrifice of the god. I need not enlarge here upon the developments of

religious  thought  which,  in  the  shape  of  rationalizations,  made  thisrecurrence  possible.  Robertson  Smith,  who  had  no  thought  of  our

derivation of sacrifice from the great event in human prehistory, states

that  the  ceremonies  at  the  festivals  in  which  the  ancient  Semites

celebrated  the  death  of  a  deity  ‘were  currently  interpreted  as  the

commemoration of a mythical tragedy’. ‘The mourning’, he declares,

‘is not a spontaneous expression of sympathy with the divine tragedy,

but obligatory and enforced by fear of supernatural anger. And a chief

object of the mourners is to disclaim responsibility for the god’s death -

a  point  which  his  already  come  before  us  in  connection  with

theanthropic  sacrifices,  such  as  the  "ox-murder  at  Athens".’  (Ibid.,

412.) It seems most probable that these ‘current interpretations’ were

correct and that the feelings of the celebrants were fully explained by

the underlying situation.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2792

 

   Let us assume it to be a fact, then, that in the course of the later

development of religions the two driving factors, the son’s sense of

guilt and the son’s rebelliousness, never became extinct. Whatever

attempt was made at solving the religious problem, whatever kind of

reconciliation  was  effected  between  these  two  opposing  mental

forces, sooner or later broke down, under the combined influence, no

doubt,  of  historical  events,  cultural  changes  and  internal  psychical

modifications.

      The  son’s  efforts  to  put  himself  in  the  place  of  the  father-god

became ever more obvious. The introduction of agriculture increased

the son’s importance in the patriarchal family. He ventured upon new

demonstrations  of  his  incestuous  libido,  which  found  symbolic

satisfaction in his cultivation of Mother Earth. Divine figures such as

Attis, Adonis and Tammuz emerged, spirits of vegetation and at the

same  time  youthful  divinities  enjoying  the  favours  of  mother

goddesses and committing incest with their mother in defiance of their

father.  But  the  sense  of  guilt,  which  was  not  allayed  by  these

creations, found expression in myths which granted only short lives to

these youthful favourites of the mother-goddesses and decreed theirpunishment by emasculation or by the wrath of the father in the form

of an animal. Adonis was killed by a wild boar, the sacred animal of

Aphrodite;  Attis,  beloved  of  Cybele,  perished  by  castration.¹  The

mourning  for  these  gods  and  the  rejoicings  over  their  resurrection

passed over into the ritual of another son-deity who was destined to

lasting success.

 

   ¹ Fear of castration plays an extremely large part, in the case of the youthful neurotics

whom we come across, as an interference in their relations with their father. The illuminating
instance reported by Ferenczi (1913a) has shown us how a little boy took as his totem the
beast that had pecked at his little penis. When our children come to hear of ritual circumcision,
they equate it with castration. The parallel in social psychology to this reaction by children has
not yet been worked out, so far as I am aware. In primaeval times and in primitive races,
where circumcision is so frequent, it is performed at the age of initiation into manhood and it is
at that age that its significance is to be found; it was only as a secondary development that it
was  shifted  back  to  the  early  years  of  life.  It  is  of  very  great  interest  to  find  that  among
primitive peoples circumcision is combined with cutting the hair and knocking out teeth or is
replaced by them, and that our children, who cannot possibly have any knowledge of this, in
fact treat these two operations, in the anxiety with which they react to them, as equivalents of
castration.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2793

 

   When Christianity first penetrated into the ancient world it met with

competition from the religion of Mithras and for a time it was doubtful

which of the two deities would gain the victory. In spite of the halo of

light surrounding his form, the youthful Persian god remains obscure

to us. We may perhaps infer from the sculptures of Mithras slaying a

bull that he represented a son who was alone in sacrificing his father

and thus redeemed his brothers from their burden of complicity in the

deed. There was an alternative method of allaying their guilt and this

was  first  adopted  by  Christ.  He  sacrificed  his  own  life  and  so

redeemed the company of brothers from original sin.

   The doctrine of original sin was of Orphic origin. It formed a part of

the mysteries, and spread from them to the schools of philosophy of

ancient Greece. (Reinach, 1905-12, 2, 75 ff.) Mankind, it was said,

were descended from the Titans, who had lulled the young Dionysus-

Zagreus and had torn him to pieces. The burden of this crime weighed

on  them.  A  fragment  of  Anaximander  relates  how  the  unity  of  theworld was broken by a primaeval sin,¹ and that whatever issued from it

must bear the punishment. The tumultuous mobbing, the killing and

the tearing in pieces by the Titans reminds us clearly enough of the

totemic sacrifice described by St. Nilus - as, for the matter of that, do

many other ancient myths, including, for instance, that of the death of

Orpheus himself. Nevertheless, there is a disturbing difference in the

fact of the murder having been committed on a youthful god.

 

   ¹ ‘Une sorte de péché proethnique’ (Reinach, 1905-12, 2, 76).

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2794

 

   There can be no doubt that in the Christian myth the original sin was

one against God the Father. If, however, Christ redeemed mankind

from the burden of original sin by the sacrifice of his own life, we are

driven to conclude that the sin was a murder. The law of talion, which

is so deeply rooted in human feelings, lays it down that a murder can

only be expiated by the sacrifice of another life: self-sacrifice points

back  to  blood-guilt.¹  And  if  this  sacrifice  of  a  life  brought  about

atonement with God the Father, the crime to be expiated can only

have been the murder of the father.

   In the Christian doctrine, therefore, men were acknowledging in the

most undisguised manner the guilty primaeval deed, since they found

the fullest atonement for it in the sacrifice of this one son. Atonement

with  the  father  was  all  the  more  complete  since  the  sacrifice  was

accompanied by a total renunciation of the women on whose account

the  rebellion  against  the  father  was  started.  But  at  that  point  the

inexorable  psychological  law  of  ambivalence  stepped  in.  The  very

deed in which the son offered the greatest possible atonement to the

father brought him at the same time to the attainment of his wishes

against the father. He himself became God, beside, or, more correctly,

in place of, the father. A son-religion displaced the father-religion. As a

sign of this substitution the ancient totem meal was revived in the form

of communion, in which the company of brothers consumed the flesh

and blood of the son - no longer the father - obtained sanctity thereby

and identified themselves with him. Thus we can trace through theages  the  identity  of  the  totem  meal  with  animal  sacrifice,  with

theanthropic human sacrifice and with the Christian Eucharist, and we

can recognize in all these rituals the effect of the crime by which men

were so deeply weighed down but of which they must none the less

feel  so  proud.  The  Christian  communion,  however,  is  essentially  a

fresh elimination of the father, a repetition of the guilty deed. We can

see  the  full  justice  of  Frazer’s  pronouncement  that  ‘the  Christian

communion has absorbed within itself a sacrament which is doubtless

far older than Christianity’.²

 

   ¹ We find that impulses to suicide in a neurotic turn out regularly to be self-punishments for

wishes for someone else’s death.

   ² Frazer (1912, 2, 51). No one familiar with the literature of the subject will imagine that the

derivation of Christian communion from the totem meal is an idea originating from the author
of the present essay.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2795

 

                                          (7)

 

   An event such as the elimination of the primal father by the company

of his sons must inevitably have left ineradicable traces in the history

of humanity; and the less it itself was recollected, the more numerous

must have been the substitutes to which it gave rise.¹ I shall resist the

temptation of pointing out these traces in mythology, where they are

not  hard  to  find,  and  shall  turn  in  another  direction  and  take  up  a

suggestion made by Salomon Reinach in a most instructive essay on

the death of Orpheus.²

   In the history of Greek art we come upon a situation which shows

striking resemblances to the scene of the totem meal as identified by

Robertson Smith, and not less profound differences from it. I have in

mind the situation of the most ancient Greek tragedy. A company of

individuals, named and dressed alike, surrounded a single figure, all

hanging upon his words and deeds: they were the Chorus and the

impersonator of the Hero. He was originally the only actor. Later, a

second and third actor were added, to play as counterpart to the Heroand as characters split off from him; but the character of the Hero

himself and his relation to the Chorus remained unaltered. The Hero

of  tragedy  must  suffer;  to  this  day  that  remains  the  essence  of  a

tragedy. He had to bear the burden of what was known as ‘tragic guilt’;

the basis of that guilt is not always easy to find, for in the light of our

everyday  life  it  is  often  no  guilt  at  all.  As  a  rule  it  lay  in  rebellion

against some divine or human authority; and the Chorus accompanied

the Hero with feelings of sympathy, sought to hold him back, to warn

him and to sober him, and mourned over him when he had met with

what was felt as the merited punishment for his rash undertaking.

      But  why  had  the  Hero  of  tragedy  to  suffer?  and  what  was  the

meaning of his ‘tragic guilt’? I will cut the discussion short and give a

quick reply. He had to suffer because he was the primal father, the

Hero of the great primaeval tragedy which was being re-enacted with

a tendentious twist; and the tragic guilt was the guilt which he had to

take on himself in order to relieve the Chorus from theirs. The scene

upon  the  stage  was  derived  from  the  historical  scene  through  a

process of systematic distortion - one might even say, as the product

of a refined hypocrisy. In the remote reality it had actually been the

members  of  the  Chorus  who  caused  the  Hero’s  suffering;  now,

however, they exhausted themselves with sympathy and regret and it

was the Hero himself who was responsible for his own sufferings. The

crime which was thrown on to his shoulders, presumptuousness and

rebelliousness against a great authority, was precisely the crime for

which  the  members  of  the  Chorus,  the  company  of  brothers,  were

responsible. Thus the tragic Hero became, though it might be against

his will, the redeemer of the Chorus

   In Greek tragedy the special subject-matter of the performance was

the sufferings of the divine goat, Dionysus, and the lamentation of the

goats who were his followers and who identified themselves with him.

That being so, it is easy to understand how drama, which had become

extinct,  was  kindled  into  fresh  life  in  the  Middle  Ages  around  the

Passion of Christ.

 

   ¹ In Ariel’s words from The Tempest:

                                Full fathom five thy father lies;
                                   Of his bones are coral made;
                                Those are pearls that were his eyes:                                   Nothing of him that doth fade,
                                But doth suffer a sea-change
                                Into something rich and strange.

   ² ‘La mort d’Orphée’, contained in the volume which I have so often quoted (1905-12, 2,

100 ff.).
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2796

 

 

   At the conclusion, then, of this exceedingly condensed inquiry, I

should  like  to  insist  that  its  outcome  shows  that  the  beginnings  of

religion,  morals,  society  and  art  converge  in  the  Oedipus  complex.

This is in complete agreement with the psycho-analytic finding that the

same complex constitutes the nucleus of all neuroses, so far as our

present knowledge goes. It seems to me a most surprising discovery

that the problems of social psychology, too, should prove soluble on

the basis of one single concrete point - man’s relation to his father. It

is even possible that yet another psychological problem belongs in this

same  connection.  I  have  often  had  occasion  to  point  out  that

emotional ambivalence in the proper sense of the term - that is, the

simultaneous existence of love and hate towards the same object -

lies  at  the  root  of  many  important  cultural  institutions.  We  know

nothing of the origin of this ambivalence. One possible assumption is

that  it  is  a  fundamental  phenomenon  of  our  emotional  life.  But  it

seems to me quite worth considering another possibility, namely that

originally it formed no part of our emotional life but was acquired by

the  human  race  in  connection  with  their  father-complex,¹  precisely

where the psycho-analytic examination of modern individuals still finds

it revealed at its strongest.²

   Before I bring my remarks to a close, however, I must find room to

point  out  that,  though  my  arguments  have  led  to  a  high  degree  of

convergence upon a single comprehensive nexus of ideas, this fact

cannot blind us to the uncertainties of my premises or the difficulties

involved in my conclusions. I will only mention two of the latter which

may have forced themselves on the notice of a number of my readers.

   No one can have failed to observe, in the first place, that I have

taken as the basis of my whole position the existence of a collectivemind, in which mental processes occur just as they do in the mind of

an individual. In particular, I have supposed that the sense of guilt for

an  action  has  persisted  for  many  thousands  of  years  and  has

remained operative in generations which can have had no knowledge

of that action. I have supposed that an emotional process, such as

might have developed in generations of sons who were ill-treated by

their father, has extended to new generations which were exempt from

such  treatment  for  the  very  reason  that  their  father  had  been

eliminated. It must be admitted that these are grave difficulties; and

any explanation that could avoid presumptions of such a kind would

seem to be preferable.

 

   ¹ Or, more correctly, their parental complex.

   ² Since I am used to being misunderstood, I think it worth while to insist explicitly that the

derivations which I have proposed in these pages do not in the least overlook the complexity
of the phenomena under review. All that they claim is to have added a new factor to the
sources,  known  or  still  unknown,  of  religion,  morality  and  society  -  a  factor  based  on  a
consideration  of  the  implications  of  psycho-analysis.  I  must  leave  to  others  the  task  of
synthesizing the explanation into a unity. It does, however, follow from the nature of the new
contribution that it could not play any other than a central part in such a synthesis, even
though powerful emotional resistance might have to be overcome before its great importance
was recognized.
 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2797

 

   Further reflection, however, will show that I am not alone in the

responsibility  for  this  bold  procedure.  Without  the  assumption  of  a

collective mind, which makes it possible to neglect the interruptions of

mental  acts  caused  by  the  extinction  of  the  individual,  social

psychology in general cannot exist. Unless psychical processes were

continued  from  one  generation  to  another,  if  each  generation  were

obliged to acquire its attitude to life anew, there would be no progress

in this field and next to no development. This gives rise to two further

questions: how much can we attribute to psychical continuity in the

sequence  of  generations?  and  what  are  the  ways  and  means

employed by one generation in order to hand on its mental states to

the next one? I shall not pretend that these problems are sufficiently

explained or that direct communication and tradition - which are thefirst things that occur to one - are enough to account for the process.

Social  psychology  shows  very  little  interest,  on  the  whole,  in  the

manner  in  which  the  required  continuity  in  the  mental  life  of

successive generations is established. A part of the problem seems to

be met by the inheritance of psychical dispositions which, however,

need  to  be  given  some  sort  of  impetus  in  the  life  of  the  individual

before  they  can  be  roused  into  actual  operation.  This  may  be  the

meaning of the poet’s words:

 

                                                Was du ererbt von deinen Vätern hast,

                                                Erwirb es, um es zu besitzen.¹

 

The problem would seem even more difficult if we had to admit that

mental impulses could be so completely suppressed as to leave no

trace whatever behind them. But that is not the case. Even the most

ruthless suppression must leave room for distorted surrogate impulses

and for reactions resulting from them. If so, however, we may safely

assume that no generation is able to conceal any of its more important

mental processes from its successor. For psycho-analysis has shown

us  that  everyone  possesses  in  his  unconscious  mental  activity  an

apparatus which enables him to interpret other people’s reactions, that

is, to undo the distortions which other people have imposed on the

expression of their feelings. An unconscious understanding such as

this of all the customs, ceremonies and dogmas left behind by the

original  relation  to  the  father  may  have  made  it  possible  for  later

generations to take over their heritage of emotion.

 

   ¹ [‘What thou hast inherited from thy fathers, acquire it to make it thine.’]

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2798

 

   Another difficulty might actually be brought forward from psycho-

analytic  quarters.  The  earliest  moral  precepts  and  restrictions  in

primitive society have been explained by us as reactions to a deed

which gave those who performed it the concept of ‘crime’. They felt

remorse for the deed and decided that it should never be repeatedand  that  its  performance  should  bring  no  advantage.  This  creative

sense of guilt still persists among us. We find it operating in an asocial

manner  in  neurotics,  and  producing  new  moral  precepts  and

persistent  restrictions,  as  an  atonement  for  crimes  that  have  been

committed and as a precaution against the committing of new ones.¹

If, however, we inquire among these neurotics to discover what were

the deeds which provoked these reactions, we shall be disappointed.

We find no deeds, but only impulses and emotions, set upon evil ends

but held back from their achievement. What lie behind the sense of

guilt of neurotics are always psychical realities and never factual ones.

What characterizes neurotics is that they prefer psychical to factual

reality and react just as seriously to thoughts as normal people do to

realities.

   May not the same have been true of primitive men?  We are justified

in  believing  that,  as  one  of  the  phenomena  of  their  narcissistic

organization, they overvalued their psychical acts to an extraordinary

degree.² Accordingly the mere hostile impulse against the father, the

mere  existence  of  a  wishful phantasy  of  killing  and  devouring  him,

would have been enough to produce the moral reaction that created

totemism and taboo. In this way we should avoid the necessity for

deriving the origin of our cultural legacy, of which we justly feel so

proud, from a hideous crime, revolting to all our feelings. No damage

would thus be done to the causal chain stretching from the beginning

to the present day, for psychical reality would be strong enough to

bear the weight of these consequences. To this it may be objected

that an alteration in the form of society from a patriarchal horde to a

fraternal clan did actually take place. This is a powerful argument, but

not a conclusive one. The alteration might have been effected in a

less  violent  fashion  and  none  the  less  have  been  capable  of

determining  the  appearance  of  the  moral  reaction.  So  long  as  the

pressure  exercised  by  the  primal  father  could  be  felt,  the  hostile

feelings  towards  him  were  justified,  and  remorse  on  their  account

would  have  to  await  a  later  day.  And  if  it  is  further  argued  that

everything derived from the ambivalent relation to the father - taboo

and  the  sacrificial  ordinance  -  is  characterized  by  the  deepest

seriousness  and  the  most  complete  reality,  this  further  objection

carries  just  as  little  weight.  For  the  ceremonials  and  inhibitions  ofobsessional  neurotics  show  these  same  characteristics  and  are

nevertheless derived only from psychical reality - from intentions and

not from their execution. We must avoid transplanting a contempt for

what is merely thought or wished from our commonplace world, with

its  wealth  of  material  values,  into  the  world  of  primitive  men  and

neurotics, of which the wealth lies only within themselves.

 

   ¹ Cf. the essay on taboo, the second in this work.

   ² Cf. the third essay in this work.

 


                                    Totem And Taboo

                                                                                      2799

 

   Here we are faced by a decision which is indeed no easy one. First,

however, it must be confessed that the distinction, which may seem

fundamental  to  other  people,  does  not  in  our  judgement  affect  the

heart of the matter. If wishes and impulses have the full value of facts

for  primitive  men,  it  is  our  business  to  give  their  attitude  our

understanding attention instead of correcting it in accordance with our

own  standards.  Let  us,  then,  examine  more  closely  the  case  of

neurosis - comparison with which led us into our present uncertainty. It

is not accurate to say that obsessional neurotics, weighed down under

the burden of an excessive morality, are defending themselves only

against psychical reality and are punishing themselves for impulses

which were merely felt. Historical reality has a share in the matter as

well. In their childhood they had these evil impulses pure and simple,

and  turned  them  into  acts  so  far  as  the  impotence  of  childhood

allowed. Each of these excessively virtuous individuals passed though

an evil period in his infancy - a phase of perversion which was the

forerunner and precondition of the later period of excessive morality.

The analogy between primitive men and neurotics will therefore be far

more fully established if we suppose that in the former instance, too,

psychical reality - as to the form taken by which we are in no doubt -

coincided  at  the  beginning  with  factual  reality:  that  primitive  men

actually did what all the evidence shows that they intended to do.

   Nor must we let ourselves be influenced too far in our judgement of

primitive men by the analogy of neurotics. There are distinctions, too,which  must  be  borne  in  mind.  It  is  no  doubt  true  that  the  sharp

contrast that we make between thinking and doing is absent in both of

them. But neurotics are above all inhibited in their actions: with them

the thought is a complete substitute for the deed. Primitive men, on

the other hand, are uninhibited: thought passes directly into action.

With them it is rather the deed that is a substitute for the thought. And

that is why, without laying claim to any finality of judgement, I think

that  in  the  case  before  us  it  may  safely  be  assumed  that  ‘in  the

beginning was the Deed’.

                                                                                       2800

 

          THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC

                                      INTEREST

                                        (1913)

 


                                                                                      2801

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2802

 

          THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS TO SCIENTIFIC

                                      INTEREST

 

                                          PART I

 

    THE PSYCHOLOGICAL INTEREST OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

Psycho-analysis  is  a  medical  procedure  which  aims  at  the  cure  of

certain forms of nervous disease (the neuroses) by a psychological

technique.  In  a  small  volume  published  in  1910.¹  I  described  the

evolution of psycho-analysis from Josef Breuer’s cathartic procedure

and its relation to the theories of Charcot and Pierre Janet.

      We  may  give  as  instances  of  disorders  that  are  accessible  to

psycho-analytic  treatment  hysterical  convulsions  and  paralyses  as

well  as  the  various  symptoms  of  obsessional  neurosis  (obsessive

ideas and actions). All of these are conditions which are occasionally

subject to spontaneous recovery and are dependent on the personal

influence of the physician in a haphazard fashion which has not yet

been  explained.  Psycho-analysis  has  no  therapeutic  effect  on  the

severer forms of mental disorder properly so called. But - for the first

time in the history of medicine - psycho-analysis has made it possible

to  get  some  insight  into  the  origin  and  mechanism  alike  of  the

neuroses and psychoses.   This medical significance of psycho-analysis would not, however,

justify me in bringing it to the notice of a circle of savants concerned in

the synthesis of the sciences. And such a plan must seem particularly

premature so long as a large number of psychiatrists and neurologists

are  opposed  to  the  new  therapeutic  method  and  reject  both  its

postulates and its findings. If, nevertheless, I regard the experiment as

a legitimate one, it is because psycho-analysis can also claim to be of

interest  to  others  than  psychiatrists,  since  it  touches  upon  various

other  spheres  of  knowledge  and  reveals  unexpected  relations

between them and the pathology of mental life.

   Accordingly in my present paper I shall leave the medical interest of

psycho-analysis on one side and illustrate what I have just asserted of

the young science by a series of examples.

 

   ¹ Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2803

 

 

   There are a large number of phenomena related to facial and other

expressive movements and to speech, as well as many processes of

thought (both in normal and sick people), which have hitherto escaped

the  notice  of  psychology  because  they  have  been  regarded  as  no

more than the results of organic disorder or of some abnormal failure

in  function  of  the  mental  apparatus.  What  I  have  in  mind  are

‘parapraxes’  (slips  of  the  tongue  or  pen,  forgetfulness,  etc.),

haphazard  actions  and  dreams  in  normal  people,  and  convulsive

attacks,  deliria,  visions,  and  obsessive  ideas  or  acts  in  neurotic

subjects.  These  phenomena  (in  so  far  as  they  were  not  entirely

neglected, as was the case with the parapraxes) were relegated to

pathology  and  an  attempt  was  made  to  find  ‘physiological’

explanations  of  them,  though  these  were  invariably  unsatisfactory.

Psycho-analysis, on the contrary, has been able to show that all these

things  can  be  explained  by  means  of  hypotheses  of  a  purely

psychological  nature  and  can  be  fitted  into  the  chain  of  psychical

events already known to us. Thus on the one hand psycho-analysishas narrowed the region subject to the physiological point of view and

on the other hand has brought a large section of pathology into the

sphere of psychology. In this instance the normal phenomena provide

the more convincing evidence. Psycho-analysis cannot be accused of

having applied to normal cases findings arrived at from pathological

material. The evidence in the latter and in the former was reached

independently  and  shows  that  normal  processes  and  what  are

described as pathological ones follow the same rules.

   I shall now discuss in greater detail two of the normal phenomena

with which we are here concerned (phenomena, that is, which can be

observed in normal people) - namely, parapraxes and dreams.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2804

 

 

   By parapraxes, then, I understand the occurrence in healthy and

normal people of such events as forgetting words and names that are

normally  familiar  to  one,  forgetting  what  one  intends  to  do,  making

slips of the tongue and pen, misreading, mislaying things and being

unable  to  find  them,  losing  things,  making  mistakes  against  one’s

better knowledge, and certain habitual gestures and movements. All of

these  have  on  the  whole  had  little  attention  paid  to  them  by

psychology;  they  have  been  classed  as  instances  of  ‘absent-

mindedness’  and  have  been  attributed  to  fatigue,  to  distracted

attention  or  to  the  contributory  effects  of  certain  slight  illnesses.

Analytic  enquiry,  however,  shows  with  enough  certainty  to  satisfy

every  requirement  that  these  latter  factors  merely  operate  as

facilitating  factors  and  may  be  absent.  Parapraxes  are  full-blown

psychical phenomena and always have a meaning and an intention.

They  serve  definite  purposes  which,  owing  to  the  prevailing

psychological situation, cannot be expressed in any other way. These

situations  as  a  rule  involve  a  psychical  conflict  which  prevents  the

underlying intention from finding direct expression and diverts it along

indirect paths. A person who is guilty of a parapraxis may notice it or

overlook it; the suppressed intention underlying it may well be familiarto him; but he is usually unaware, without analysis, that that intention

is responsible for the parapraxis in question. Analyses of parapraxes

are  often  quite  easily  and  quickly  made.  If  a  person’s  attention  is

drawn to a blunder, the next thought that occurs to him provides its

explanation.

   Parapraxes are the most convenient material for anyone who wishes

to  convince  himself  of  the  trustworthiness  of  psycho-analytic

explanations. In a small work, first published in book form in 1904, I

presented a large number of examples of this kind, and since then I

have been able to add to my collection many contributions from other

observers.¹

      The  commonest  motive  for  suppressing  an  intention,  which  has

thereafter  to  be  content  with  finding  its  expression  in  a  parapraxis,

turns out to be the avoidance of unpleasure. Thus, one obstinately

forgets a proper name if one nourishes a secret grudge against its

owner; one forgets to carry out an intention if one has in fact only

formed it unwillingly - only, for instance, under the pressure of some

convention; one loses an object, if one has quarrelled with someone of

whom the object reminds one - with its original donor, for instance;

one gets into the wrong train if one is making a journey unwillingly and

would rather be somewhere else. This motive of avoiding unpleasure

is  seen  most  clearly  where  the  forgetting  of  impressions  and

experiences is concerned - a fact which had already been observed

by  many  writers  before  psycho-analysis  existed.  Memory  shows  its

partiality by being ready to prevent the reproduction of impressions

with a distressing affect, even though this purpose cannot be achieved

in every case.

 

   ¹ The Psychopathology of Everyday Life. Cf. also works on the subject by Maeder, Brill,

Jones, Rank, etc.
 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2805

 

   In other instances the analysis of a parapraxis is less simple and

requires less obvious explanations, on account of the intrusion of a

process which we describe as ‘displacement’. One may, for instance,forget  the  name  of  someone  against  whom  one  has  no  objection;

analysis will show, however, that the name has stirred up the memory

of someone else, who has the same or a similar-sounding name and

whom one has good reason to dislike. This connection has led to the

innocent person’s name being forgotten; the intention to forget has, as

it were, been displaced along some line of association.

   Nor is the intention to avoid unpleasure the only one which can find

its  outlet  in  parapraxes.  In  many  cases  analysis  reveals  other

purposes which have been suppressed in the particular situation and

which  can  only  make  themselves  felt,  so  to  say,  as  background

disturbances.  Thus  a  slip  of  the  tongue  will  often  serve  to  betray

opinions which the speaker wishes to conceal from his interlocutor.

Slips of the tongue have been understood in this sense by various

great writers and employed for this purpose in their works. The loss of

precious objects often turns out to be an act of sacrifice intended to

avert some expected evil; and many other superstitions too survive in

educated people in the form of parapraxes. The mislaying of objects

means  as  a  rule  getting  rid  of  them;  damage  is  done  to  one’s

possessions (ostensibly by accident) so as to make it necessary to

acquire something better - and so on.

   Nevertheless, in spite of the apparent triviality of these phenomena,

the  psycho-analytic  explanation  of  parapraxes  involves  some  slight

modifications  in  our  view  of  the  world.  We  find  that  even  normal

people are far more frequently moved by contradictory motives than

we should have expected. The number of occurrences that can be

described  as  ‘accidental’  is  considerably  diminished.  It  is  almost  a

consolation to be able to exclude the loss of objects from among the

chance events of life; our blunders often turn out to be a cover for our

secret  intentions.  But  -  what  is  more  important  -  many  serious

accidents that we should otherwise have ascribed entirely to chance

reveal under analysis the participation of the subject’s own volition,

though  without  its  being  clearly  admitted  by  him.  The  distinction

between a chance accident and deliberate self-destruction, which in

practice is so often hard to draw, becomes even more dubious when

looked at from an analytic point of view.

             The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2806

 

 

   The explanation of parapraxes owes its theoretical value to the ease

with which they can be solved and their frequency in normal people.

But  the  success  of  psycho-analysis  in  explaining  them  is  far

surpassed in importance by a further achievement made by it, relating

to another phenomenon of normal mental life. What I have in mind is

the interpretation of dreams,  which  brought  psycho-analysis  for  the

first  time  into  the  conflict  with  official  science  which  was  to  be  its

destiny.  Medical  research  explains  dreams  as  purely  somatic

phenomena, without meaning or significance, and regards them as the

reaction of a mental organ sunk in a state of sleep to physical stimuli

which partially awaken it. Psycho-analysis raises the status of dreams

into  that  of  psychical  acts  possessing  meaning  and  purpose,  and

having a place in the subject’s mental life, and thus disregards their

strangeness, incoherence and absurdity. On this view somatic stimuli

merely play the part of material that is worked over in the course of the

construction of the dream. There is no half-way house between these

two  views  of  dreams.  What  argues  against  the  physiological

hypothesis is its unfruitfulness, and what may be argued in favour of

the psycho-analytic one is the fact that it has translated and given a

meaning to thousands of dreams and has used them to throw light on

the intimate details of the human mind.

   I devoted a volume published in 1900 to the important subject of

dream-interpretation  and  have  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  the

theories put forward in it confirmed and amplified by contributions from

almost  every  worker  in  the  field  of  psycho-analysis.¹  It  is  generally

agreed  that  dream-interpretation  is  the  foundation  stone  of  psycho-

analytic  work  and  that  its  findings  constitute  the  most  important

contribution made by psycho-analysis to psychology.

 

   ¹ The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a). See also my shorter essay On Dreams (1901a),

and other writings by Rank, Stekel, Jones, Silberer, Brill, Maeder, Abraham, Ferenczi, etc.
 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest                                                                                      2807

 

   I cannot enter here into the technique by which an interpretation of

dreams is arrived at, nor can I give the grounds for the conclusions to

which  the  psycho-analytic  investigation  of  dreams  has  led.  I  must

restrict  myself  to  enunciating  some  new  concepts,  reporting  my

findings and stressing their importance for normal psychology.

      Psycho-analysis,  then,  has  demonstrated  the  following  facts.  All

dreams have a meaning. Their strangeness is due to distortions that

have been made in the expression of their meaning. Their absurdity is

deliberate  and  expresses  derision,  ridicule  and  contradiction.  Their

incoherence  is  a  matter  of  indifference  for  their  interpretation.  The

dream  as  we  remember  it  after  waking  is  described  by  us  as  its

‘manifest content’. In the process of interpreting this, we are led to the

‘latent dream-thoughts’, which lie hidden behind the manifest content

and which are represented by it. These latent dream-thoughts are no

longer  strange,  incoherent  or  absurd;  they  are  completely  valid

constituents of our waking thought. We give the name of ‘dream-work’

to  the  process  which  transforms  the  latent  dream-thoughts  into  the

manifest content of the dream; it is this dream-work that brings about

the distortion which makes the dream-thoughts unrecognizable in the

content of the dream.

   The dream-work is a psychological process the like of which has

hitherto been unknown to psychology. It has claims upon our interest

in two main directions. In the first place, it brings to our notice novel

processes  such  as  ‘condensation’  (of  ideas)  and  ‘displacement’  (of

psychical emphasis from one idea to another), processes which we

have never come across at all in our waking life, or only as the basis

of  what  are  known  as  ‘errors  in  thought’.  In  the  second  place,  it

enables  us  to  detect  the  operation  in  the  mind  of  a  play  of  forces

which  was  concealed  from  our  conscious  perception.  We  find  that

there is a ‘censorship’, a testing agency, at work in us, which decides

whether an idea cropping up in the mind shall be allowed to reach

consciousness, and which, so far as lies within its power, ruthlessly

excludes anything that might produce or revive unpleasure. And it will

be recalled at this point that in our analysis of parapraxes we found

traces  of  this  same  intention  to  avoid  unpleasure  in  rememberingthings and of similar conflicts between mental impulses.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2808

 

   A study of the dream-work forces on us irresistibly a view of mental

life  which  appears  to  decide  the  most  controversial  problems  of

psychology. The dream-work compels us to assume the existence of

an unconscious psychical activity which is more comprehensive and

more  important  than  the  familiar  activity  that  is  linked  with

consciousness. (I shall have some more to say on this point when I

come  to  discuss  the philosophical  interest  of  psycho-analysis.)  It

enables  us  to  dissect  the  psychical  apparatus  into  a  number  of

different  agencies  or  systems,  and  shows  us  that  in  the  system  of

unconscious  mental  activity  processes  operate  which  are  of  quite

another kind from those perceived in consciousness.

   The dream-work has only one function - namely to maintain sleep.

‘Dreams are the guardians of sleep.’ The dream-thoughts themselves

may serve the purposes of the most various mental functions. The

dream-work accomplishes its task by representing a wish that arises

from the dream-thoughts as fulfilled in a hallucinatory fashion.

   It may safely be said that the psycho-analytic study of dreams has

given us our first insight into a ‘depth-psychology’ whose existence

had not hitherto been suspected.¹ Fundamental changes will have to

be  introduced  into  normal  psychology  if  it  is  to  be  brought  into

harmony with these new findings.

   It is quite impossible to exhaust the psychological interest of dream-

interpretation within the limits of my present paper. Let us bear in mind

that what I have so far stressed is merely that dreams have a meaning

and are objects for psychological study, and let us now proceed with

our  consideration  of  the  new  territory  which  has  been  annexed  by

psychology in the domain of pathology.

 

    ¹ Psycho-analysis  does  not  at  present  postulate  any  relation  between  this  psychical

topography and anatomical stratification or histological layers.
             The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2809

 

 

   The psychological novelties inferred from dreams and parapraxes

must be applicable as an explanation of other phenomena if we are to

believe in the value of these novelties, or, indeed, in their existence.

And  we  do  in  fact  find  that  psycho-analysis  has  shown  that  the

hypotheses  of  unconscious  mental  activity,  of  censorship  and

repression and of distortion and substitution, at which we have arrived

from  our  study  of  these  normal  phenomena,  also  afford  us  a  first

understanding of a number of pathological phenomena and, as one

might  say,  put  into  our  hands  the  key  to  all  the  riddles  of  the

psychology of the neuroses. Thus dreams are to be regarded as the

normal prototypes of all psychopathological structures. Anyone who

understands dreams can also grasp the psychical mechanism of the

neuroses and psychoses.

   Starting from dreams, the investigations of psycho-analysis have

enabled it to construct a psychology of the neuroses which is being

continuously built up piece by piece. But what we are here concerned

with  -  the psychological  interest  of  psycho-analysis  -  obliges  us  to

enter more fully into only two sides of this far reaching subject: the

evidence that many pathological phenomena which had hitherto been

believed  to  require  physiological  explanations  are  in  fact  psychical

acts,  and  the  evidence  that  the  processes  which  lead  to  abnormal

consequences can be traced back to psychical motive forces.

   I will illustrate the first of these theses by a few examples. Hysterical

attacks have long been recognized as signs of increased emotional

excitement and equated with outbreaks of affect. Charcot attempted to

reduce the multiplicity of their modes of manifestation by means of

descriptive formulas; Pierre Janet recognized the unconscious ideas

operating behind such attacks; while psycho-analysis has shown that

they  are  mimetic  representations  of  scenes  (whether  actually

experienced or only invented ) with which the patient’s imagination is

occupied without his becoming conscious of them. The meaning of

these  pantomimes  is  concealed  from  the  spectators  by  means  of

condensations and distortions of the acts which they represent. Andthis applies equally to what are described as the ‘chronic’ symptoms of

hysterical  patients.  All  of  them  are  mimetic  or  hallucinatory

representations  of  phantasies  which  unconsciously  dominate  the

subject’s emotional life and which have the meaning of fulfilments of

secret  and  repressed  wishes.  The  tormenting  character  of  these

symptoms  is  due  to  the  internal  conflict  into  which  these  patients’

minds are driven by the need to combat such unconscious wishes.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2810

 

      In  another  neurotic  disorder,  obsessional  neurosis,  the  patients

become  the  victims  of  distressing  and  apparently  senseless

ceremonials  which  take  the  form  of  the  rhythmical  repetition  of  the

most  trivial  acts  (such  as  washing  or  dressing)  or  of  carrying  out

meaningless injunctions or of obeying mysterious prohibitions. It was

nothing  less  than  a  triumph  of  psycho-analytic  research  when  it

succeeded in showing that all these obsessive acts, even the most

insignificant and trivial of them, have a meaning, and that they are

reflections, translated into indifferent terms, of conflicts in the patients’

lives,  of  the  struggle  between  temptations  and  moral  restraints  -

reflections  of  the  proscribed  wish  itself  and  of  the  punishment  and

atonement  which  that  wish  incurs.  In  another  form  of  the  same

disorder the victim suffers from tormenting ideas (obsessions) which

force themselves upon him and are accompanied by affects whose

character and intensity are often only quite inadequately accounted for

by the terms of the obsessive ideas themselves. Analytic investigation

has shown in their case that the affects are entirely justified, since

they  correspond  to  self-reproaches  which  are  based  on  something

that is at least psychically real. But the ideas to which these affects

are attached are not the original ones, but have found their way into

their  present  position  by  a  process  of  displacement  -  by  being

substituted  for  something  that  has  been  repressed.  If  these

displacements can be reversed, the way is open to the discovery of

the repressed ideas, and the relation between affect and idea is found

to be perfectly appropriate. 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2811

 

      In  another  neurotic  disorder,  dementia  praecox  (paraphrenia  or

schizophrenia), a condition which is in fact incurable, the patient is left,

in the most severe cases, in a state of apparently complete apathy.

Often his sole remaining actions are certain movements and gestures

which are repeated monotonously and have been given the name of

‘stereotypies’. An analytic investigation of residues of this kind, made

by Jung, has shown that they are the remains of perfectly significant

mimetic actions, which at one time gave expression to the subject’s

ruling  wishes.  The  craziest  speeches  and  the  queerest  poses  and

attitudes  adopted  by  these  patients  become  intelligible  and  can  be

given  a  place  in  the  chain  of  their  mental  processes  if  they  are

approached on the basis of psycho-analytic hypotheses.

   Similar considerations apply to the deliria and hallucinations, as well

as to the delusional systems, exhibited by various psychotic patients.

Where  hitherto  nothing  but  the  most  freakish  capriciousness  has

seemed to prevail, psycho-analytic research has introduced law, order

and connection, or has at least allowed us to suspect their presence

where its work is still incomplete. The most heterogeneous forms of

mental disorder are revealed as the results of processes which are at

bottom  identical  and  which  can  be  understood  and  described  by

means of psychological concepts. What had already been discovered

in the formation of dreams is operative everywhere - psychical conflict,

the repression of certain instinctual impulses which have been pushed

back into the unconscious by other mental forces, reaction formations

set up by the repressing forces, and substitutes constructed by the

instincts which have been repressed but have not been robbed of all

their  energy.  The  accompanying  processes  of  condensation  and

displacement,  so  familiar  to  us  in  dreams,  are  also  to  be  found

everywhere.  The  multiplicity  of  clinical  pictures  observed  by

psychiatrists  depends  upon  two  other  things:  the  multiplicity  of  the

psychical mechanisms at the disposal of the repressive process and

the multiplicity of developmental dispositions which give the repressedimpulses  an  opportunity  for  breaking  through  into  substitutive

structures.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2812

 

   Psycho-analysis points to psychology for the solution of a good half

of  the  problems  of  psychiatry.  It  would  nevertheless  be  a  serious

mistake  to  suppose  that  analysis  favours  or  aims  at  a purely

psychological view of mental disorders. It cannot overlook the fact that

the other half of the problems of psychiatry are concerned with the

influence of organic factors (whether mechanical, toxic or infective) on

the  mental  apparatus.  Even  in  the  case  of  the  mildest  of  these

disorders, the neuroses, it makes no claim that their origin is purely

psychogenic but traces their aetiology to the influence upon mental life

of an unquestionably organic factor to which I shall refer later.

 

   The number of detailed psycho-analytic findings which cannot fail to

be  of  importance  for  general  psychology  is  too  great  for  me  to

enumerate them here. I will only mention two other points: psycho-

analysis unhesitatingly ascribes the primacy in mental life to affective

processes,  and  it  reveals  an  unexpected  amount  of  affective

disturbance and blinding of the intellect in normal no less than in sick

people.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2813

 

                                          PART II

 

  THE CLAIMS OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS TO THE INTEREST OF

                THE NON-PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCES

 

              (A) THE PHILOLOGICAL INTEREST OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

      I  shall  no  doubt  be  overstepping  common  linguistic  usage  inpostulating an interest in psycho-analysis on the part of philologists,

that  is  of  experts  in speech.  For  in  what  follows  ‘speech’  must  be

understood not merely to mean the expression of thought in words but

to include the speech of gesture and every other method, such, for

instance, as writing, by which mental activity can be expressed. That

being  so,  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  the  interpretations  made  by

psycho-analysis  are  first  and  foremost  translations  from  an  alien

method of expression into the one which is familiar to us. When we

interpret  a  dream  we  are  simply  translating  a  particular  thought-

content (the latent dream-thoughts) from the ‘language of dreams’ into

our waking speech. In the course of doing so we learn the peculiarities

of this dream language and it is borne in upon us that it forms part of a

highly archaic system of expression. Thus, to take an instance, there

is no special indication for the negative in the language of dreams.

Contraries may stand for each other in the dream’s content and may

be  represented  by  the  same  element.  Or  we  may  put  it  like  this:

concepts  are  still  ambivalent  in  dream-language,  and  unite  within

themselves  contrary  meanings  -  as  is  the  case,  according  to  the

hypotheses of philologists, in the oldest roots of historical languages.¹

Another  striking  feature  of  our  dream-language  is  its  extremely

frequent  use  of  symbols,  which  make  us  able  to  some  extent  to

translate the content of dreams without reference to the associations

of  the  individual  dreamer.  Our  researches  have  not  yet  sufficiently

elucidated  the  essential  nature  of  these  symbols.  They  are  in  part

substitutes and analogies based upon obvious similarities; but in some

of  these  symbols  the tertium  comparationis  which  is  presumably

present escapes our conscious knowledge. It is precisely this latter

class  of  symbols  which  must  probably  originate  from  the  earliest

phases  of  linguistic  development  and  conceptual  construction.  In

dreams it is above all the sexual organs and sexual activities which

are represented symbolically instead of directly. A philologist, Hans

Sperber, of Uppsala, has only recently (1912) attempted to prove that

words which originally represented sexual activities have, on the basis

of  analogies  of  this  kind,  undergone  an  extraordinarily  far-reaching

change in their meaning.

 

   ¹ Cf. Abel on the antithetical meaning of primal words, and my review of his paper. 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2814

 

      If  we  reflect  that  the  means  of  representation  in  dreams  are

principally visual images and not words, we shall see that it is even

more appropriate to compare dreams with a system of writing than

with  a  language.  In  fact  the  interpretation  of  dreams  is  completely

analogous to the decipherment of an ancient pictographic script such

as  Egyptian  hieroglyphs.  In  both  cases  there  are  certain  elements

which are not intended to be interpreted (or read, as the case may be)

but are only designed to serve as ‘determinatives’, that is to establish

the  meaning  of  some  other  element.  The  ambiguity  of  various

elements  of  dreams  finds  a  parallel  in  these  ancient  systems  of

writing; and so too does the omission of various relations, which have

in both cases to be supplied from the context. If this conception of the

method of representation in dreams has not yet been followed up, this,

as will be readily understood, must be ascribed to the fact that psycho-

analysts are entirely ignorant of the attitude and knowledge with which

a  philologist  would  approach  such  a  problem  as  that  presented  by

dreams.

   The language of dreams may be looked upon as the method by

which  unconscious  mental  activity  expresses  itself.  But  the

unconscious speaks more than one dialect. According to the differing

psychological  conditions  governing  and  distinguishing  the  various

forms of neurosis, we find regular modifications in the way in which

unconscious  mental  impulses  are  expressed.  While  the  gesture-

language of hysteria agrees on the whole with the picture-language of

dreams  and  visions,  etc.,  the  thought-language  of  obsessional

neurosis and of the paraphrenias (dementia praecox and paranoia)

exhibits special idiomatic peculiarities which, in a number of instances,

we have been able to understand and interrelate. For instance, what a

hysteric  expresses  by  vomiting  an  obsessional  will  express  by

painstaking protective measures against infection, while a paraphrenic

will  be  led  to  complaints  or  suspicions  that  he  is  being  poisoned.

These are all of them different representations of the patient’s wish to

become pregnant which have been repressed into the unconscious, orof his defensive reaction against that wish.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2815

 

            (B) THE PHILOSOPHICAL INTEREST OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

   Philosophy, in so far as it is built on psychology, will be unable to

avoid taking the psycho-analytic contributions to psychology fully into

account and reacting to this new enrichment of our knowledge just as

it has to every considerable advance in the specialized sciences. In

particular,  the  setting  up  of  the  hypothesis  of  unconscious  mental

activities must compel philosophy to decide one way or the other and,

if it accepts the idea, to modify its own views on the relation of mind to

body so that they may conform to the new knowledge. It is true that

philosophy has repeatedly dealt with the problem of the unconscious,

but, with few exceptions, philosophers have taken up one or other of

the  two  following  positions.  Either  their  unconscious  has  been

something mystical, something intangible and undemonstrable, whose

relation to the mind has remained obscure, or they have identified the

mental  with  the  conscious  and  have  proceeded  to  infer  from  this

definition that what is unconscious cannot be mental or a subject for

psychology.  These  opinions  must  be  put  down  to  the  fact  that

philosophers have formed their judgement on the unconscious without

being acquainted with the phenomena of unconscious mental activity,

and  therefore  without  any  suspicion  of  how  far  unconscious

phenomena resemble conscious ones or of the respects in which they

differ from them. If anyone possessing that knowledge nevertheless

holds to the conviction which equates the conscious and the psychical

and  consequently  denies  the  unconscious  the  attribute  of  being

psychical, no objection can, of course, be made except that such a

distinction turns out to be highly unpractical. For it is easy to describe

the  unconscious  and  to  follow  its  developments  if  it  is  approached

from the direction of its relation to the conscious, with which it has so

much in common. On the other hand, there still seems no possibility of

approaching it from the direction of physical events. So that it is bound

to remain a matter for psychological study.   There is yet another way in which philosophy can derive a stimulus

from  psycho-analysis,  and  that  is  by  itself  becoming  a  subject  of

psycho-analytic  research.  Philosophical  theories  and  systems  have

been the work of a small number of men of striking individuality. In no

other  science  does  the  personality  of  the  scientific  worker  play

anything like so large a part as in philosophy. And now for the first

time psycho-analysis enables us to construct a ‘psychography’ of a

personality. (See the sociological section below, p. 2824.) It teaches

us  to  recognize  the  affective  units  -  the  complexes  dependent  on

instincts - whose presence is to be presumed in each individual, and it

introduces us to the study of the transformations and end-products

arising  from  these  instinctual  forces.  It  reveals  the  relations  of  a

person’s  constitutional  disposition  and  the  events  of  his  life  to  the

achievements open to him owing to his peculiar gifts. It can conjecture

with  more  or  less  certainty  from  an  artist’s  work  the  intimate

personality that lies behind it. In the same way, psycho-analysis can

indicate  the  subjective  and  individual  motives  behind  philosophical

theories which have ostensibly sprung from impartial logical work, and

can draw a critic’s attention to the weak spots in the system. It is not

the business of psycho-analysis, however, to undertake such criticism

itself, for, as may be imagined, the fact that a theory is psychologically

determined does not in the least invalidate its scientific truth.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2816

 

              (C) THE BIOLOGICAL INTEREST OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

   It has not been the fate of psycho-analysis to be greeted (like other

young sciences) with the sympathetic encouragement of those who

are interested in the advance of knowledge. For a long time it was

disregarded,  and  when  at  last  it  could  no  longer  be  neglected  it

became, for emotional reasons, the object of the most violent attacks

from people who had not taken the trouble to become acquainted with

it. It owed this unfriendly reception to a single circumstance: for at an

early  stage  of  its  researches  psycho-analysis  was  driven  to  the

conclusion that nervous illnesses are an expression of a disturbanceof the sexual function and it was thus led to devote its attention to an

investigation  of  that  function  -  one  which  had  been  far  too  long

neglected. But anyone who respects the rule that scientific judgement

should  not  be  influenced  by  emotional  attitudes  will  assign  a  high

degree of biological interest to psycho-analysis on account of these

very  investigations  and  will  regard  the  resistances  to  it  as  actual

evidence in favour of the correctness of its assertions.

   Psycho-analysis has done justice to the sexual function in man by

making  a  detailed  examination  of  its  importance  in  mental  and

practical life - an importance which has been emphasized by many

creative writers and by some philosophers, but which has never been

recognized  by  science.  But  in  the  first  place  it  was  necessary  to

enlarge the unduly restricted concept of sexuality, an enlargement that

was justified by reference to the extensions of sexuality occurring in

the so called perversions and to the behaviour of children. It turned

out  to  be  impossible  to  maintain  any  longer  that  childhood  was

asexual  and  was  invaded  for  the  first  time  by  a  sudden  inrush  of

sexual impulses at the age of puberty. On the contrary, when once the

blinkers of partiality and prejudice had been removed, observation had

no difficulty in revealing that sexual interests and activities are present

in the human child at almost every age and from the very first. The

importance of this infantile sexuality is not impaired by the fact that we

cannot everywhere draw a clear line between it and a child’s asexual

activity.  It  differs,  however,  from  what  is  described  as  the  ‘normal’

sexuality of adults. It includes the germs of all those sexual activities

which in later life are sharply contrasted with normal sexual life as

being perversions, and as such bound to seem incomprehensible and

vicious.  The  normal  sexuality  of  adults  emerges  from  infantile

sexuality  by  a  series  of  developments,  combinations,  divisions  and

suppressions, which are scarcely ever achieved with ideal perfection

and consequently leave behind predispositions to a retrogression of

the function in the form of illness.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2817

       Infantile  sexuality  exhibits  two  other  characteristics  which  are  of

importance  from  a  biological  point  of  view.  It  turns  out  to  be  put

together  from  a  number  of  component  instincts  which  seem  to  be

attached to certain regions of the body (‘erotogenic zones’) and some

of which emerge from the beginning in pairs of opposites - instincts

with an active and a passive aim. Just as in later life what is loved is

not merely the object’s sexual organs but his whole body, so from the

very first it is not merely the genitals but many other parts of the body

which are the seat of sexual excitation and respond to appropriate

stimuli with sexual pleasure. This fact is closely related to the second

characteristic  of  infantile  sexuality  -  namely  that  to  start  with  it  is

attached  to  the  functions  of  nutrition  and  excretion,  and,  in  all

probability, of muscular excitation and sensory activity.

   If we examine sexuality in the adult with the help of psycho-analysis,

and  consider  the  life  of  children  in  the  light  of  the  knowledge  thus

gained, we perceive that sexuality is not merely a function serving the

purposes of reproduction, on a par with digestion, respiration, etc. It is

something far more independent, which stands in contrast to all the

individual’s other activities and is only forced into an alliance with the

individual’s  economy  after  a  complicated  course  of  development

involving the imposition of numerous restrictions. Cases, theoretically

quite conceivable, in which the interests of these sexual impulses fail

to coincide with the self-preservation of the individual seem actually to

be presented by the group of neurotic illnesses. For the final formula

which psycho-analysis has arrived at on the nature of the neuroses

runs thus: The primal conflict which leads to neuroses is one between

the sexual instincts and those which maintain the ego. The neuroses

represent a more or less partial overpowering of the ego by sexuality

after the ego’s attempts at suppressing sexuality have failed.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2818

 

      We  have  found  it  necessary  to  hold  aloof  from  biological

considerations  during  our  psycho-analytic  work  and  to  refrain  from

using them for heuristic purposes, so that we may not be misled in ourimpartial judgement of the psycho-analytic facts before us. But after

we have completed our psycho-analytic work we shall have to find a

point  of  contact  with  biology;  and  we  may  rightly  feel  glad  if  that

contact  is  already  assured  at  one  important  point  or  another.  The

contrast between the ego instincts and the sexual instinct, to which we

have been obliged to trace back the origin of the neuroses, is carried

into the sphere of biology in the contrast between the instincts which

serve  the  preservation  of  the  individual  and  those  which  serve  the

survival  of  the  species.  In  biology  we  come  upon  the  more

comprehensive conception of an immortal germ-plasm to which the

different transitory individuals are attached like organs that develop

successively.  It  is  only  this  conception  which  enables  us  rightly  to

understand  the  part  played  by  the  sexual  instinctual  forces  in

physiology and psychology.

      In  spite  of  all  our  efforts  to  prevent  biological  terminology  and

considerations  from  dominating  psycho-analytic  work,  we  cannot

avoid using them even in our descriptions of the phenomena that we

study. We cannot help regarding the term ‘instinct’ as a concept on the

frontier between the spheres of psychology and biology. We speak,

too,  of  ‘masculine’  and  ‘feminine’  mental  attributes  and  impulses,

although, strictly speaking, the differences between the sexes can lay

claim to no special psychical characterization. What we speak of in

ordinary life as ‘masculine’ or ‘feminine’ reduces itself from the point of

view of psychology to the qualities of ‘activity’ and ‘passivity’ - that is,

to qualities determined not by the instincts themselves but by their

aims. The regular association of these ‘active’ and ‘passive’ instincts

in mental life reflects the bisexuality of individuals, which is among the

clinical postulates of psycho-analysis.

   I shall be satisfied if these few remarks have drawn attention to the

many  respects  in  which  psycho-analysis  acts  as  an  intermediary

between biology and psychology.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2819

 

(D) THE INTEREST OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS FROM A DEVELOPMENTAL POINT OF VIEW

    Not every analysis of psychological phenomena deserves the name

of psycho-analysis. The latter implies more than the mere analysis of

composite phenomena into simpler ones. It consists in tracing back

one psychical structure to another which preceded it in time and out of

which it developed. Medical psycho-analytic procedure was not able to

eliminate  a  symptom  until  it  had  traced  that  symptom’s  origin  and

development. Thus from the very first psycho-analysis was directed

towards tracing developmental processes. It began by discovering the

genesis of neurotic symptoms, and was led, as time went on, to turn

its attention to other psychical structures and to construct a genetic

psychology which would apply to them too.

   Psycho-analysis has been obliged to derive the mental life of adults

from that of children, and has had to take seriously the old saying that

the child is father to the man. It has traced the continuity between the

infantile and adult mind, and has also noted the transformations and

re-arrangements that occur in the process. In most of us there is a gap

in our memories covering the first years of our childhood, of which

only a few fragmentary recollections survive. Psycho-analysis may be

said to have filled in this gap and to have abolished man’s infantile

amnesia. (See the section on ‘Educational Interest’ below.)

   Some notable discoveries have been made in the course of this

investigation  of  the  infantile  mind.  Thus  it  has  been  possible  to

confirm, what has often already been suspected, the extraordinarily

important  influence  exerted  by  the  impressions  of  childhood  (and

particularly  by  its  earliest  years)  on  the  whole  course  of  later

development.  This  brings  us  up  against  a  psychological  paradox  -

which for psycho-analysts alone is no paradox - that it is precisely

these most important of all impressions that are not remembered in

later years. Psycho-analysis has been able to establish the decisive

and  indestructible  character  of  these  earliest  experiences  in  the

clearest possible way in the case of sexual life. ‘On revient toujours à

ses premiers amours’ is sober truth. The many riddles in the sexual

life of adults can only be solved if stress is laid on the infantile factors

in  love.  Theoretical  light  is  thrown  on  their  influence  by  the

consideration that an individual’s first experiences in childhood do not

occur only by chance but also correspond to the first activities of his

innate or constitutional instinctual dispositions. 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2820

 

   Another and far more surprising discovery has been that, in spite of

all the later development that occurs in the adult, none of the infantile

mental formations perish. All the wishes, instinctual impulses, modes

of reaction and attitudes of childhood are still demonstrably present in

maturity  and  in  appropriate  circumstances  can  emerge  once  more.

They are not destroyed but merely overlaid - to use the spatial mode

of description which psycho-analytic psychology has been obliged to

adopt. Thus it is part of the nature of the mental past that, unlike the

historic past, it is not absorbed by its derivatives; it persists (whether

actually or only potentially) alongside what has proceeded from it. The

proof of this assertion lies in the fact that the dreams of normal people

revive their childhood characters every night and reduce their whole

mental  life  to  an  infantile  level.  This  same  return  to  psychical

infantilism  (‘regression’)  appears  in  the  neuroses  and  psychoses,

whose peculiarities may to a great extent be described as psychical

archaisms.  The  strength  in  which  the  residues  of  infancy  are  still

present in the mind shows us the amount of disposition to illness; that

disposition  may  accordingly  be  regarded  as  an  expression  of  an

inhibition in development. The part of a person’s psychical material

which  has  remained  infantile  and  has  been  repressed  as  being

unserviceable constitutes the core of his unconscious. And we believe

we  can  follow  in  our  patients’  life-histories  the  way  in  which  this

unconscious, held back as it is by the forces of repression, lies in wait

for a chance to become active and makes use of its opportunities if

the later and higher psychical structures fail to master the difficulties of

real life.

   In the last few years psycho-analytic writers¹ have become aware

that the principle that ‘ontogeny is a repetition of phylogeny’ must be

applicable  to  mental  life;  and  this  has  led  to  a  fresh  extension  of

psycho-analytic interest.

 

   ¹ Abraham, Spielrein and Jung.

             The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2821

 

      (E) THE INTEREST OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS FROM THE POINT OF VIEW
                          OF THE HISTORY OF CIVILIZATION

 

   The comparison between the childhood of individual men and the

early history of societies has already proved its fruitfulness in several

directions, even though the study has scarcely more than begun. In

this connection the psycho-analytic mode of thought acts like a new

instrument  of  research.  The  application  of  its  hypotheses  to  social

psychology enables us both to raise fresh problems and to see old

ones in a fresh light and contribute towards their solution.

   In the first place, it seems quite possible to apply the psycho-analytic

views derived from dreams to products of ethnic imagination such as

myths  and  fairy  tales.¹  The  need  to  interpret  such  productions  has

long  been  felt;  some  ‘secret  meaning’  has  been  suspected  to  lie

behind them and it has been presumed that that meaning is concealed

by changes and transformations. The study made by psycho-analysis

of  dreams  and  neuroses  has  given  it  the  necessary  experience  to

enable it to guess the technical procedures that have governed these

distortions. But in a number of instances it can also reveal the hidden

motives which have led to this modification in the original meaning of

myths.  It  cannot  accept  as  the  first  impulse  to  the  construction  of

myths  a  theoretical  craving  for  finding  an  explanation  of  natural

phenomena or for accounting for cult observances and usages which

have  become  unintelligible.  It  looks  for  that  impulse  in  the  same

psychical  ‘complexes’,  in  the  same  emotional  trends,  which  it  has

discovered at the base of dreams and symptoms.

   A similar application of its points of view, its hypotheses and its

findings has enabled psycho-analysis to throw light on the origins of

our  great  cultural  institutions  -  on  religion,  morality,  justice  and

philosophy.² By examining the primitive psychological situations which

were able to provide the motive for creations of this kind, it has been

in  a  position  to  reject  certain  attempts  at  an  explanation  that  were

based on too superficial a psychology and to replace them by a more

penetrating insight. 

   ¹ Cf. Abraham, Rank and Jung.

   ² For some first attempts in this direction, see Jung (1912) and Freud (1912-13).

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2822

 

   Psycho-analysis has established an intimate connection between

these  psychical  achievements  of  individuals  on  the  one  hand  and

societies  on  the  other  by  postulating  one  and  the  same  dynamic

source  for  both  of  them.  It  starts  out  from  the  basic  idea  that  the

principal function of the mental mechanism is to relieve the individual

from the tensions created in him by his needs. One part of this task

can be achieved by extracting satisfaction from the external world; and

for this purpose it is essential to have control over the real world. But

the satisfaction of another part of these needs - among them certain

affective impulses - is regularly frustrated by reality. This leads to the

further  task  of  finding  some  other  means  of  dealing  with  the

unsatisfied impulses. The whole course of the history of civilization is

no more than an account of the various methods adopted by mankind

for  ‘binding’  their  unsatisfied  wishes,  which,  according  to  changing

conditions  (modified,  moreover,  by  technological  advances)  have

been  met  by  reality  sometimes  with  favour  and  sometimes  with

frustration.

   An investigation of primitive peoples shows mankind caught up, to

begin  with,  in  a  childish  belief  in  its  own  omnipotence.¹  A  whole

number of mental structures can thus be understood as attempts to

deny  whatever  might  disturb  this  feeling  of  omnipotence  and  so  to

prevent  emotional  life  from  being  affected  by  reality  until  the  latter

could be better controlled and used for purposes of satisfaction. The

principle of avoiding unpleasure dominates human actions until it is

replaced by the better one of adaptation to the external world. Pari

passu  with  men’s  progressive  control  over  the  world  goes  a

development in their Weltanschauung, their view of the universe as a

whole. They turn away more and more from their original belief in their

own omnipotence, rising from an animistic phase through a religious

to a scientific one. Myths, religion and morality find their place in thisscheme  as  attempts  to  seek  a  compensation  for  the  lack  of

satisfaction of human wishes.

   Our knowledge of the neurotic illnesses of individuals has been of

much assistance to our understanding of the great social institutions.

For the neuroses themselves have turned out to be attempts to find

individual solutions for the problems of compensating for unsatisfied

wishes, while the institutions seek to provide social solutions for these

same  problems.  The  recession  of  the  social  factor  and  the

predominance of the sexual one turns these neurotic solutions of the

psychological problem into caricatures which are of no service except

to help us in explaining such important questions.

 

   ¹ Cf. Ferenczi (1913c) and Freud (1912-13), Chapter III.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2823

 

        (F) THE INTEREST OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS FROM THE POINT OF VIEW
                          OF THE SCIENCE OF AESTHETICS

 

      Psycho-analysis  throws  a  satisfactory  light  upon  some  of  the

problems concerning arts and artists; but others escape it entirely. In

the exercising of an art it sees once again an activity intended to allay

ungratified wishes - in the first place in the creative artist himself and

subsequently  in  his  audience  or  spectators.  The  motive  forces  of

artists are the same conflicts which drive other people into neurosis

and have encouraged society to construct its institutions. Whence it is

that  the  artist  derives  his  creative  capacity  is  not  a  question  for

psychology.  The  artist’s  first  aim  is  to  set  himself  free  and,  by

communicating  his  work  to  other  people  suffering  from  the  same

arrested desires, he offers them the same liberation.¹ He represents

his most personal wishful phantasies as fulfilled; but they only become

a  work  of  art  when  they  have  undergone  a  transformation  which

softens what is offensive in them, conceals their personal origin and,

by obeying the laws of beauty, bribes other people with a bonus of

pleasure. Psycho-analysis has no difficulty in pointing out, alongside

the manifest part of artistic enjoyment, another that is latent though farmore potent, derived from the hidden sources of instinctual liberation.

The connection between the impressions of the artist’s childhood and

his life-history on the one hand and his works, as reactions to those

impressions,  on  the  other  is  one  of  the  most  attractive  subjects  of

analytic examination.²

      For  the  rest,  most  of  the  problems  of  artistic  creation  and

appreciation await further study, which will throw the light of analytic

knowledge  on  them  and  assign  them  their  place  in  the  complex

structure presented by the compensation for human wishes. Art is a

conventionally  accepted  reality  in  which,  thanks  to  artistic  illusion,

symbols and substitutes are able to provoke real emotions. Thus art

constitutes a region half-way between a reality which frustrates wishes

and the wish-fulfilling world of the imagination - a region in which, as it

were, primitive man’s strivings for omnipotence are still in full force.

 

   ¹ Cf. Rank (1907).

   ² Cf. Rank (1912). See also, for the application of psycho-analysis to aesthetic problems,

my book on jokes (Freud, 1905c).
 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2824

 

              (G) THE SOCIOLOGICAL INTEREST OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

   It is true that psycho-analysis has taken the individual mind as its

subject, but in investigating the individual it could not avoid dealing

with the emotional basis of the relation of the individual to society. It

has found that the social feelings invariably contain an erotic element -

an  element  which,  if  it  is  over-emphasized  and  then  repressed,

becomes one of the marks of a particular group of mental disorders.

Psycho-analysis  has  recognized  that  in  general  the  neuroses  are

asocial  in  their  nature  and  that  they  always  aim  at  driving  the

individual out of society and at replacing the safe monastic seclusion

of earlier days by the isolation of illness. The intense feeling of guilt

which dominates so many neuroses has been shown to be a social

modification of neurotic anxiety.

   On the other hand, psycho-analysis has fully demonstrated the partplayed  by  social  conditions  and  requirements  in  the  causation  of

neurosis. The forces which, operating from the ego, bring about the

restriction  and  repression  of  instinct  owe  their  origin  essentially  to

compliance with the demands of civilization. A constitution and a set of

childhood experiences which, in other cases, would inevitably lead to

a neurosis will produce no such result where this compliance is absent

or where these demands are not made by the social circle in which the

particular individual is placed. The old assertion that the increase in

nervous disorders is a product of civilization is at least a half-truth.

Young people are brought into contact with the demands of civilization

by  upbringing  and  example;  and  if  instinctual  repression  occurs

independently  of  these  two  factors,  it  is  a  plausible  hypothesis  to

suppose that a primaeval and prehistoric demand has at last become

part of the organized and inherited endowment of mankind. A child

who  produces  instinctual  repressions  spontaneously  is  thus  merely

repeating a part of the history of civilization. What is to-day an act of

internal restraint was once an external one, imposed, perhaps, by the

necessities of the moment; and, in the same way, what is now brought

to  bear  upon  every  growing  individual  as  an  external  demand  of

civilization  may  some  day  become  an  internal  disposition  to

repression.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2825

 

              (H) THE EDUCATIONAL INTEREST OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

   The overmastering interest which must be felt in psycho-analysis by

the  theory  of  education  is  based  upon  a  fact  which  has  become

evident. Only someone who can feel his way into the minds of children

can be capable of educating them; and we grown-up people cannot

understand  children  because  we  no  longer  understand  our  own

childhood.  Our  infantile  amnesia  proves  that  we  have  grown

estranged  from  our  childhood.  Psycho-analysis  has  brought  to  light

the wishes, the thought structures and the developmental processes

of  childhood.  All  earlier  attempts  in  this  direction  have  been  in  the

highest degree incomplete and misleading because they have entirelyoverlooked the inestimably important factor of sexuality in its physical

and  mental  manifestations.  The  incredulous  astonishment  which

meets the most certainly established findings of psycho-analysis on

the  subject  of  childhood  -  the  Oedipus  complex,  self-love  (or

‘narcissism’),  the  disposition  to  perversions,  anal  erotism,  sexual

curiosity - is a measure of the gulf which separates our mental life, our

judgements of value and, indeed, our processes of thought from those

of even normal children.

   When educators have become familiar with the findings of psycho-

analysis, it will be easier for them to reconcile themselves to certain

phases of infantile development and they will, among other things, not

be  in  danger  of  over-estimating  the  importance  of  the  socially

unserviceable  or  perverse  instinctual  impulses  which  emerge  in

children. On the contrary they will refrain from any attempt at forcibly

suppressing such impulses, when they learn that efforts of this kind

often produce no less undesirable results than the alternative, which is

so  much  dreaded  by  educators,  of  giving  free  play  to  children’s

naughtiness. The forcible suppression of strong instincts by external

means  never  has  the  effect  in  a  child  of  these  instincts  being

extinguished or brought under control; it leads to repression, which

establishes a predisposition to later nervous illness. Psycho-analysis

has frequent opportunities of observing the part played by inopportune

and undiscerning severity of upbringing in the production of neuroses,

or the price, in loss of efficiency and of capacity for enjoyment, which

has to be paid for the normality upon which the educator insists. And

psycho-analysis  can  also  show  what  precious  contributions  to  the

formation  of  character  are  made  by  these  asocial  and  perverse

instincts in the child, if they are not subjected to repression but are

diverted from their original aims to more valuable ones by the process

known  as  ‘sublimation’.  Our  highest  virtues  have  grown  up,  as

reaction  formations  and  sublimations,  out  of  our  worst  dispositions.

Education  should  scrupulously  refrain  from  burying  these  precious

springs  of  action  and  should  restrict  itself  to  encouraging  the

processes  by  which  these  energies  are  led  along  safe  paths.

Whatever we can expect in the way of prophylaxis against neurosis in

the individual lies in the hands of a psycho-analytically enlightened

education.¹ 

   ¹ See the writings of the Zurich pastor, Dr. Oskar Pfister.

 


            The Claims Of Psycho-Analysis To Scientific Interest

                                                                                      2826

 

 

      It  has  not  been  my  aim  in  my  present  paper  to  lay  before  a

scientifically orientated public an account of the compass and content

of psycho-analysis or of its hypotheses, problems and findings. My

purpose will have been fulfilled if I have made clear the many spheres

of knowledge in which psycho-analysis is of interest and the numerous

links which it has begun to forge between them.

                                                                                       2827

 

      OBSERVATIONS AND EXAMPLES FROM ANALYTIC PRACTICE

                                        (1913)

 


                                                                                      2828

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2829

 

      OBSERVATIONS AND EXAMPLES FROM ANALYTIC PRACTICE

 

The collection of short contributions, of which we here present a first

instalment,  calls  for  a  few  introductory  words.  The  cases  of  illness

which  come  under  a  psycho-analyst’s  observation  are  of  course  of

unequal value in adding to his knowledge. There are some on which

he has to bring to bear all that he knows and from which he learns

nothing; and there are others which show him what he already knows

in a particularly clearly marked manner and in exceptionally revealing

isolation, so that he is indebted to them not only for a confirmation but

for an extension of his knowledge. We are justified in supposing that

the psychical processes which we wish to study are no different in the

first class of cases from what they are in the second, but we shall

choose to describe them as they occur in the favourable and clear

examples  afforded  by  the  latter.  Similarly,  the  theory  of  evolution

assumes  that  in  the  animal  kingdom  the  segmentation  of  the  egg

proceeds in the same manner in those cases where a high degree of

pigmentation is present and which are unfavourable for observation,

as it does in those cases where the object of study is transparent and

poorly  pigmented  and  which  are  on  that  account  selected  for

observation.

   But the numerous apt examples, which, in the course of an analyst’s

daily work, bring him a confirmation of what he already knows, are for

the most part lost to view, since their collection into a larger wholeoften involves long delays. There is therefore some advantage in the

provision of a framework within which observations and examples of

this kind can be published and made generally known without waiting

to be worked over from a more generalized point of view.

 


              Observations And Examples From Analytic Practice

                                                                                      2830

 

   Under the heading which is here introduced space will be offered for

material of this kind. Communications should be kept as concise as

possible. The different items are arranged in no particular order.

 

                                          (1)

 

              DREAM WITH AN UNRECOGNIZED PRECIPITATING CAUSE

 

   A good sleeper awoke one morning at a summer resort in the Tyrol,

knowing that he had had a dream that the Pope was dead. He could

think of no explanation of it. During the morning of the same day his

wife said to him: ‘Did you hear the dreadful noise the bells made early

this morning?’ He had not heard it but had evidently dreamt about it.

The interpretation which his dream gave of the bells was his revenge

on the pious Tyrolese. According to the newspapers the Pope was

slightly indisposed at that time.

 

                                          (2)

 

                            THE TIME OF DAY IN DREAMS

 

   This very often stands for the age of the dreamer at some particular

period  in  his  childhood.  In  one  dream  a  quarter  past  five  in  the

morning meant the age of five years and three months, which was

significant, since that was the dreamer’s age at the time of the birth of

his younger brother. - Many similar examples.

 


              Observations And Examples From Analytic Practice                                                                                      2831

 

                                          (3)

 

                          REPRESENTATION OF AGES IN DREAMS

 

   A woman dreamt that she was walking with two little girls whose

ages differed by fifteen months. She was unable to recall any family of

her acquaintance to whom this would apply. It occurred to her that

both  the  children  represented  herself  and  that  the  dream  was

reminding  her  that  the  two  traumatic  events  of  her  childhood  were

separated from each other by fifteen months (3½ and 4¾).

 

                                          (4)

 

                      POSITION WHEN WAKING FROM A DREAM

 

   A woman dreamt that she was lying on her back and pressing the

soles of her feet against those of another woman. The analysis made

it seem probable that she was thinking of scenes of romping which

she  had  substituted  for  the  memory  of  an  observation  of  sexual

intercourse. When she woke up she noticed that, on the contrary, she

had been lying on her stomach with her arms crossed, and had thus

been imitating the position of a man and his embrace.

 

                                          (9)

 

                            TWO ROOMS AND ONE ROOM

 

   He had a dream in which he saw two familiar rooms which had been

made into one.

   Nothing factual. The dream pointed to the female genitals and the

anus, which, as a child, he had regarded as one area, the ‘bottom’ (in

accordance with the infantile ‘cloaca theory’), while he now knows that

there  are  two  separate  cavities  and  orifices.  A  reversed

representation.

               Observations And Examples From Analytic Practice

                                                                                      2832

 

                                          (10)

 

                                OVERCOAT AS A SYMBOL

 

   In women’s dreams an overcoat [German ‘Mantel’] is unquestionably

shown to be a symbol for a man. Linguistic assonance may perhaps

play some part in this.

 

                                          (13)

 

                              DISGRACED FEET (SHOES)

 

   After several days of resistance the patient reported that she had felt

very much snubbed because a young man whom she met regularly

near  the  doctor’s  house,  and  who  used  as  a  rule  to  look  at  her

admiringly,  had  on  the  last  occasion  looked  contemptuously  at  her

feet.  In  fact  she  had  no  reason  to  be  ashamed  of  her  feet.  She

produced the explanation herself after admitting that she had regarded

the  young  man  as  the  doctor’s  son,  who  thus  (by  way  of  the

transference)  stood  for  her  elder  brother.  There  now  followed  a

memory of having been in the habit of accompanying her brother to

the lavatory when she was about five years old and of watching him

micturate. She was overcome with envy at not being able to do it in

the same way as he did and one day tried to copy him (envy for the

penis). But in doing so she wetted her shoes and got very angry when

her brother teased her about it. For a long time afterwards her anger

recurred whenever her brother looked contemptuously at her shoes

with the object of reminding her of her misfortune. She added that this

experience had determined her later behaviour at school. If she was

unsuccessful  in  anything  at  the  first  attempt  she  could  never  bring

herself to try again, so that in many subjects she failed completely.

This is a good example of the way in which sexual life acts as a model

and influences character.

 

                                          (15) 

                              SELF-CRITICISM BY NEUROTICS

 

   It is always a striking thing and deserves special notice when a

neurotic  is  in  the  habit  of  speaking  ill  of  himself,  expressing  a  low

opinion of himself, and so on. As in the case of self-reproaches, it is

often possible to explain it by supposing that he is identifying himself

with someone else. But in one patient the attendant circumstances

during the session necessitated another explanation of behaviour of

this kind. A young lady, who was never tired of declaring that she had

very  little  intelligence,  was  without  gifts,  etc.,  was  only  trying  to

indicate  by  this  that  she  had  great  physical  beauty,  and  was

concealing this boast behind her self-criticism. Nor was a reference to

the  harmful  effects  of  masturbation  -  a  reference  which  is  to  be

expected in all such cases - absent in this one.

 


              Observations And Examples From Analytic Practice

                                                                                      2833

 

                                          (19)

 

                        CONSIDERATIONS OF REPRESENTABILITY

 

   A man dreamt that he was pulling a woman out from behind a bed:

i.e. he was giving her preference.¹ - He (an officer) was sitting at a

table opposite the Emperor: i.e. he was putting himself in opposition to

the  Emperor  (his  father).  In  both  these  cases  the  dreamer  himself

gave the translation.

 

                                          (20)

 

                            DREAMS ABOUT DEAD PEOPLE

 

   If someone dreams of talking to dead people or associating with

them, and so on, this often has the meaning of his own death. But if

he remembers in his dream that the person in question is dead, the

dreamer is repudiating the fact that it signifies his own death. 

                                          (21)

 

                                FRAGMENTARY DREAMS

 

   These often contain only the symbols relating to the subject of the

dream. For instance, here is a dream that occurred in a context of

homosexual  impulses:  he  was  going  for  a  walk  somewhere  with  a

friend . . . (indistinct) . . . balloons.

 

                                          (22)

 

        APPEARANCE IN THE DREAM OF THE SYMPTOMS OF THE ILLNESS

 

   The symptoms of the illness (anxiety, etc.), when they appear in a

dream, seem generally speaking to mean: ‘I fell ill because of this (i.e.

in connection with the earlier elements of the dream).’ Such dreams,

accordingly, correspond to a continuation of the analysis in the dream.

 

     ¹ [The  point  depends  on  a  similarity  between  the  German  word  for  ‘pulling  out’

(‘hervorziehen’) and ‘giving preference’ (‘vorziehen’).]

                                                                                       2834

 

              FAUSSE RECONNAISSANCE (‘DÉJÀ RACONTÉ’)

                      IN PSYCHO-ANALYTIC TREATMENT

                                        (1914)

 


                                                                                      2835

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2836

 

              FAUSSE RECONNAISSANCE (‘DÉJÀ RACONTÉ’)

                      IN PSYCHO-ANALYTIC TREATMENT

 

It not infrequently happens in the course of an analytic treatment that

the patient, after reporting some fact that he has remembered, will go

on to say: ‘But I’ve told you that already’ - while the analyst himself

feels sure that this is the first time he has heard the story. If the patient

is contradicted upon the point, he will often protest with energy that he

is perfectly certain he is right, that he is ready to swear to it, and so

on; while the analyst’s own conviction that what he has heard is new

to  him  will  become  correspondingly  stronger.  To  try  to  decide  the

dispute  by  shouting  the  patient  down  or  by  outvying  him  in

protestations  would  be  a  most  unpsychological  proceeding.  It  is

familiar ground that a sense of conviction of the accuracy of one’s

memory has no objective value; and, since one of the two persons

concerned must necessarily be in the wrong, it may just as well be the

physician as the patient who has fallen a victim to a paramnesia. The

analyst will admit as much to the patient, will break off the argument,

and will postpone a settlement of the point until some later occasion.

   In a minority of cases the analyst himself will then recollect that he

has already heard the piece of information under dispute, and will at

the same time discover the subjective, and often far-fetched, reason

which led to this temporary forgetfulness. But in the great majority ofcases it is the patient who turns out to have been mistaken; and he

can be brought to recognize the fact. The explanation of this frequent

occurrence appears to be that the patient really had an intention of

giving this information, that once or even several times he actually

made some remark leading up to it, but that he was then prevented by

resistance from carrying out his purpose, and afterwards confused a

recollection of his intention with a recollection of its performance.

 


        Fausse Reconnaissance ('Deja Raconte') In Psycho-Analytic

                                      Treatment

                                                                                      2837

 

   Leaving on one side any cases in which there may still be some

element of doubt, I will now bring forward a few others which are of

special theoretical interest. With certain people it happens, and may

even happen repeatedly, that they cling with particular obstinacy to the

assertion that they have already told the analyst this or that, when the

nature of the circumstances and of the information in question makes

it quite impossible that they can be right. For what they claim to have

told  the  analyst  already  and  what  they  claim  to  recognize  as

something old, which must be familiar to the analyst as well, turn out

to  be  memories  of  the  greatest  importance  to  the  analysis  -

confirmatory  facts  for  which  the  analyst  has  long  been  waiting,  or

solutions which wind up a whole section of the work and which he

would certainly have made the basis of an exhaustive discussion. In

the face of these considerations the patient himself soon admits that

his  recollection  must  have  deceived  him,  though  he  is  unable  to

account for its definite character.

      The  phenomenon  presented  by  the  patient  in  cases  like  this

deserves to be called a ‘fausse reconnaissance’, and is completely

analogous  to  what  occurs  in  certain  other  cases  and  has  been

described  as  a  ‘déjà  vu’.  In  these  other  cases  the  subject  has  a

spontaneous feeling such as ‘I’ve been in this situation before’, or ‘I’ve

been  through  all  this  already’,  without  ever  being  in  a  position  to

confirm  his  conviction  by  discovering  an  actual  recollection  of  the

previous  occasion.  This  latter  phenomenon,  as  is  well  known,  hasprovoked a large number of attempts at explanation, which can be

divided roughly into two groups.¹ One class of explanation looks upon

the  feeling  which  constitutes  the  phenomenon  as  deserving  of

credence, and assumes that something really has been remembered -

the  only  question  being  what.  The  second  and  far  larger  class  of

explanation includes those which maintain, on the contrary, that what

we have to deal with is an illusory memory, and that the problem is to

discover how this paramnesic error can have arisen. This latter group

comprises many widely different hypotheses. There is, for instance,

the  ancient  view,  ascribed  to  Pythagoras,  that  the  phenomenon  of

déjà vu  is  evidence  of  the  subject  having  had  a  former  life;  again,

there is the hypothesis based on anatomy (put forward by Wigan in

1860) to the effect that the phenomenon is based on an absence of

simultaneity in the functioning of the two cerebral hemispheres; and

finally there are the purely psychological theories, supported by the

majority of more recent authorities, which regard the déjà vu as an

indication of an apperceptive weakness, and assign the responsibility

for  its  occurrence  to  such  causes  as  fatigue,  exhaustion  and

distraction.

 

   ¹ One of the most recent bibliographies of the subject is to be found in Havelock Ellis

(1911).
 


        Fausse Reconnaissance ('Deja Raconte') In Psycho-Analytic

                                      Treatment

                                                                                      2838

 

   In 1904 Grasset put forward an explanation of the déjà vu which

must  be  reckoned  as  one  of  the  group  which  ‘believes’  in  the

phenomenon. He was of opinion that the phenomenon indicates that

at some earlier time there has been an unconscious perception, which

only now makes its way into consciousness under the influence of a

new  and  similar  impression.  Several  other  authorities  have  agreed

with this view, and have maintained that the basis of the phenomenon

is  the  recollection  of  something  that  has  been  dreamed  and  then

forgotten. In both cases it would be a question of the activation of an

unconscious impression.   In 1907, in the second edition of my Psychopathology of Everyday

Life, I proposed an exactly similar explanation for this form of apparent

paramnesia  without  mentioning  Grasset’s  paper  or  knowing  of  its

existence.  By  way  of  excuse  I  may  remark  that  I  arrived  at  my

conclusion as the result of a psycho-analytic investigation which I was

able to make of an example of déjà vu in a female patient; it was

extremely clear, although it had taken place some 28 years earlier. I

shall not reproduce the little analysis in this place. It showed that the

situation in which the déjà vu occurred was really calculated to revive

the memory of an earlier experience of the patient’s. The patient, who

was at that time a twelve year-old child, was visiting a family in which

there was a brother who was seriously ill and at the point of death;

while her own brother had been in a similarly dangerous condition a

few months earlier. But with the earlier of these two similar events

there had been associated a phantasy that was incapable of entering

consciousness  -  namely,  a  wish  that  her  brother  should  die.

Consequently, the analogy between the two cases could no become

conscious. And the perception of it was replaced by the phenomenon

of ‘having been through it all before’, the identity being displaced from

the really common element on to the locality.

 


        Fausse Reconnaissance ('Deja Raconte') In Psycho-Analytic

                                      Treatment

                                                                                      2839

 

   The name ‘déjà vu’ is, as we know, applied to a whole class of

analogous phenomena, such as the ‘déjà entendu’, the ‘déjà éprouve’

and the ‘déjà senti’. The case which I am now about to report, as a

single instance out of many similar ones, consists of a ‘déjà raconte’;

and it could be traced back to an unconscious resolution which was

never carried out.

   A patient said to me in the course of his associations: ‘When I was

playing in the garden with a knife (that was when I was five years old)

and cut through my little finger - oh, I only thought it was cut through -

but I’ve told you about that already.’

   I assured him that I had no recollection of anything of the kind. Heinsisted with increasing conviction that it was impossible he could be

mistaken. I finally put an end to the argument in the manner I have

described above and asked him in any case to repeat the story. Then

we should see where we were.

   ‘When I was five years old, I was playing in the garden near my

nurse, and was carving with my pocket-knife in the bark of one of the

walnut-trees  that  come  into  my  dream  as  well.¹  Suddenly,  to  my

unspeakable terror, I noticed that I had cut through the little finger of

my (right or left?) hand, so that it was only hanging on by its skin. I felt

no pain, but great fear. I did not venture to say anything to my nurse,

who was only a few paces distant, but I sank down on the nearest

seat and sat there incapable of casting another glance at my finger. At

last  I  calmed  down,  took  a  look  at  the  finger,  and  saw  that  it  was

entirely uninjured.’

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘The Occurrence in Dreams of Material from Fairy Tales’. In telling the story again on a

later occasion he made the following correction: ‘I don’t believe I was cutting the tree. That
was a confusion with another recollection, which must also have been hallucinatorily falsified,
of having made a cut in a tree with my knife and of blood having come out of the tree.’
 


        Fausse Reconnaissance ('Deja Raconte') In Psycho-Analytic

                                      Treatment

                                                                                      2840

 

   We soon agreed that, in spite of what he had thought, he could not

have told me the story of this vision or hallucination before. He was

very well aware that I could not have failed to exploit such evidence as

this  of  his  having  had  a fear  of  castration  at  the  age  of  five.  The

episode  broke  down  his  resistance  to  assuming  the  existence  of  a

castration  complex;  but  he  raised  the  question:  ‘Why  did  I  feel  so

certain of having told you this recollection before?’

      It  then  occurred  to  both  of  us  that  repeatedly  and  in  various

connections he had brought out the following trivial recollection, and

each time without our deriving my profit from it:

   ‘Once when my uncle went away on a journey he asked me and my

sister what we should like him to bring us back. My sister asked for a

book, and I asked for a pocket-knife.’ We now understood that thisassociation which had emerged months before had in reality been a

screen  memory  for  the  repressed  recollection,  and  had  been  an

attempt  (rendered  abortive  by  resistance)  at  telling  the  story  of  his

imagined loss of his little finger - an unmistakable equivalent for his

penis. The knife which his uncle did in fact bring him back was, as he

clearly remembered, the same one that made its appearance in the

episode which had been suppressed for so long.

   It seems unnecessary to add anything in the way of an interpretation

of this little occurrence, so far as it throws light upon the phenomenon

of  ‘fausse  reconnaissance’.  As  regards  the  subject-matter  of  the

patient’s  vision,  I  may  remark  that,  particularly  in  relation  to  the

castration  complex,  similar  hallucinatory  falsifications  are  of  not

infrequent  occurrence,  and  that  they  can  just  as  easily  serve  the

purpose of correcting unwelcome perceptions.

 


        Fausse Reconnaissance ('Deja Raconte') In Psycho-Analytic

                                      Treatment

                                                                                      2841

 

   In 1911 a man of university education, residing in a university town

in  Germany,  with  whom  I  am  unacquainted  and  whose  age  is

unknown  to  me,  put  the  following  notes  upon  his  childhood  at  my

disposal.

   ‘In the course of reading your study on Leonardo da Vinci, I was

moved to internal dissent by the observations near the beginning of

Chapter III. Your assertion that male children are dominated by an

interest in their own genitals provoked me to make a counter-assertion

to  the  effect  that  "if  that  is  the  general  rule,  I  at  all  events  am  an

exception to it". I then went on to read the passage that follows with

the  utmost  amazement,  such  amazement  as  one  feels  when  one

comes across a fact of an entirely novel character. In the midst of my

amazement a recollection occurred to me which showed me, to my

own surprise, that the fact could not be by any means so novel as it

had  seemed.  For,  at  the  time  at  which  I  was  passing  through  the

period of "infantile sexual researches", a lucky chance gave me an

opportunity of inspecting the female genitals in a little girl of my ownage, and in doing so I quite clearly observed a penis of the same kind

as my own. Soon afterwards I was plunged into fresh confusion by the

sight of some female statues and nudes; and in order to get over this

"scientific"  discrepancy  I  devised  the  following  experiment.  By

pressing  my  thighs  together  I  succeeded  in  making  my  genitals

disappear between them; and I was glad to find that in that way all

differences between my own appearance and that of a female nude

could be got rid of. Evidently, I thought to myself, the genitals have

been made to disappear in a similar way in female nudes.

   ‘At this point another recollection occurred to me, which has always

been of the greatest importance to me, in so far as it is one of the

three  recollections  which  constitute  all  that  I  can  remember  of  my

mother,  who  died  when  I  was  very  young.  I  remember  seeing  my

mother  standing  in  front  of  the  washing-stand  and  cleaning  the

glasses and washing-basin, while I was playing in the same room and

committing  some  misdemeanour.  As  a  punishment  my  hand  was

soundly slapped. Then to my very great terror I saw my little finger fall

off; and in fact it fell into the pail. Knowing that my mother was angry, I

did not venture to say anything; but my terror grew still more intense

when I saw the pail carried off soon afterwards by the servant girl. For

a long time I was convinced that I had lost a finger - up to the time, I

believe, at which I learnt to count.

   ‘I have often tried to interpret this recollection, which, as I have

already mentioned, has always been of the greatest importance to me

on  account  of  its  connection  with  my  mother;  but  none  of  my

interpretations  has  satisfied  me.  It  is  only  now,  after  reading  your

book,  that  I  begin  to  have  a  suspicion  of  a  simple  and  satisfying

answer to the conundrum.’

 


        Fausse Reconnaissance ('Deja Raconte') In Psycho-Analytic

                                      Treatment

                                                                                      2842

 

      There  is  another  kind  of fausse  reconnaissance  which  not

infrequently makes its appearance at the close of a treatment, much to

the  physician’s  satisfaction.  After  he  has  succeeded  in  forcing  therepressed event (whether it was of a real or of a psychical nature)

upon the patient’s acceptance in the teeth of all resistances, and has

succeeded, as it were, in rehabilitating it - the patient may say: ‘Now I

feel as though I had known it all the time.’ With this the work of the

analysis has been completed.

                                                                                       2843

 

                        THE MOSES OF MICHELANGELO

                                        (1914)

 


                                                                                      2844

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2845

 

                        THE MOSES OF MICHELANGELO

 

I  may  say  at  once  that  I  am  no  connoisseur  in  art,  but  simply  a

layman. I have often observed that the subject-matter of works of art

has  a  stronger  attraction  for  me  than  their  formal  and  technical

qualities, though to the artist their value lies first and foremost in these

latter. I am unable rightly to appreciate many of the methods used and

the effects obtained in art. I state this so as to secure the reader’s

indulgence for the attempt I propose to make here.

   Nevertheless, works of art do exercise a powerful effect on me,

especially those of literature and sculpture, less often of painting. This

has occasioned me, when I have been contemplating such things, to

spend a long time before them trying to apprehend them in my own

way, i.e. to explain to myself what their effect is due to. Wherever I

cannot do this, as for instance with music, I am almost incapable of

obtaining any pleasure. Some rationalistic, or perhaps analytic, turn of

mind in me rebels against being moved by a thing without knowing

why I am thus affected and what it is that affects me.

   This has brought me to recognize the apparently paradoxical fact

that precisely some of the grandest and most overwhelming creations

of art are still unsolved riddles to our understanding. We admire them,

we  feel  overawed  by  them,  but  we  are  unable  to  say  what  they

represent to us. I am not sufficiently well-read to know whether this

fact has already been remarked upon; possibly, indeed, some writeron  aesthetics  has  discovered  that  this  state  of  intellectual

bewilderment is a necessary condition when a work of art is to achieve

its greatest effects. It would be only with the greatest reluctance that I

could bring myself to believe in any such necessity.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2846

 

   I do not mean that connoisseurs and lovers of art find no words with

which  to  praise  such  objects  to  us.  They  are  eloquent  enough,  it

seems to me. But usually in the presence of a great work of art each

says  something  different  from  the  other;  and  none  of  them  says

anything that solves the problem for the unpretending admirer. In my

opinion, what grips us so powerfully can only be the artist’s intention,

in  so  far  as  he  has  succeeded  in  expressing  it  in  his  work  and  in

getting  us  to  understand  it.  I  realize  that  this  cannot  be  merely  a

matter of intellectual comprehension; what he aims at is to awaken in

us the same, emotional attitude, the same mental constellation as that

which  in  him  produced  the  impetus  to  create.  But  why  should  the

artist’s  intention  not  be  capable  of  being  communicated  and

comprehended in words, like any other fact of mental life? Perhaps

where great works of art are concerned this would never be possible

without the application of psycho-analysis. The product itself after all

must admit of such an analysis, if it really is an effective expression of

the  intentions  and  emotional  activities  of  the  artist.  To  discover  his

intention, though, I must first find out the meaning and content of what

is represented in his work; I must, in other words, be able to interpret

it.  It  is  possible,  therefore,  that  a  work  of  art  of  this  kind  needs

interpretation, and that until I have accomplished that interpretation I

cannot come to know why I have been so powerfully affected. I even

venture to hope that the effect of the work will undergo no diminution

after we have succeeded in thus analysing it.

   Let us consider Shakespeare’s masterpiece, Hamlet, a play, now

over  three  centuries  old.¹  I  have  followed  the  literature  of  psycho-

analysis closely, and I accept its claim that it was not until the material

of  the  tragedy  had  been  traced  back  by  psycho-analysis  to  theOedipus theme that the mystery of its effect was at last explained. But

before  this  was  done,  what  a  mass  of  differing  and  contradictory

interpretative  attempts,  what  a  variety  of  opinions  about  the  hero’s

character and the dramatist’s intentions! Does Shakespeare claim our

sympathies on behalf of a sick man, or of an ineffectual weakling, or of

an idealist who is merely too good for the real world? And how many

of these interpretations leave us cold! - so cold that they do nothing to

explain the effect of the play and rather incline us to the view that its

magical appeal rests solely upon the impressive thoughts in it and the

splendour  of  its  language.  And  yet,  do  not  those  very  endeavours

speak  for  the  fact  that  we  feel  the  need  of  discovering  in  it  some

source of power beyond them alone?

 

   ¹ Perhaps first performed in 1602.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2847

 

      Another  of  these  inscrutable  and  wonderful  works  of  art  is  the

marble statue of Moses, by Michelangelo, in the Church of S. Pietro in

Vincoli in Rome. As we know, it was only a fragment of the gigantic

tomb which the artist was to have erected for the powerful Pope Julius

II.¹ It always delights me to read an appreciative sentence about this

statue, such as that it is ‘the crown of modern sculpture’ (Grimm). For

no piece of statuary has ever made a stronger impression on me than

this.  How  often  have  I  mounted  the  steep  steps  from  the  unlovely

Corso Cavour to the lonely piazza where the deserted church stands,

and have essayed to support the angry scorn of the hero’s glance!

Sometimes I have crept cautiously out of the half-gloom of the interior

as though I myself belonged to the mob upon whom his eye is turned -

the mob which can hold fast no conviction, which has neither faith nor

patience, and which rejoices when it has regained its illusory idols.

   But why do I call this statue inscrutable? There is not the slightest

doubt that it represents Moses, the Law-giver of the Jews, holding the

Tables of the Ten Commandments. That much is certain, but that is

all. As recently as 1912 an art critic, Max Sauerlandt, has said, ‘No

other work of art in the world has been judged so diversely as theMoses with the head of Pan. The mere interpretation of the figure has

given rise to completely opposed views. . . .’ Basing myself on an

essay  published  only  five  years  ago,²  I  will  first  set  out  the  doubts

which  are  associated  with  this  figure  of  Moses;  and  it  will  not  be

difficult  to  show  that  behind  them  lies  concealed  all  that  is  most

essential and valuable for the comprehension of this work of art.

 

   ¹ According to Henry Thode, the statue was made between the years 1512 and 1516.

   ² Thode (1908).

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2848

 

                                            I

 

      The  Moses  of  Michelangelo  is  represented  as  seated;  his  body

faces forward, his head with its mighty beard looks to the left, his right

foot rests on the ground and his left leg is raised so that only the toes

touch the ground. His right arm links the Tables of the Law with a

portion of his beard; his left arm lies in his lap. Were I to give a more

detailed description of his attitude, I should have to anticipate what I

want to say later on. The descriptions of the figure given by various

writers are, by the way, curiously inapt. What has not been understood

has been inaccurately perceived or reproduced. Grimm says that the

right hand, ‘under whose arm the Tables rest, grasps his beard’. So

also  Lübke:  ‘Profoundly  shaken,  he  rasps  with  his  right  hand  his

magnificent, flowing beard . . .‘; and Springer: ‘Moses presses one

(the  left)  hand  against  his  body,  and  thrusts  the  other,  as  though

unconsciously, into the mighty locks of his beard.’ Justi thinks that the

fingers of his (right) hand are playing with his beard, ‘as an agitated

man  nowadays  might  play  with  his  watch-chain.’  Müntz,  too,  lays

stress on this playing with the beard. Thode speaks of the ‘calm, firm

posture of the right hand upon the Tables resting against his side’. He

does not recognize any sign of excitement even in the right hand, as

Justi and also Boito do. ‘The hand remains grasping his beard, in the

position it was in before the Titan turned his head to one side.’ Jakob

Burckhardt  complains  that  ‘the  celebrated  left  arm  has  no  otherfunction in reality than to press his beard to his body’.

   If mere descriptions do not agree we shall not be surprised to find a

divergence of view as to the meaning of various features of the statue.

In my opinion we cannot better characterize the facial expression of

Moses than in the words of Thode, who reads in it ‘a mixture of wrath,

pain and contempt’, - ‘wrath in his threatening contracted brows, pain

in his glance, and contempt in his protruded under-lip and in the down-

drawn corners of his mouth’. But other admirers must have seen with

other eyes. Thus Dupaty says, ‘His august brow seems to be but a

transparent veil only half concealing his great mind’.¹ Lübke, on the

other hand, declares that ‘one would look in vain in that head for an

expression  of  higher  intelligence;  his  down-drawn  brow  speaks  of

nothing but a capacity for infinite wrath and an all-compelling energy’.

Guillaume (1876) differs still more widely in his interpretation of the

expression  of  the  face.  He  finds  no  emotion  in  it  ‘only  a  proud

simplicity, an inspired dignity, a living faith. The eye of Moses looks

into  the  future,  he  foresees  the  lasting  survival  of  his  people,  the

immutability of his law.’ Similarly, to Müntz, ‘the eyes of Moses rove

far beyond the race of men. They are turned towards those mysteries

which he alone has descried.’ To Steinmann, indeed, this Moses is ‘no

longer the stern Lawgiver, no longer the terrible enemy of sin, armed

with the wrath of Jehovah, but the royal priest, whom age may not

approach, beneficent and prophetic, with the reflection of eternity upon

his brow, taking his last farewell of his people’.

 

   ¹ Quoted by Thode, ibid., 197.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2849

 

   There have even been some for whom the Moses of Michelangelo

had nothing at all to say, and who are honest enough to admit it. Thus

a  critic  in  the Quarterly  Revue  of  1858:  ‘There  is  an  absence  of

meaning in the general conception, which precludes the idea of a self-

sufficing whole. . . .’ And we are astonished to learn that there are yet

others who find nothing to admire in the Moses, but who revolt against

it and complain of the brutality of the figure and the animal cast of thehead.

      Has  then  the  master-hand  indeed  traced  such  a  vague  or

ambiguous script in the stone, that so many different readings of it are

possible?

   Another question, however, arises, which covers the first one. Did

Michelangelo  intend  to  create  a  ‘timeless  study  of  character  and

mood’ in this Moses, or did he portray him at a particular moment of

his life and, if so, at a highly significant one? The majority of judges

have decided in the latter sense and are able to tell us what episode in

his life it is which the artist has immortalized in stone. It is the descent

from Mount Sinai, where Moses has received the Tables from God,

and  it  is  the  moment  when  he  perceives  that  the  people  have

meanwhile made themselves a Golden Calf and are dancing around it

and rejoicing. This is the scene upon which his eyes are turned, this is

the spectacle which calls out the feelings depicted in his countenance

-  feelings  which  in  the  next  instant  will  launch  his  great  frame  into

violent action. Michelangelo has chosen this last moment of hesitation,

of calm before the storm, for his representation. In the next instant

Moses will spring to his feet - his left foot is already raised from the

ground - dash the Tables to the earth, and let loose his rage upon his

faithless people.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2850

 

   Once more many individual differences of opinion exist among those

who support this interpretation.

   Burckhardt writes: ‘Moses seems to be shown at that moment at

which  he  catches  sight  of  the  worship  of  the  Golden  Calf,  and  is

springing to his feet. His form is animated by the inception of a mighty

movement and the physical strength with which he is endowed causes

us to await it with fear and trembling.’

      Lübke  says:  ‘It  is  as  if  at  this  moment  his  flashing  eye  were

perceiving  the  sin  of  the  worship  of  the  Golden  Calf  and  a  mighty

inward movement were running through his whole frame. Profoundly

shaken, he grasps with his right hand his magnificent, flowing beard,as though to master his actions for one instant longer, only for the

explosion of his wrath to burst out with more shattering force the next.’

      Springer  agrees  with  this  view,  but  not  without  mentioning  one

misgiving, which will engage our attention later in this paper. He says,

‘Burning with energy and zeal, it is with difficulty that the hero subdues

his  inward  emotion.  .  .  .  We  are  thus  involuntarily  reminded  of  a

dramatic  situation  and  are  brought  to  believe  that  Moses  is

represented  at  the  moment  at  which  he  sees  the  people  of  Israel

worshipping the Golden Calf and is about to start up in wrath. Such an

impression,  it  is  true,  is  not  easy  to  reconcile  with  the  artist’s  real

intention, since the figure of Moses, like the other five seated figures

on  the  upper  part  of  the  Papal  tomb,  is  meant  primarily  to  have  a

decorative effect. But it testifies very convincingly to the vitality and

individuality portrayed in the figure of Moses.’

 

      One  or  two  writers,  without  actually  accepting  the  Golden  Calf

theory, do nevertheless agree on its main point, namely, that Moses is

just about to spring to his feet and take action.

   According to Grimm, ‘The form’ (of Moses) ‘is filled with a majesty, a

self-assurance,  a  feeling  that  all  the  thunders  of  heaven  are  at  his

command, and that yet he is holding himself in check before loosing

them, waiting to see whether the foes whom he means to annihilate

will dare to attack him. He sits there as if on the point of starting to his

feet, his proud head carried high on his shoulders; the hand under

whose  arm  the  Tables  rest  grasps  his  beard,  which  falls  in  heavy

waves over his breast, his nostrils distended and his lips shaped as

though words were trembling upon them.’

   Heath Wilson declares that Moses’ attention has been excited, and

he is about to leap to his feet, but is still hesitating; and that his glance

of mingled scorn and indignation is still capable of changing into one

of compassion.

   Wölfflin speaks of ‘inhibited movement’. The cause of this inhibition,

he says, lies in the will of the man himself; it is the last moment of self-

control before he lets himself go and leaps to his feet.

   Justi has gone the furthest of all in his interpretation of the statue as

Moses in the act of perceiving the Golden Calf, and he has pointed out

details hitherto unobserved in it and worked them into his hypothesis.He directs our attention to the position of the two Tables - an unusual

one, for they are about to slip down on to the stone seat. ‘He’ (Moses)

‘might  therefore  be  looking  in  the  direction  from  which  the  clamour

was coming with an expression of evil foreboding, or it might be the

actual sight of the abomination which has dealt him a stunning blow.

Quivering with horror and pain he has sunk down.¹ He has sojourned

on the mountain forty days and nights and he is weary. A horror, a

great turn of fortune, a crime, even happiness itself, can be perceived

in a single moment, but not grasped in its essence, its depths or its

consequences.  For  an  instant  it  seems  to  Moses  that  his  work  is

destroyed and he despairs utterly of his people. In such moments the

inner emotions betray themselves involuntarily in small movements.

He lets the Tables slip from his right hand on to the stone seat; they

have  come  to  rest  on  their  corner  there  and  are  pressed  by  his

forearm against the side of his body. His hand, however, comes in

contact with his breast and beard and thus, by the turning of the head

to the spectator’s right, it draws the beard to the left and breaks the

symmetry of that masculine adornment. It looks as though his fingers

were playing with his beard as an agitated man nowadays might play

with his watch-chain. His left hand is buried in his garment over the

lower part of his body - in the Old Testament the viscera are the seat

of the emotions - but the left leg is already drawn back and the right

put forward; in the next instant he will leap up, his mental energy will

be transposed from feeling into action, his right arm will move, the

Tables  will  fall  to  the  ground,  and  the  shameful  trespass  will  be

expiated  in  torrents  of  blood.  .  .  .’  ‘This  is  not  yet  the  moment  of

tension  of  an  act.  Pain  of  mind  still  dominates  him  and  almost

paralyses him.’

 

   ¹ It should be remarked that the careful arrangement of the mantle over the knees of the

sitting figure invalidates this first part of Justi’s view. On the contrary, this would lead us to
suppose that Moses is represented as sitting there in calm repose until he is startled by some
sudden perception.
 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2851

    Knapp takes the same view, except that he does not introduce the

doubtful point at the beginning of the description, and carries the idea

of the slipping Tables further. ‘He who just now was alone with his

God is distracted by earthly sounds. He hears a noise; the noise of

singing and dancing wakes him from his dream; he turns his eyes and

his head in the direction of the clamour. In one instant fear, rage and

unbridled passion traverse his huge frame. The Tables begin to slip

down, and will fall to the ground and break when he leaps to his feet

and  hurls  the  angry  thunder  of  his  words  into  the  midst  of  his

backsliding people. . . . This is the moment of highest tension which is

chosen. . . .’ Knapp, therefore, emphasizes the element of preparation

for action, and disagrees with the view that what is being represented

is an initial inhibition due to an overmastering agitation.

   It cannot be denied that there is something extraordinarily attractive

about  attempts  at  an  interpretation  of  the  kind  made  by  Justi  and

Knapp. This is because they do not stop short at the general effect of

the figure, but are based on separate features in it; these we usually

fail to notice, being overcome by the total impression of the statue and

as it were paralysed by it. The marked turn of the head and eyes to

the left, whereas the body faces forwards, supports the view that the

resting Moses has suddenly seen something on that side to rivet his

attention. His lifted foot can hardly mean anything else but that he is

preparing to spring up;¹ and the very unusual way in which the Tables

are held (for they are most sacred objects and are not to be brought

into the composition like any ordinary accessory) is fully accounted for

if we suppose they have slipped down as a result of the agitation of

their  bearer  and  will  fall  to  the  ground.  According  to  this  view  we

should  believe  that  the  statue  represents  a  special  and  important

moment in the life of Moses, and we should be left in no doubt of what

that moment is.

   But two remarks of Thode’s deprive us of the knowledge we thought

to  have  gained.  This  critic  says  that  to  his  eye  the  Tables  are  not

slipping down but are ‘firmly lodged’. He notes the ‘calm, firm pose of

the right hand upon the resting Tables’. If we look for ourselves we

cannot  but  admit  unreservedly  that  Thode  is  right.  The  Tables  are

firmly placed and in no danger of slipping. Moses’ right hand supports

them or is supported by them. This does not explain the position inwhich  they  are  held,  it  is  true,  but  that  position  cannot  be  used  in

favour of the interpretation of Justi and others.

   The second observation is still more final. Thode reminds us that

‘this statue was planned as one of six, and is intended to be seated.

Both facts contradict the view that Michelangelo meant to record a

particular historical moment. For, as regards the first consideration,

the plan of representing a row of seated figures as types of human

beings - as the vita activa and the vita contemplativa - excluded a

representation  of  a  particular  historic  episode.  And,  as  regards  the

second,  the  representation  of  a  seated  posture  -  a  posture

necessitated  by  the  artistic  conception  of  the  whole  monument  -

contradicts the nature of that episode, namely, the descent of Moses

from Mount Sinai into the camp.’

 

   ¹ Although the left foot of the reposeful seated figure of Giuliano in the Medici Chapel is

similarly raised from the ground.
 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2852

 

   If we accept Thode’s objection we shall find that we can add to its

weight. The figure of Moses was to have decorated the base of the

tomb together with five other statues (or according to a later sketch,

with three). Its immediate counterpart was to have been a figure of

Paul.  One  other  pair,  representing  the vita  activa  and  the vita

contemplativa in the shape of Leah and Rachel - standing, it is true -

has been executed on the tomb as it still exists in its sadly aborted

form. The Moses thus forms part of a whole and we cannot imagine

that the figure was meant to arouse an expectation in the spectator

that it was on the point of leaping up from its seat and rushing away to

create a disturbance on its own account. If the other figures were not

also represented as about to take violent action - and it seems very

improbable that they were - then it would create a very bad impression

for one of them to give us the illusion that it was going to leave its

place and its companions, in fact to abandon its role in the general

scheme. Such an intention would have a chaotic effect and we could

not charge a great artist with it unless the facts drove us to it. A figurein the act of instant departure would be utterly at variance with the

state of mind which the tomb is meant to induce in us.

   The figure of Moses, therefore, cannot be supposed to be springing

to his feet; he must be allowed to remain as he is in sublime repose

like the other figures and like the proposed statue of the Pope (which

was not, however, executed by Michelangelo himself). But then the

statue we see before us cannot be that of a man filled with wrath, of

Moses when he came down from Mount Sinai and found his people

faithless and threw down the Holy Tables so that they were broken.

And, indeed, I can recollect my own disillusionment when, during my,

first visits to San Pietro in Vincoli, I used to sit down in front of the

statue in the expectation that I should now see how it would start up

on its raised foot, dash the Tables of the Law to the ground and let fly

its  wrath.  Nothing  of  the  kind  happened.  Instead,  the  stone  image

became  more  and  more  transfixed,  an  almost  oppressively  solemn

calm emanated from it, and I was obliged to realize that something

was represented here that could stay without change; that this Moses

would remain sitting like this in his wrath for ever.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2853

 

      But  if  we  have  to  abandon  our  interpretation  of  the  statue  as

showing Moses just before his outburst of wrath at the sight of the

Golden  Calf,  we  have  no  alternative  but  to  accept  one  of  the

hypotheses  which  regard  it  as  a  study  of  character.  Thode’s  view

seems to be the least arbitrary and to have the closest reference to

the  meaning  of  its  movements.  He  says,  ‘Here,  as  always,  he  is

concerned with representing a certain type of character. He creates

the image of a passionate leader of mankind who, conscious of his

divine mission as Lawgiver, meets the uncomprehending opposition of

men. The only means of representing a man of action of this kind was

to accentuate the power of his will, and this was done by a rendering

of movement pervading the whole of his apparent quiet, as we see in

the turn of his head, the tension of his muscles and the position of his

left foot. These are the same distinguishing marks that we find againin  the vir  activus  of  the  Medici  Chapel  in  Florence.  This  general

character of the figure is further heightened by laying stress on the

conflict which is bound to arise between such a reforming genius and

the rest of mankind. Emotions of anger, contempt and pain are typified

in him. Without them it would not have been possible to portray the

nature of a superman of this kind. Michelangelo has created, not a

historical  figure,  but  a  character-type,  embodying  an  inexhaustible

inner force which tames the recalcitrant world; and he has given a

form not only to the Biblical narrative of Moses, but to his own inner

experiences, and to his impressions both of the individuality of Julius

himself, and also, I believe, of the underlying springs of Savonarola’s

perpetual conflicts.’

   This view may be brought into connection with Knackfuss’s remark

that the great secret of the effect produced by the Moses lies in the

artistic contrast between the inward fire and the outward calm of his

bearing.

   For myself, I see nothing to object to in Thode’s explanation; but I

feel the lack of something in it. Perhaps it is the need to discover a

closer parallel between the state of mind of the hero as expressed in

his attitude, and the contrast above-mentioned between his ‘outward’

calm and ‘inward’ emotion.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2854

 

                                            II

 

   Long before I had any opportunity of hearing about psycho-analysis,

I learnt that a Russian art-connoisseur, Ivan Lermolieff,¹ had caused a

revolution in the art galleries of Europe by questioning the authorship

of  many  pictures,  showing  how  to  distinguish  copies  from  originals

with  certainty,  and  constructing  hypothetical  artists  for  those  works

whose  former  supposed  authorship  had  been  discredited.  He

achieved this by insisting that attention should be diverted from the

general  impression  and  main  features  of  a  picture,  and  by  laying

stress on the significance of minor details, of things like the drawing ofthe fingernails, of the lobe of an ear, of halos and such unconsidered

trifles which the copyist neglects to imitate and yet which every artist

executes in his own characteristic way. I was then greatly interested to

learn that the Russian pseudonym concealed the identity of an Italian

physician called Morelli, who died in 1891 with the rank of Senator of

the  Kingdom  of  Italy.  It  seems  to  me  that  his  method  of  inquiry  is

closely  related  to  the  technique  of  psycho-analysis.  It,  too,  is

accustomed to divine secret and concealed things from despised or

unnoticed  features,  from  the  rubbish-heap,  as  it  were,  of  our

observations.

   Now in two places in the figure of Moses there are certain details

which have hitherto not only escaped notice but, in fact, have not even

been properly described. These are the attitude of his right hand and

the position of the two Tables of the Law. We may say that this hand

forms  a  very  singular,  unnatural  link,  and  one  which  calls  for

explanation, between the Tables and the wrathful hero’s beard. He

has  been  described  as  running  his  fingers  through  his  beard  and

playing with its locks, while the outer edge of his hand rests on the

Tables. But this is plainly not so. It is worth while examining more

closely what those fingers of the right hand are doing, and describing

more minutely the mighty beard with which they are in contact.²

 

   ¹ His first essays were published in German between 1874 and 1876.

   ² Cf. the illustration.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2855

 

   We now quite clearly perceive the following things: the thumb of the

hand is concealed and the index finger alone is in effective contact

with the beard. It is pressed so deeply against the soft masses of hair

that  they  bulge  out  beyond  it  both  above  and  below,  that  is,  both

towards the head and towards the abdomen. The other three fingers

are  propped  upon  the  wall  of  his  chest  and  are  bent  at  the  upper

joints; they are barely touched by the extreme right-hand lock of the

beard which falls past them. They have, as it were, withdrawn from the

beard. It is therefore not correct to say that the right hand is playingwith the beard or plunged in it; the simple truth is that the index finger

is laid over a part of the beard and makes a deep trough in it. It cannot

be denied that to press one’s beard with one finger is an extraordinary

gesture and one not easy to understand.

   The much-admired beard of Moses flows from his cheeks, chin and

upper lip in a number of waving strands which are kept distinct from

one another all the way down. One of the strands on his extreme right,

growing  from  the  cheek,  falls  down  to  the  inward-pressing  index

finger,  by  which  it  is  retained.  We  may  assume  that  it  resumes  its

course  between  that  finger  and  the  concealed  thumb.  The

corresponding strand on his left side falls practically unimpeded far

down over his breast. What has received the most unusual treatment

is the thick mass of hair on the inside of this latter strand, the part

between it and the middle line. It is not suffered to follow the turn of

the head to the left; it is forced to roll over loosely and form part of a

kind of scroll which lies across and over the strands on the inner right

side of the beard. This is because it is held fast by the pressure of the

right index finger, although it grows from the left side of the face and

is, in fact, the main portion of the whole left side of the beard. Thus,

the  main  mass  of  the  beard  is  thrown  to  the  right  of  the  figure,

whereas the head is sharply turned to the left. At the place where the

right  index  finger  is  pressed  in,  a  kind  of  whorl  of  hairs  is  formed;

strands of hair coming from the left lie over strands coming from the

right, both caught in by that despotic finger. It is only beyond this place

that the masses of hair, deflected from their course, flow freely once

more, and now they fall vertically until their ends are gathered up in

Moses’ left hand as it lies open on his lap.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2856

 

   I have no illusions as to the clarity of my description, and venture no

opinion whether the sculptor really does invite us to solve the riddle of

that  knot  in  the  beard  of  his  statue.  But  apart  from  this,  the  fact

remains that the pressure of the right index finger affects mainly the

strands of hair from the left side; and that this oblique hold preventsthe beard from accompanying the turn of the head and eyes to the left.

Now we may be allowed to ask what this arrangement means and to

what motives it owes its existence. If it was indeed considerations of

linear  and  spatial  design  which  caused  the  sculptor  to  draw  the

downward-streaming wealth of hair across to the right of the figure

which is looking to its left, how strangely unsuitable as a means does

the pressure of a single finger appear to be! And what man who, for

some reason or other, has drawn his beard over to the other side,

would take it into his head to hold down the one half across the other

by the pressure of one finger? Yet may not these minute particulars

mean nothing in reality, and may we not be racking our brains about

things which were of no moment to their creator?

   But let us proceed on the assumption that even these details have

significance. There is a solution which will remove our difficulties and

afford a glimpse of a new meaning. If the left side of Moses’ beard lies

under the pressure of his right finger, we may perhaps take this pose

as the last stage of some connection between his right hand and the

left half of his beard, a connection which was a much more intimate

one at some moment before that chosen for representation. Perhaps

his  hand  had  seized  his  beard  with  far  more  energy,  had  reached

across to its left edge, and, in returning to that position in which the

statue shows it, had been followed by a part of his beard which now

testifies to the movement which has just taken place. The loop of the

beard would thus be an indication of the path taken by this hand.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2857

 

   Thus we shall have inferred that there had been a retreating motion

of the right hand. This one assumption necessarily brings others with

it.  In  imagination  we  complete  the  scene  of  which  this  movement,

established  by  the  evidence  of  the  beard,  is  a  part;  and  we  are

brought back quite naturally to the hypothesis according to which the

resting  Moses  is  startled  by  the  clamour  of  the  people  and  the

spectacle  of  the  Golden  Calf.  He  was  sitting  there  calmly,  we  will

suppose, his head with its flowing beard facing forward, and his handin all probability not near it at all. Suddenly the clamour strikes his ear;

he turns his head and eyes in the direction from which the disturbance

comes, sees the scene and takes it in. Now wrath and indignation lay

hold of him; and he would fain leap up and punish the wrongdoers,

annihilate them. His rage, distant as yet from its object, is meanwhile

directed in a gesture against his own body. His impatient hand, ready

to  act,  clutches  at  his  beard  which  has  moved  with  the  turn  of  his

head, and presses it between his thumb and palm in the iron grasp of

his  closing  fingers.  It  is  a  gesture  whose  power  and  vehemence

remind us of other creations of Michelangelo’s. But now an alteration

takes place, as yet we do not know how or why. The hand that had

been put forward and had sunk into his beard is hastily withdrawn and

unclasped, and the fingers let go their hold; but so deeply have they

been plunged in that in their withdrawal they drag a great piece of the

left side of the beard across to the right, and this piece remains lodged

over the hair of the right under the weight of one finger, the longest

and uppermost one of the hand. And this new position, which can only

be understood with reference to the former one, is now retained.

   It is time now to pause and reflect. We have assumed that the right

hand was, to begin with, away from the beard; that then it reached

across to the left of the figure in a moment of great emotional tension

and seized the beard; and that it was finally drawn back again, taking

a part of the beard with it. We have disposed of this right hand as

though we had the free use of it. But may we do this? Is the hand

indeed so free? Must it not hold or support the Tables? Are not such

mimetic evolutions as these prohibited by its important function? And

furthermore, what could have occasioned its withdrawal if the motive

which made it leave its original position was such a strong one?

   Here are indeed fresh difficulties. It is undeniable that the right hand

is  responsible  for  the  Tables;  and  also  that  we  have  no  motive  to

account for the withdrawal we have ascribed to it. But what if both

difficulties could be solved together, and if then and then only they

presented a clear and connected sequence of events? What if it is

precisely something which is happening to the Tables that explains

the movements of the hand?

                             The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2858

 

   If we look at the drawing in Fig. 4 we shall see that the Tables

present one or two notable features hitherto not deemed worthy of

remark. It has been said that the right hand rests upon the Tables; or

again  that  it  supports  them.  And  we  can  see  at  once  that  the  two

apposed, rectangular tablets stand on one corner. If we look closer we

shall notice that the lower edge is a different shape from the upper

one, which is obliquely inclined forward.

 




















  

The upper edge is straight, whereas the lower one has a protuberance

like a horn on the part nearest to us, and the Tables touch the stone

seat precisely with this protuberance. What can be the meaning of this

detail?¹ It can hardly be doubted that this projection is meant to mark

the actual top side of the Tables, as regards the writing. It is only the

top edge of rectangular tablets of this kind that is curved or notched.

Thus we see that the Tables are upside-down. This is a singular way

to  treat  such  sacred  objects.  They  are  stood  on  their  heads  and

practically balanced on one corner. What consideration of form could

have led Michelangelo to put them in such a position? Or was this

detail as well of no importance to the artist?

 

   ¹ Which, by the way, is quite incorrectly reproduced in a large plaster cast in the collection

of the Vienna Academy of Fine Arts.
 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2859

 

   We begin to suspect that the Tables too have arrived at their present

position as the result of a previous movement; that this movement wasa consequence of the change of place of the right hand that we have

postulated, and in its turn compelled that hand to make its subsequent

retreat. The movements of the hand and of the Tables can be co-

ordinated  in  this  way:  at  first  the  figure  of  Moses,  while  it  was  still

sitting quietly, carried the Tables perpendicularly under its right arm.

Its  right  hand  grasped  their  lower  edge  and  found  a  hold  in  the

projection on their front part. (The fact that this made them easier to

carry sufficiently accounts for the upside-down position in which the

Tables were held.) Then came the moment when Moses’ calm was

broken by the disturbance. He turned his head in its direction, and

when he saw the spectacle he lifted his foot preparatory to starting up,

let go the Tables with his hand and plunged it to the left and upwards

into his beard, as though to turn his violence against his own body.

The Tables were now consigned to the pressure of his arm, which had

to squeeze them against his side. But this support was not sufficient

and the Tables began to slip in a forward and downward direction. The

upper  edge,  which  had  been  held  horizontally,  now  began  to  face

forwards and downwards; and the lower edge, deprived of its stay,

was nearing the stone seat with its front corner. Another instant and

the Tables would have pivoted upon this new point of support, have hit

the  ground  with  the  upper  edge  foremost,  and  been  shattered  to

pieces. It is to prevent this that the right hand retreated, let go the

beard, a part of which was drawn back with it unintentionally, came

against the upper edge of the Tables in time and held them near the

hind  corner,  which  had  now  come  uppermost.  Thus  the  singularly

constrained air of the whole - beard, hand and tilted Tables - can be

traced to that one passionate movement of the hand and its natural

consequences.  If  we  wish  to  reverse  the  effects  of  those  stormy

movements, we must raise the upper front corner of the Tables and

push  it  back,  thus  lifting  their  lower  front  corner  (the  one  with  the

protuberance) from the stone seat; and then lower the right hand and

bring it under the now horizontal lower edge of the Tables.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2860

    I have procured from the hand of an artist three drawings to illustrate

my meaning. Fig. 3 reproduces the statue as it actually is; Figs. 1 and

2 represent the preceding stages according to my hypothesis - the first

that of calm, the second that of highest tension, in which the figure is

preparing to spring up and has abandoned its hold of the Tables, so

that these are beginning to slip down. Now it is remarkable how the

two  postures  in  the  imaginary  drawings  vindicate  the  incorrect

descriptions  of  earlier  writers.  Gondivi,  a  contemporary  of

Michelangelo’s, says: ‘Moses, the captain and leader of the Hebrews,

is seated in the attitude of a contemplative sage, holding the Tables of

the Law under his right arm, and leaning his chin on his left hand(!), as

one who is weary and full of care.’ No such attitude is to be seen in

Michelangelo’s  statue,  but  it  describes  almost  exactly  the  view  on

which  the  first  drawing  is  based.  Lübke  writes,  together  with  other

critics:  ‘Profoundly  shaken,  he  grasps  with  his  right  hand  his

magnificent,  flowing  beard.’  This  is  incorrect  if  we  look  at  the

reproduction of the actual statue, but it is true of the second sketch

(Fig. 2). Justi and Knapp have observed, as we have seen, that the

Tables  are  about  to  slip  down  and  are  in  danger  of  being  broken.

Thode set them right and showed that the Tables were securely held

by the right hand; yet they would have been correct if they had been

describing  not  the  statue  itself  but  the  middle  stage  of  our

reconstructed  action.  It  almost  seems  as  if  they  had  emancipated

themselves from the visual image of the statue and had unconsciously

begun an analysis of the motive forces behind it, and that that analysis

had  led  them  to  make  the  same  claim  as  we  have  done  more

consciously and more explicitly.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2861

 

                                            III

 

   We may now, I believe, permit ourselves to reap the fruits of our

endeavours.  We  have  seen  how  many  of  those  who  have  felt  the

influence  of  this  statue  have  been  impelled  to  interpret  it  asrepresenting Moses agitated by the spectacle of his people fallen from

grace  and  dancing  round  an  idol.  But  this  interpretation  had  to  be

given  up,  for  it  made  us  expect  to  see  him  spring  up  in  the  next

moment, break the Tables and accomplish the work of vengeance.

Such a conception, however, would fail to harmonize with the design

of making this figure, together with three (or five) more seated figures,

a  part  of  the  tomb  of  Julius  II.  We  may  now  take  up  again  the

abandoned interpretation, for the Moses we have reconstructed will

neither leap up nor cast the Tables from him. What we see before us

is not the inception of a violent action but the remains of a movement

that  has  already  taken  place.  In  his  first  transport  of  fury,  Moses

desired to act, to spring up and take vengeance and forget the Tables;

but he has overcome the temptation, and he will now remain seated

and still, in his frozen wrath and in his pain mingled with contempt. Nor

will he throw away the Tables so that they will break on the stones, for

it is on their especial account that he has controlled his anger; it was

to preserve them that he kept his passion in check. In giving way to

his rage and indignation, he had to neglect the Tables, and the hand

which  upheld  them  was  withdrawn.  They  began  to  slide  down  and

were  in  danger  of  being  broken.  This  brought  him  to  himself.  He

remembered his mission and for its sake renounced an indulgence of

his  feelings.  His  hand  returned  and  saved  the  unsupported  Tables

before  they  had  actually  fallen  to  the  ground.  In  this  attitude  he

remained immobilized, and in this attitude Michelangelo has portrayed

him as the guardian of the tomb.

   As our eyes travel down it the figure exhibits three distinct emotional

strata. The lines of the face reflect the feelings which have won the

ascendancy; the middle of the figure shows the traces of suppressed

movement; and the foot still retains the attitude of the projected action.

It  is  as  though  the  controlling  influence  had  proceeded  downwards

from above. No mention has been made so far of the left arm, and it

seems to claim a share in our interpretation. The hand is laid in the lap

in  a  mild  gesture  and  holds  as  though  in  a  caress  the  end  of  the

flowing beard. It seems as if it is meant to counteract the violence with

which the other hand had misused the beard a few moments ago.

   But here it will be objected that after all this is not the Moses of the

Bible. For that Moses did actually fall into a fit of rage and did throwaway the Tables and break them. This Moses must be a quite different

man, a new Moses of the artist’s conception; so that Michelangelo

must have had the presumption to emend the sacred text and to falsify

the  character  of  that  holy  man.  Can  we  think  him  capable  of  a

boldness  which  might  almost  be  said  to  approach  an  act  of

blasphemy?

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2862

 

   The passage in the Holy Scriptures which describes Moses’ action

at the scene of the Golden Calf is as follows: (Exodus xxxii. 7) ‘And

the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for thy people, which

thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves:

(8) They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded

them: they have made them a molten calf, and have worshipped it,

and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel,

which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. (9) And the Lord said

unto Moses, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiff-necked

people: (10) Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot

against them, and that I may consume them; and I will make of thee a

great nation. (11) And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said,

Lord, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou hast

brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power, and with a

mighty hand? . . .

   ‘(14) And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto

his people. (15) And Moses turned, and went down from the mount,

and the two tables of the testimony were in his hand: the tables were

written on both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they

written. (16) And the tables were the work of God, and the writing was

the writing of God, graven upon the tables. (17) And when Joshua

heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses,

There is a noise of war in the camp. (18) And he said, It is not the

voice of them that shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that

cry for being overcome; but the noise of them that sing do I hear. (19)

And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh unto the camp, that hesaw the calf, and the dancing: and Moses’ anger waxed hot, and he

cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount.

(20) And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire,

and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the water, and made the

children of Israel drink of it. . . .

   ‘(30) And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said unto the

people, Ye have sinned a great sin: and now I will go up unto the Lord;

peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin. (31) And Moses

returned unto the Lord, and said, Oh! this people have sinned a great

sin,  and  have  made  them  gods  of  gold!  (32)  Yet  now,  if  thou  wilt

forgive their sin-; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which

thou hast written. (33) And the Lord said unto Moses, Whosoever hath

sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book. (34) Therefore now

go, lead the people unto the place of which I have spoken unto thee.

Behold,  mine  Angel  shall  go  before  thee:  nevertheless,  in  the  day

when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them. (35) And the Lord plagued

the people, because they made the calf which Aaron made.’

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2863

 

   It is impossible to read the above passage in the light of modern

criticism of the Bible without finding evidence that it has been clumsily

put together from various sources. In verse 8 the Lord Himself tells

Moses that his people have fallen away and made themselves an idol;

and  Moses  intercedes  for  the  wrongdoers.  And  yet  he  speaks  to

Joshua  as  though  he  knew  nothing  of  this  (18),  and  is  suddenly

aroused  to  wrath  as  he  sees  the  scene  of  the  worshipping  of  the

Golden Calf (19). In verse 14 he has already gained a pardon from

God  for  his  erring  people,  yet  in  verse  31  he  returns  into  the

mountains to implore this forgiveness, tells God about his people’s sin

and  is  assured  of  the  postponement  of  the  punishment.  Verse  35

speaks of a visitation of his people by the Lord about which nothing

more is told us; whereas the verses 20-30 describe the punishment

which Moses himself dealt out. It is well known that the historical parts

of  the  Bible,  dealing  with  the  Exodus,  are  crowded  with  still  moreglaring incongruities and contradictions.

   The age of the Renaissance had naturally no such critical attitude

towards  the  text  of  the  Bible,  but  had  to  accept  it  as  a  consistent

whole, with the result that the passage in question was not a very

good  subject  for  representation.  According  to  the  Scriptures  Moses

was already instructed about the idolatry of his people and had ranged

himself on the side of mildness and forgiveness; nevertheless, when

he saw the Golden Calf and the dancing crowd, he was overcome by

a sudden frenzy of rage. It would therefore not surprise us to find that

the artist, in depicting the reaction of his hero to that painful surprise,

had  deviated  from  the  text  from  inner  motives.  Moreover,  such

deviations from the scriptural text on a much slighter pretext were by

no  means  unusual  or  disallowed  to  artists.  A  celebrated  picture  by

Parmigiano possessed by his native town depicts Moses sitting on the

top of a mountain and dashing the Tables to the ground, although the

Bible expressly says that he broke them ‘beneath the mount’. Even

the representation of a seated Moses finds no support in the text and

seems  rather  to  bear  out  those  critics  who  maintain  that

Michelangelo’s statue is not meant to record any particular moment in

the prophet’s life.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2864

 

   More important than his infidelity to the text of the Scriptures is the

alteration  which  Michelangelo  has,  in  our  supposition,  made  in  the

character of Moses. The Moses of legend and tradition had a hasty

temper  and  was  subject  to  fits  of  passion.  It  was  in  a  transport  of

divine wrath of this kind that he slew an Egyptian who was maltreating

an Israelite, and had to flee out of the land into the wilderness; and it

was in a similar passion that he broke the Tables of the Law, inscribed

by  God  Himself.  Tradition,  in  recording  such  a  characteristic,  is

unbiased, and preserves the impression of a great personality who

once  lived.  But  Michelangelo  has  placed  a  different  Moses  on  the

tomb of the Pope, one superior to the historical or traditional Moses.

He  has  modified  the  theme  of  the  broken  Tables;  he  does  not  letMoses break them in his wrath, but makes him be influenced by the

danger that they will be broken and makes him calm that wrath, or at

any rate prevent it from becoming an act. In this way he has added

something new and more than human to the figure of Moses; so that

the giant frame with its tremendous physical power becomes only a

concrete  expression  of  the  highest  mental  achievement  that  is

possible in a man, that of struggling successfully against an inward

passion for the sake of a cause to which he has devoted himself.

   We have now completed our interpretation of Michelangelo’s statue,

though  it  can  still  be  asked  what  motives  prompted  the  sculptor  to

select  the  figure  of  Moses,  and  a  so  greatly  altered  Moses,  as  an

adornment  for  the  tomb  of  Julius  II.  In  the  opinion  of  many  these

motives  are  to  be  found  in  the  character  of  the  Pope  and  in

Michelangelo’s relations with him. Julius II was akin to Michelangelo in

this,  that  he  attempted  to  realize  great  and  mighty  ends,  and

especially designs on a grand scale. He was a man of action and he

had  a  definite  purpose,  which  was  to  unite  Italy  under  the  Papal

supremacy. He desired to bring about single-handed what was not to

happen for several centuries, and then only through the conjunction of

many alien forces; and he worked alone, with impatience, in the short

span of sovereignty allowed him, and used violent means. He could

appreciate Michelangelo as a man of his own kind, but he often made

him smart under his sudden anger and his utter lack of consideration

for others. The artist felt the same violent force of will in himself, and,

as the more introspective thinker, may have had a premonition of the

failure to which they were both doomed. And so he carved his Moses

on the Pope’s tomb, not without a reproach against the dead pontiff,

as a warning to himself, thus, in self-criticism, rising superior to his

own nature.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2865

 

                                            IV

 

   In 1863 an Englishman, Watkiss Lloyd, devoted a little book to theMoses of Michelangelo. I succeeded in getting hold of this short essay

of forty-six pages, and read it with mixed feelings. I once more had an

opportunity  of  experiencing  in  myself  what  unworthy  and  puerile

motives enter into our thoughts and acts even in a serious cause. My

first feeling was one of regret that the author should have anticipated

so much of my thought, which seemed precious to me because it was

the result of my own efforts; and it was only in the second instance

that I was able to get pleasure from its unexpected confirmation of my

opinion. Our views, however, diverge on one very important point.

   Lloyd remarks in the first place that the usual descriptions of the

figure are incorrect, and that Moses is not in the act of rising¹ - that the

right hand is not grasping the beard, but that the index-finger alone is

resting  upon  it.²  Lloyd  also  recognizes,  and  this  is  much  more

important,  that  the  attitude  portrayed  can  only  be  explained  by

postulating a foregoing one, which is not represented, and that the

drawing of the left lock of the beard across to the right signifies that

the right hand and the left side of the beard have at a previous stage

been in closer and more natural contact. But he suggests another way

of  reconstructing  the  earlier  contact  which  must  necessarily  be

assumed.  According  to  him,  it  was  not  the  hand  which  had  been

plunged into the beard, but the beard which had been where the hand

now  is.  We  must,  he  says,  imagine  that  just  before  the  sudden

interruption the head of the statue was turned far round to its right

over the hand which, then as now, was holding the Tables of the Law.

The pressure (of the Tables) against the palm of the hand caused the

fingers to open naturally beneath the flowing locks of the beard, and

the sudden turn of the head to the other side resulted in a part of the

beard  being  detained  for  an  instant  by  the  motionless  hand  and

forming the loop of hair which is to be looked on as a mark of the

course it has taken - its ‘wake’, to use Lloyd’s own word.

 

   ¹ ‘But he is not rising or preparing to rise; the bust is fully upright, not thrown forward for the

alteration of balance preparatory for such a movement. . . .’ (LIoyd, 1863, 10).

   ² ‘Such a description is altogether erroneous; the fillets of the beard are detained by the

right hand but they are not held, nor grasped, enclosed or taken hold of. They are even
detained  but  momentarily  -  momentarily  engaged,  they  are  on  the  point  of  being  free  for
disengagement’ (ibid., 11).
                             The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2866

 

      In  rejecting  the  other  possibility,  that  of  the  right  hand  having

previously been in contact with the left side of the beard, Lloyd has

allowed himself to be influenced by a consideration which shows how

near he came to our interpretation. He says that it was not possible for

the prophet, even in very great agitation, to have put out his hand to

draw his beard across to the right. For in that case his fingers would

have  been  in  an  entirely  different  position;  and,  moreover,  such  a

movement would have allowed the Tables to slip down, since they are

only supported by the pressure of the right arm - unless, in Moses’

endeavour to save them at the last moment, we think of them as being

‘clutched by a gesture so awkward that to imagine it is profanation’.

   It is easy to see what the writer has overlooked. He has correctly

interpreted  the  anomalies  of  the  beard  as  indicating  a  preceding

movement, but he has omitted to apply the same explanation to the no

less unnatural details in the position of the Tables. He examines only

the data connected with the beard and not those connected with the

Tables, whose position he assumes to be the original one. In this way

he  closes  the  door  to  a  conception  like  ours  which,  by  examining

certain  insignificant  details,  has  arrived  at  an  unexpected

interpretation of the meaning and aim of the figure as a whole.

   But what if both of us have strayed on to a wrong path? What if we

have  taken  too  serious  and  profound  a  view  of  details  which  were

nothing to the artist, details which he had introduced quite arbitrarily or

for some purely formal reasons with no hidden intention behind? What

if we have shared the fate of so many interpreters who have thought

they  saw  quite  clearly  things  which  the  artist  did  not  intend  either

consciously or unconsciously? I cannot tell. I cannot say whether it is

reasonable to credit Michelangelo - an artist in whose works there is

so  much  thought  striving  for  expression  -  with  such  an  elementary

want  of  precision,  and  especially  whether  this  can  be  assumed  in

regard  to  the  striking  and  singular  features  of  the  statue  under

discussion. And finally we may be allowed to point out, in all modesty,

that  the  artist  is  no  less  responsible  than  his  interpreters  for  the

obscurity which surrounds his work. In his creations Michelangelo hasoften enough gone to the utmost limit of what is expressible in art; and

perhaps in his statue of Moses he has not completely succeeded, if

his purpose was to make the passage of a violent gust of passion

visible in the signs left behind it in the ensuing calm.

 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo

                                                                                      2867

 
































 


                            The Moses Of Michelangelo                                                                                      2868

 

                                    POSTSCRIPT

                                        (1927)

 

   Several years after the publication of my paper on the Moses of

Michelangelo,  which  appeared  anonymously  in Imago  in  1914,  Dr.

Ernest Jones very kindly sent me a copy of the April number of the

Burlington Magazine of 1921 (Vol. XXXVIII), which could not fail to

turn my interest once more to the interpretation of the statue which I

had originally suggested. This number contains (pp. 157-66) a short

article by H. P. Mitchell on two bronzes of the twelfth century, now in

the  Ashmolean  Museum  at  Oxford,  which  are  attributed  to  an

outstanding artist of that day, Nicholas of Verdun. We possess other

works by the same hand in Tournay, Arras and Klosterneuburg, near

Vienna; his masterpiece is considered to be the Shrine of the Three

Kings in Cologne.

   One of the two statuettes described by Mitchell, which is just over 9

inches high, is identifiable beyond all doubt as a Moses, because of

the two Tables of the Law which he holds in his hand. This Moses,

too, is represented as seated, enveloped in a flowing robe. His face is

expressive of strong passion, mixed, perhaps, with grief; and his hand

grasps  his  long  beard  and  presses  its  strands  between  palm  and

thumb as in a vice. He is, that is to say, making the very gesture which

I postulated in Fig. 2 of my former paper as a preliminary stage of the

attitude into which Michelangelo has cast him.

      A  glance  at  the  accompanying  illustration  will  show  the  main

difference between the two compositions, which are separated from

each other by an interval of more than three centuries. The Moses of

the Lorraine artist is holding the Tables by their top edge with his left

hand, resting them on his knee. If we were to transfer them to the

other side of his body and put them under his right arm we should

have established the preliminary posture of Michelangelo’s Moses. If

my view of the thrusting of the hand into the beard is right, then the

Moses  of  the  year  1180  shows  us  an  instant  during  his  storm  of

feeling, whilst the statue in S. Pietro in Vincoli depicts the calm when

the storm is over.   In my opinion this new piece of evidence increases the probability

that the interpretation which I attempted in 1914 was a correct one.

Perhaps some connoisseur of art will be able to bridge the gulf in time

between  the  Moses  of  Nicholas  of  Verdun  and  the  Moses  of  the

Master  of  the  Italian  Renaissance  by  telling  us  where  examples  of

representations of Moses belonging to the intervening period are to be

found.

                                                                                       2869

 

        SOME REFLECTIONS ON SCHOOLBOY PSYCHOLOGY

                                        (1914)

 


                                                                                      2870

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2871

 

        SOME REFLECTIONS ON SCHOOLBOY PSYCHOLOGY

 

It gives you a queer feeling if, late in life, you are ordered once again

to write a school essay. But you obey automatically, like the old soldier

who, at the word ‘Attention!’, cannot help dropping whatever he may

have in his hands and who finds his little fingers pressed along the

seams of his trousers. It is strange how readily you obey the orders,

as though nothing in particular had happened in the last half-century.

But in fact you have grown old in the interval, you are on the eve of

your  sixtieth  birthday,  and  your  physical  feelings,  as  well  as  your

mirror, show unmistakably how far your life’s candle is burnt down.

   As little as ten years ago, perhaps, you may have had moments at

which you suddenly felt quite young again. As you walked through the

streets of Vienna - already a grey-beard, and weighed down by all the

cares  of  family  life  -  you  might  come  unexpectedly  on  some  well-

preserved,  elderly  gentleman  and  would  greet  him  humbly  almost,

because  you  had  recognized  him  as  one  of  your  former

schoolmasters. But afterwards you would stop and reflect: ‘Was that

really he? or only some one deceptively like him? How youthful he

looks! And how old you yourself have grown! How old can he be to-

day? Can it be possible that the men who used to stand for us as

types of adulthood were really so little older than we were?’

   At such moments as these, I used to find, the present time seemed

to sink into obscurity and the years between ten and eighteen wouldrise  from  the  corners  of  my  memory,  with  all  their  guesses  and

illusions, their painful distortions and heartening successes - my first

glimpses of an extinct civilization (which in my case was to bring me

as much consolation as anything else in the struggles of life), my first

contacts with the sciences, among which it seemed open to me to

choose to which of them I should dedicate what were no doubt my

inestimable services. And I seem to remember that through the whole

of this time there ran a premonition of a task ahead, till it found open

expression in my school-leaving essay as a wish that I might during

the course of my life contribute something to our human knowledge.

 


                  Some Reflections On Schoolboy Psychology

                                                                                      2872

 

   Later I became a physician - or a psychologist, rather - and was able

to create a new psychological discipline, something that is known as

‘psycho-analysis’, which is followed to-day with excited interest, and is

greeted  with  praise  and  blame,  by  physicians  and  enquirers  in

neighbouring, and in distant, foreign lands - but least of all, of course,

in our own country.

      As  a  psycho-analyst  I  am  bound  to  be  concerned  more  with

emotional  than  intellectual  processes,  with  unconscious  than  with

conscious mental life. My emotion at meeting my old schoolmaster

warns me to make a first admission: it is hard to decide whether what

affected  us  more  and  was  of  greater  importance  to  us  was  our

concern  with  the  sciences  that  we  were  taught  or  with  the

personalities  of  our  teachers.  It  is  true,  at  least,  that  this  second

concern was a perpetual undercurrent in all of us, and that in many of

us the path to the sciences led only through our teachers. Some of us

stopped half-way along that path, and for a few - why not admit as

much? - it was on that account blocked for good and all.

      We  courted  them  or  turned  our  backs  on  them,  we  imagined

sympathies and antipathies in them which probably had no existence,

we studied their characters and on theirs we formed or misformed our

own. They called up our fiercest opposition and forced us to complete

submission; we peered into their little weaknesses, and took pride intheir excellences, their knowledge and their justice. At bottom we felt a

great affection for them if they gave us any ground for it, though I

cannot tell how many of them were aware of this. But it cannot be

denied that our position in regard to them was a quite remarkable one

and  one  which  may  well  have  had  its  inconvenience  for  those

concerned. We were from the very first equally inclined to love and to

hate them, to criticize and respect them. Psycho-analysis has given

the name of ‘ambivalence’ to this readiness to contradictory attitudes,

and it has no difficulty in pointing to the source of ambivalent feelings

of such a kind.

 


                  Some Reflections On Schoolboy Psychology

                                                                                      2873

 

   For psycho-analysis has taught us that the individual’s emotional

attitudes to other people, which are of such extreme importance to his

later behaviour, are already established at an unexpectedly early age.

The nature and quality of the human child’s relations to people of his

own and the opposite sex have already been laid down in the first six

years of his life. He may afterwards develop and transform them in

certain directions but he can no longer get rid of them. The people to

whom he is in this way fixed are his parents and his brothers and

sisters.  All  those  whom  he  gets  to  know  later  become  substitute

figures for these first objects of his feelings. (We should perhaps add

to his parents any other people, such as nurses, who cared for him in

his infancy.) These substitute figures can be classified from his point

of view according as they are derived from what we call the ‘imagos’

of his father, his mother, his brothers and sisters, and so on. His later

acquaintances  are  thus  obliged  to  take  over  a  kind  of  emotional

heritage; they encounter sympathies and antipathies to the production

of which they themselves have contributed little. All of his later choices

of friendship and love follow upon the basis of the memory-traces left

behind by these first prototypes.

      Of  all  the  imagos  of  a  childhood  which,  as  a  rule,  is  no  longer

remembered, none is more important for a youth or a man than that of

his father. Organic necessity introduces into a man’s relation to hisfather an emotional ambivalence which we have found most strikingly

expressed in the Greek myth of King Oedipus. A little boy is bound to

love and admire his father, who seems to him the most powerful, the

kindest and the wisest creature in the world. God himself is after all

only an exaltation of this picture of a father as he is represented in the

mind  of  early  childhood.  But  soon  the  other  side  of  this  emotional

relationship  emerges.  One’s  father  is  recognized  as  the  paramount

disturber  of  one’s  instinctual  life;  he  becomes  a  model  not  only  to

imitate but also to get rid of, in order to take his place. Thenceforward

affectionate  and  hostile  impulses  towards  him  persist  side  by  side,

often to the end of one’s life, without either of them being able to do

away with the other. It is in this existence of contrary feelings side by

side  that  lies  the  essential  character  of  what  we  call  emotional

ambivalence.

 


                  Some Reflections On Schoolboy Psychology

                                                                                      2874

 

   In the second half of childhood a change sets in in the boy’s relation

to his father - a change whose importance cannot be exaggerated.

From  his  nursery  the  boy  begins  to  cast  his  eyes  upon  the  world

outside. And he cannot fail now to make discoveries which undermine

his  original  high  opinion  of  his  father  and  which  expedite  his

detachment from his first ideal. He finds that his father is no longer the

mightiest, wisest and richest of beings; he grows dissatisfied with him,

he  learns  to  criticize  him  and  to  estimate  his  place  in  society;  and

then, as a rule, he makes him pay heavily for the disappointment that

has  been  caused  by  him.  Everything  that  is  hopeful,  as  well  as

everything that is unwelcome, in the new generation is determined by

this detachment from the father.

      It  is  in  this  phase  of  a  youth’s  development  that  he  comes  into

contact with his teachers. So that we can now understand our relation

to our schoolmasters. These men, not all of whom were in fact fathers

themselves,  became  our  substitute  fathers.  That  was  why,  even

though they were still quite young, they struck us as so mature and so

unattainably  adult.  We  transferred  on  to  them  the  respect  andexpectations attaching to the omniscient father of our childhood, and

we then began to treat them as we treated our fathers at home. We

confronted them with the ambivalence that we had acquired in our

own families and with its help we struggled with them as we had been

in the habit of struggling with our fathers in the flesh. Unless we take

into account our nurseries and our family homes, our behaviour to our

schoolmasters would be not only incomprehensible but inexcusable.

      As  schoolboys  we  had  other  and  scarcely  less  important

experiences  with  the  successors  of  our  brothers  and  sisters  -  our

schoolfellows  -  but  these  must  be  described  elsewhere.  In  a

commemoration of the jubilee of our school it is on the masters that

our thoughts must rest.

                                                                                       2875

 

    ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHO-ANALYTIC MOVEMENT

                                        (1914)

 


                                                                                      2876

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2877

 

    ON THE HISTORY OF THE PSYCHO-ANALYTIC MOVEMENT

 

                                  Fluctuat nec mergitur ¹

                        (On the coat of arms of the City of Paris)

 

                                            I

 

No  one  need  be  surprised  at  the  subjective  character  of  the

contribution  I  propose  to  make  here  to  the  history  of  the  psycho-

analytic movement, nor need anyone wonder at the part I play in it.

For psycho-analysis is my creation; for ten years I was the only person

who concerned himself with it, and all the dissatisfaction which the

new phenomenon aroused in my contemporaries has been poured out

in the form of criticisms on my head. Although it is a long time now

since  I  was  the  only  psycho-analyst,  I  consider  myself  justified  in

maintaining that even to-day no one can know better than I do what

psycho-analysis is, how it differs from other ways of investigating the

life of the mind, and precisely what should be called psycho-analysis

and  what  would  better  be  described  by  some  other  name.  In  thus

repudiating what seems to me a cool act of usurpation, I am indirectly

informing the readers of this Jahrbuch the events that have led to the

changes in its editorship and format.

 

   ¹ [ ’It is tossed by the waves, but does not sink’.] 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2878

 

 

   In 1909, in the lecture-room of an American university, I had my first

opportunity  of  speaking  in  public  about  psycho-analysis.¹  The

occasion  was  a  momentous  one  for  my  work,  and  moved  by  this

thought  I  then  declared  that  it  was  not  I  who  had  brought  psycho-

analysis into existence: the credit for this was due to someone else, to

Josef Breuer, whose work had been done at a time when I was still a

student engaged in passing my examinations (1880-2). Since I gave

those lectures, however, some well-disposed friends have suggested

to  me  a  doubt  whether  my  gratitude  was  not  expressed  too

extravagantly on that occasion. In their view I ought to have done as I

had  previously  been  accustomed  to  do:  treated  Breuer’s  ‘cathartic

procedure’ as a preliminary stage of psycho-analysis, and represented

psycho-analysis  itself  as  beginning  with  my  discarding  the  hypnotic

technique  and  introducing  free  associations.  It  is  of  no  great

importance  in  any  case  whether  the  history  of  psycho-analysis  is

reckoned  as  beginning  with  the  cathartic  method  or  with  my

modification  of  it;  I  refer  to  this  uninteresting  point  merely  because

certain  opponents  of  psycho-analysis  have  a  habit  of  occasionally

recollecting that after all the art of psycho-analysis was not invented

by  me,  but  by  Breuer.  This  only  happens,  of  course,  if  their  views

allow them to find something in it deserving attention; if they set no

such limits to their rejection of it, psycho-analysis is always without

question my work alone. I have never heard that Breuer’s great share

in  psycho-analysis  has  earned  him  a  proportionate  measure  of

criticism  and  abuse.  As  I  have  long  recognized  that  to  stir  up

contradiction and arouse bitterness is the inevitable fate of psycho-

analysis,  I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  I  must  be  the  true

originator of all that is particularly characteristic in it. I am happy to be

able to add that none of the efforts to minimize my part in creating this

much-abused analysis have ever come from Breuer himself or could

claim any support from him.

      Breuer’s  discoveries  have  so  often  been  described  that  I  candispense  with  discussing  them  in  detail  here.  These  were  the

fundamental fact that the symptoms of hysterical patients are founded

upon scenes in their past lives which have made a great impression

on them but have been forgotten (traumas); the therapy founded upon

this,  which  consisted  in  causing  them  to  remember  and  reproduce

these experiences in a state of hypnosis (catharsis); and the fragment

of theory inferred from it, which was that these symptoms represented

an abnormal employment of amounts of excitation which had not been

disposed  of  (conversion).  Whenever  Breuer,  in  his  theoretical

contribution to the Studies on Hysteria (1895), referred to this process

of  conversion,  he  always  added  my  name  in  brackets  after  it,  as

though  the  priority  for  this  first  attempt  at  theoretical  evaluation

belonged to me. I believe that actually this distinction relates only to

the  name,  and  that  the  conception  came  to  us  simultaneously  and

together.

 

   ¹ In my ‘Five Lectures’ (1910a), delivered at Clark University.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2879

 

   It is well known, too, that after Breuer made his first discovery of the

cathartic method he let it rest for a number of years, and only took it

up  again  at  my  instigation,  on  my  return  from  my  studies  under

Charcot. He had a large consulting practice in medicine which made

great  claims  on  him;  I  myself  had  only  unwillingly  taken  up  the

profession  of  medicine,  but  I  had  at  that  time  a  strong  motive  for

helping people suffering from nervous affections or at least for wishing

to  understand  something  about  their  states.  I  had  embarked  upon

physical  therapy,  and  had  felt  absolutely  helpless  after  the

disappointing results from my study of Erb’s Elektrotherapie, which put

forward such a number of indications and recommendations. If I did

not  at  the  time  arrive  on  my  own  account  at  the  conclusion  which

Möbius established later, that the successes of electrical treatment in

nervous patients are the effects of suggestion, there is no doubt that

only the total absence of these promised successes was to blame.

Treatment by suggestion during deep hypnosis, which I learned fromLiébeault’s  and  Bernheim’s  highly  impressive  demonstrations,  then

seemed  to  offer  a  satisfactory  substitute  for  the  failure  of  electrical

treatment.  But  the  practice  of investigating  patients  in  a  state  of

hypnosis, with which Breuer made me acquainted - a practice which

combined  an  automatic  mode  of  operation  with  the  satisfaction  of

scientific  curiosity  -  was  bound  to  be  incomparably  more  attractive

than  the  monotonous,  forcible  prohibitions  used  in  treatment  by

suggestion, prohibitions which stood in the way of all research.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2880

 

   We have recently received a piece of advice, purporting to represent

one of the latest developments of psycho-analysis, to the effect that

the current conflict and the exciting cause of illness are to be brought

into the foreground in analysis. Now this is exactly what Breuer and I

used to do at the beginning of our work with the cathartic method. We

led the patient’s attention directly to the traumatic scene in which the

symptom  had  arisen,  and  we  endeavoured  to  discover  the  mental

conflict in that scene and to release the suppressed affect in it. In the

course of this we discovered the mental process, characteristic of the

neuroses, which I later named ‘regression’. The patient’s associations

moved  back  from  the  scene  which  we  were  trying  to  elucidate  to

earlier experiences, and compelled the analysis, which was supposed

to correct the present, to occupy itself with the past. This regression

led constantly further backwards; at first it seemed regularly to bring

us  to  puberty;  later  on,  failures  and  points  which  still  eluded

explanation  drew  the  analytic  work  still  further  back  into  years  of

childhood  which  had  hitherto  been  inaccessible  to  any  kind  of

exploration.  This  regressive  direction  became  an  important

characteristic  of  analysis.  It  appeared  that  psycho-analysis  could

explain  nothing  belonging  to  the  present  without  referring  back  to

something past; indeed, that every pathogenic experience implied a

previous experience which, though not in itself pathogenic, had yet

endowed the later one with its pathogenic quality. The temptation to

confine one’s attention to the known present exciting cause was sostrong, however, that even in later analyses I gave way to it. In the

analysis  of  the  patient  I  named  ‘Dora’,  carried  out  in  1899,  I  had

knowledge of the scene which occasioned the outbreak of the current

illness. I tried innumerable times to submit this experience to analysis,

but even direct demands always failed to produce from her anything

more than the same meagre and incomplete description of it. Not until

a  long  détour,  leading  back  over  her  earliest  childhood,  had  been

made,  did  a  dream  present  itself  which  on  analysis  brought  to  her

mind  the  hitherto  forgotten  details  of  this  scene,  so  that  a

comprehension and a solution of the current conflict became possible.

   This one example shows how very misleading is the advice referred

to above, and what a degree of scientific regression is represented by

the  neglect  of  regression  in  analytic  technique  which  is  thus

recommended to us.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2881

 

   The first difference between Breuer and myself came to light on a

question  concerning  the  finer  psychical  mechanism  of  hysteria.  He

gave  preference  to  a  theory  which  was  still  to  some  extent

physiological, as one might say; he tried to explain the mental splitting

in  hysterical  patients  by  the  absence  of  communication  between

various mental states (‘states of consciousness’, as we called them at

that time), and he therefore constructed the theory of ‘hypnoid states’,

the  products  of  which  were  supposed  to  penetrate  into  ‘waking

consciousness’  like  unassimilated  foreign  bodies.  I  had  taken  the

matter less scientifically; everywhere I seemed to discern motives and

tendencies  analogous  to  those  of  everyday  life,  and  I  looked  upon

psychical splitting itself as an effect of a process of repelling which at

that time I called ‘defence’, and later, ‘repression’. I made a short-lived

attempt to allow the two mechanisms a separate existence side by

side, but as observation showed me always and only one thing, it was

not  long  before  my  ‘defence’  theory  took  up  its  stand  opposite  his

‘hypnoid’ one.

   I am quite sure, however, that this opposition between our views hadnothing to do with the breach in our relations which followed shortly

after. This had deeper causes, but it came about in such a way that at

first I did not understand it; it was only later that I learnt from many

clear indications how to interpret it. It will be remembered that Breuer

said  of  his  famous  first  patient  that  the  element  of  sexuality  was

astonishingly undeveloped in her and had contributed nothing to the

very rich clinical picture of the case. I have always wondered why the

critics  did  not  more  often  cite  this  assertion  of  Breuer’s  as  an

argument against my contention of a sexual aetiology in the neuroses,

and even to-day I do not know whether I ought to regard the omission

as evidence of tact or of carelessness on their part. Anyone who reads

the history of Breuer’s case now in the light of the knowledge gained

in the last twenty years will at once perceive the symbolism in it - the

snakes, the stiffening, the paralysis of the arm - and, on taking into

account the situation at the bedside of the young woman’s sick father,

will easily guess the real interpretation of her symptoms; his opinion of

the part played by sexuality in her mental life will therefore be very

different from that of her doctor. In his treatment of her case, Breuer

was able to make use of a very intense suggestive rapport with the

patient, which may serve us as a complete prototype of what we call

‘transference’ to-day. Now I have strong reasons for suspecting that

after  all  her  symptoms  had  been  relieved  Breuer  must  have

discovered  from  further  indications  the  sexual  motivation  of  this

transference,  but  that  the  universal  nature  of  this  unexpected

phenomenon escaped him, with the result that, as though confronted

by an ‘untoward event’,¹ he broke off all further investigation. He never

said this to me in so many words, but he told me enough at different

times  to  justify  this  reconstruction  of  what  happened.  When  I  later

began  more  and  more  resolutely  to  put  forward  the  significance  of

sexuality in the aetiology of neuroses, he was the first to show the

reaction  of  distaste  and  repudiation  which  was  later  to  become  so

familiar to me, but which at that time I had not yet learnt to recognize

as my inevitable fate.

   The fact of the emergence of the transference in its crudely sexual

form, whether affectionate or hostile, in every treatment of a neurosis,

although this is neither desired nor induced by either doctor or patient,

has always seemed to me the most irrefragable proof that the sourceof the driving forces of neurosis lies in sexual life. This argument has

never received anything approaching the degree of attention that it

merits, for if it had, investigations in this field would leave no other

conclusion  open.  As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  this  argument  has

remained the decisive one, over and above the more specific findings

of analytic work.

 

   ¹ [In English in the original.]

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2882

 

 

   There was some consolation for the bad reception accorded to my

contention of a sexual aetiology in the neuroses even by my more

intimate circle of friends - for a vacuum rapidly formed itself about my

person - in the thought that I was taking up the fight for a new and

original  idea.  But,  one  day,  certain  memories  gathered  in  my  mind

which disturbed this pleasing notion, but which gave me in exchange a

valuable insight into the processes of human creative activity and the

nature of human knowledge. The idea for which I was being made

responsible had by no means originated with me. It had been imparted

to me by three people whose opinion had commanded my deepest

respect  -  by  Breuer  himself,  by  Charcot,  and  by  Chrobak,  the

gynaecologist at the University, perhaps the most eminent of all our

Vienna physicians. These three men had all communicated to me a

piece of knowledge which, strictly speaking, they themselves did not

possess. Two of them later denied having done so when I reminded

them of the fact; the third (the great Charcot) would probably have

done the same if it had been granted me to see him again. But these

three identical opinions, which I had heard without understanding, had

lain dormant in my mind for years, until one day they awoke in the

form of an apparently original discovery.

      One  day,  when  I  was  a  young  house-physician,  I  was  walking

across  the  town  with  Breuer,  when  a  man  came  up  who  evidently

wanted to speak to him urgently. I fell behind. As soon as Breuer was

free, he told me in his friendly, instructive way that this man was thehusband of a patient of his and had brought him some news of her.

The wife, he added, was behaving in such a peculiar way in society

that she had been brought to him for treatment as a nervous case. He

concluded: ‘These things are always secrets d’alcôve!’ I asked him in

astonishment  what  he  meant,  and  he  answered  by  explaining  the

word alcôve  (‘marriage-bed’)  to  me,  for  he  failed  to  realize  how

extraordinary the matter of his statement seemed to me.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2883

 

      Some  years  later,  at  one  of  Charcot’s  evening  receptions,  I

happened to be standing near the great teacher at a moment when he

appeared  to  be  telling  Brouardel  a  very  interesting  story  about

something that had happened during his day’s work. I hardly heard the

beginning,  but  gradually  my  attention  was  seized  by  what  he  was

talking of: a young married couple from a distant country in the East -

the woman a severe sufferer, the man either impotent or exceedingly

awkward. ‘Tâchez donc,’ I heard Charcot repeating, ‘je vous assure,

vous  y  arriverez.’¹  Brouardel,  who  spoke  less  loudly,  must  have

expressed his astonishment that symptoms like the wife’s could have

been produced by such circumstances. For Charcot suddenly broke

out with great animation: ‘Mais, dans des cas pareils c’est toujours la

chose génitale, toujours . . . toujours . . . toujours’;² and he crossed his

arms over his stomach, hugging himself and jumping up and down on

his toes several times in his own characteristically lively way. I know

that for a moment I was almost paralysed with amazement and said to

myself: ‘Well, but if he knows that, why does he never say so?’ But the

impression was soon forgotten; brain anatomy and the experimental

induction of hysterical paralyses absorbed all my interest.

   A year later, I had begun my medical career in Vienna as a lecturer

in nervous diseases, and in everything relating to the aetiology of the

neuroses I was still as ignorant and innocent as one could expect of a

promising  student  trained  at  a  university.  One  day  I  had  a  friendly

message from Chrobak, asking me to take a woman patient of his to

whom he could not give enough time, owing to his new appointmentas a University teacher. I arrived at the patient’s house before he did

and found that she was suffering from attacks of meaningless anxiety,

and  could  only  be  soothed  by  the  most  precise  information  about

where her doctor was at every moment of the day. When Chrobak

arrived he took me aside and told me that the patient’s anxiety was

due to the fact that although she had been married for eighteen years

she was still virgo intacta. The husband was absolutely impotent. In

such cases, he said, there was nothing for a medical man to do but to

shield this domestic misfortune with his own reputation, and put up

with it if people shrugged their shoulders and said of him: ‘He’s no

good if he can’t cure her after so many years.’ The sole prescription

for such a malady, he added, is familiar enough to us, but we cannot

order it. It runs:

 

                                                ‘Rx         Penis normalis

                                                                                    dosim

                                                                        repetatur!’

 

I had never heard of such a prescription, and felt inclined to shake my

head over my kind friend’s cynicism.

 

   ¹ [‘Go on trying! I promise you, you’ll succeed.’]

   ² [‘But in this sort of case it’s always a question of the genitals - always, always, always.’]

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2884

 

      I  have  not  of  course  disclosed  the  illustrious  parentage  of  this

scandalous idea in order to saddle other people with the responsibility

for it. I am well aware that it is one thing to give utterance to an idea

once or twice in the form of a passing aperçu, and quite another to

mean it seriously - to take it literally and pursue it in the face of every

contradictory detail, and to win it a place among accepted truths. It is

the difference between a casual flirtation and a legal marriage with all

its duties and difficulties. ‘Épouser les idées de . . .’¹ is no uncommon

figure of speech, at any rate in French.

    Among the other new factors which were added to the cathartic

procedure  as  a  result  of  my  work  and  which  transformed  it  into

psycho-analysis, I may mention in particular the theory of repression

and  resistance,  the  recognition  of  infantile  sexuality,  and  the

interpreting and exploiting of dreams as a source of knowledge of the

unconscious.

   The theory of repression quite certainly came to me independently

of any other source; I know of no outside impression which might have

suggested it to me, and for a long time I imagined it to be entirely

original,  until  Otto  Rank  (1911a)  showed  us  a  passage  in

Schopenhauer’s World  as  Will  and  Idea  in  which  the  philosopher

seeks to give an explanation of insanity. What he says there about the

struggle against accepting a distressing piece of reality coincides with

my concept of repression so completely that once again I owe the

chance of making a discovery to my not being well-read. Yet others

have  read  the  passage  and  passed  it  by  without  making  this

discovery, and perhaps the same would have happened to me if in my

young days I had had more taste for reading philosophical works. In

later years I have denied myself the very great pleasure of reading the

works of Nietzsche, with the deliberate object of not being hampered

in working out the impressions received in psycho-analysis by any sort

of anticipatory ideas. I had therefore to be prepared - and I am so,

gladly - to forgo all claims to priority in the many instances in which

laborious psycho-analytic investigation can merely confirm the truths

which the philosopher recognized by intuition.

 

   ¹ [‘To espouse an idea.’]

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2885

 

   The theory of repression is the corner-stone on which the whole

structure of psycho-analysis rests. It is the most essential part of it;

and yet it is nothing but a theoretical formulation of a phenomenon

which may be observed as often as one pleases if one undertakes an

analysis of a neurotic without resorting to hypnosis. In such cases one

comes across a resistance which opposes the work of analysis and inorder to frustrate it pleads a failure of memory. The use of hypnosis

was  bound  to  hide  this  resistance;  the  history  of  psycho-analysis

proper, therefore, only begins with the new technique that dispenses

with  hypnosis.  The  theoretical  consideration  of  the  fact  that  this

resistance coincides with an amnesia leads inevitably to the view of

unconscious mental activity which is peculiar to psycho-analysis and

which,  too,  distinguishes  it  quite  clearly  from  philosophical

speculations  about  the  unconscious.  It  may  thus  be  said  that  the

theory of psycho-analysis is an attempt to account for two striking and

unexpected facts of observation which emerge whenever an attempt

is made to trace the symptoms of a neurotic back to their sources in

his past life: the facts of transference and of resistance. Any line of

investigation which recognizes these two facts and takes them as the

starting-point of its work has a right to call itself psycho-analysis, even

though it arrives at results other than my own. But anyone who takes

up other sides of the problem while avoiding these two hypotheses will

hardly escape a charge of misappropriation of property by attempted

impersonation, if he persists in calling himself a psycho-analyst.

   If anyone sought to place the theory of repression and resistance

among  the premisses  instead  of  the findings  of  psycho-analysis,  I

should oppose him most emphatically. Such premisses of a general

psychological and biological nature do exist, and it would be useful to

consider them on some other occasion; but the theory of repression is

a product of psycho-analytic work, a theoretical inference legitimately

drawn from innumerable observations.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2886

 

 

   Another product of this sort was the hypothesis of infantile sexuality.

This, however, was made at a much later date. In the early days of

tentative investigation by analysis no such thing was thought of. At

first  it  was  merely  observed  that  the  effects  of  present-day

experiences  had  to  be  traced  back  to  something  in  the  past.  But

enquirers  often  find  more  than  they  bargain  for.  One  was  drawnfurther and further back into the past; one hoped at last to be able to

stop  at  puberty,  the  period  in  which  the  sexual  impulses  are

traditionally supposed to awake. But in vain; the tracks led still further

back into childhood and into its earlier years. On the way, a mistaken

idea had to be overcome which might have been almost fatal to the

young science. Influenced by Charcot’s view of the traumatic origin of

hysteria, one was readily inclined to accept as true and aetiologically

significant  the  statements  made  by  patients  in  which  they  ascribed

their  symptoms  to  passive  sexual  experiences  in  the  first  years  of

childhood - to put it bluntly, to seduction. When this aetiology broke

down under the weight of its own improbability and contradiction in

definitely ascertainable circumstances, the result at first was helpless

bewilderment. Analysis had led back to these infantile sexual traumas

by the right path, and yet they were not true. The firm ground of reality

was gone. At that time I would gladly have given up the whole work,

just as my esteemed predecessor, Breuer, had done when he made

his  unwelcome  discovery.  Perhaps  I  persevered  only  because  I  no

longer  had  any  choice  and  could  not  then  begin  again  at  anything

else.  At  last  came  the  reflection  that,  after  all,  one  had  no  right  to

despair because one has been deceived in one’s expectations; one

must revise those expectations. If hysterical subjects trace back their

symptoms  to  traumas  that  are  fictitious,  then  the  new  fact  which

emerges is precisely that they create such scenes in phantasy, and

this  psychical  reality  requires  to  be  taken  into  account  alongside

practical reality. This reflection was soon followed by the discovery

that  these  phantasies  were  intended  to  cover  up  the  auto-erotic

activity of the first years of childhood, to embellish it and raise it to a

higher plane. And now, from behind the phantasies, the whole range

of a child’s sexual life came to light.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2887

 

   With this sexual activity of the first years of childhood the inherited

constitution of the individual also came into its own. Disposition and

experience are here linked up in an indissoluble aetiological unity. Fordisposition  exaggerates  impressions  which  would  otherwise  have

been completely commonplace and have had no effect, so that they

become  traumas  giving  rise  to  stimulations  and  fixations;  while

experiences  awaken  factors  in  the  disposition  which,  without  them,

might  have  long  remained  dormant  and  perhaps  never  have

developed. The last word on the subject of traumatic aetiology was

spoken  later  by  Abraham,  when  he  pointed  out  that  the  sexual

constitution  which  is  peculiar  to  children  is  precisely  calculated  to

provoke sexual experiences of a particular kind - namely traumas.

      In  the  beginning,  my  statements  about  infantile  sexuality  were

founded almost exclusively on the findings of analysis in adults which

led back into the past. I had no opportunity of direct observations on

children.  It  was  therefore  a  very  great  triumph  when  it  became

possible  years  later  to  confirm  almost  all  my  inferences  by  direct

observation and the analysis of very young children - a triumph that

lost some of its magnitude as one gradually realized that the nature of

the discovery was such that one should really be ashamed of having

had to make it. The further one carried these observations on children,

the more self-evident the facts became; but the more astonishing, too,

did it become that one had taken so much trouble to overlook them.

      Such  a  certain  conviction  of  the  existence  and  importance  of

infantile sexuality can, however, only be obtained by the method of

analysis, by pursuing the symptoms and peculiarities of neurotics back

to  their  ultimate  sources,  the  discovery  of  which  then  explains

whatever is explicable in them and enables whatever is modifiable to

be changed. I can understand that one would arrive at different results

if,  as  C.  G.  Jung  has  recently  done,  one  first  forms  a  theoretical

conception  of  the  nature  of  the  sexual  instinct  and  then  seeks  to

explain the life of children on that basis. A conception of this kind is

bound  to  be  selected  arbitrarily  or  in  accordance  with  irrelevant

considerations, and runs the risk of proving inadequate for the field to

which one is seeking to apply it. It is true that the analytic method, too,

leads  to  certain  ultimate  difficulties  and  obscurities  in  regard  to

sexuality and its relation to the total life of the individual. But these

problems cannot be got rid of by speculation; they must await solution

through other observations or through observations in other fields.

               On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2888

 

 

   I need say little about the interpretation of dreams. It came as the

first fruits of the technical innovation I had adopted when, following a

dim presentiment, I decided to replace hypnosis by free association.

My desire for knowledge had not at the start been directed towards

understanding dreams. I do not know of any outside influence which

drew my interest to them or inspired me with any helpful expectations.

Before Breuer and I ceased to meet I only just had time to tell him in a

single sentence that I now understood how to translate dreams. Since

this was how the discovery came about, it followed that the symbolism

in  the  language  of  dreams  was  almost  the  last  thing  to  become

accessible  to  me,  for  the  dreamer’s  associations  help  very  little

towards understanding symbols. I have held fast to the habit of always

studying things themselves before looking for information about them

in  books,  and  therefore  I  was  able  to  establish  the  symbolism  of

dreams for myself before I was led to it by Scherner’s work on the

subject. It was only later that I came to appreciate to its full extent this

mode of expression of dreams. This was partly through the influence

of the works of Stekel, who at first did such very creditable work but

afterwards went totally astray. The close connection between psycho-

analytic  dream-interpretation  and  the  art  of  interpreting  dreams  as

practised and held in such high esteem in antiquity only became clear

to me much later. Later on I found the essential characteristic and

most  important  part  of  my  dream  theory  -  the  derivation  of  dream-

distortion from an internal conflict, a kind of inner dishonesty - in a

writer  who  was  ignorant,  it  is  true,  of  medicine,  though  not  of

philosophy,  the  famous  engineer  J.  Popper,  who  published  his

Phantasien eines Realisten under the name of Lynkeus.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2889

 

   The interpretation of dreams became a solace and a support to mein  those  arduous  first  years  of  analysis,  when  I  had  to  master  the

technique, clinical phenomena and therapy of the neuroses all at the

same time. At that period I was completely isolated and in the network

of problems and accumulation of difficulties I often dreaded losing my

bearings  and  also  my  confidence.  There  were  often  patients  with

whom an unaccountably long time elapsed before my hypothesis, that

a neurosis was bound to become intelligible through analysis, proved

true;  but  these  patients’  dreams,  which  might  be  regarded  as

analogues  of  their  symptoms,  almost  always  confirmed  the

hypothesis.

      It  was  only  my  success  in  this  direction  that  enabled  me  to

persevere. The result is that I have acquired a habit of gauging the

measure of a psychologist’s understanding by his attitude to dream-

interpretation; and I have observed with satisfaction that most of the

opponents of psycho-analysis avoid this field altogether or else display

remarkable clumsiness if they attempt to deal with it. Moreover, I soon

saw the necessity of carrying out a self-analysis, and this I did with the

help of a series of my own dreams which led me back through all the

events of my childhood; and I am still of the opinion to-day that this

kind of analysis may suffice for anyone who is a good dreamer and

not too abnormal.

 

   I think that by thus unrolling the story of the development of psycho-

analysis  I  have  shown  what  it  is,  better  than  by  a  systematic

description of it. I did not at first perceive the peculiar nature of what I

had discovered. I unhesitatingly sacrificed my growing popularity as a

doctor, and the increase in attendance during my consulting hours, by

making a systematic enquiry into the sexual factors involved in the

causation of my patients’ neuroses; and this brought me a great many

new  facts  which  finally  confirmed  my  conviction  of  the  practical

importance of the sexual factor. I innocently addressed a meeting of

the Vienna Society for Psychiatry and Neurology with Krafft-Ebing in

the chair, expecting that the material losses I had willingly undergone

would  be  made  up  for  by  the  interest  and  recognition  of  my

colleagues.  I  treated  my  discoveries  as  ordinary  contributions  to

science and hoped they would be received in the same spirit. But the

silence  which  my  communications  met  with,  the  void  which  formeditself about me, the hints that were conveyed to me, gradually made

me  realize  that  assertions  on  the  part  played  by  sexuality  in  the

aetiology of the neuroses cannot count upon meeting with the same

kind  of  treatment  as  other  communications.  I  understood  that  from

now onwards I was one of those who have ‘disturbed the sleep of the

world’, as Hebbel says, and that I could not reckon upon objectivity

and tolerance. Since, however, my conviction of the general accuracy

of my observations and conclusions grew even stronger, and since

neither my confidence in my own judgement nor my moral courage

were  precisely  small,  the  outcome  of  the  situation  could  not  be  in

doubt. I made up my mind to believe that it had been my fortune to

discover some particularly important facts and connections, and I was

prepared  to  accept  the  fate  that  sometimes  accompanies  such

discoveries.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2890

 

      I  pictured  the  future  as  follows:  -  I  should  probably  succeed  in

maintaining myself by means of the therapeutic success of the new

procedure, but science would ignore me entirely during my lifetime;

some  decades  later,  someone  else  would  infallibly  come  upon  the

same things - for which the time was not now ripe - would achieve

recognition  for  them  and  bring  me  honour  as  a  forerunner  whose

failure had been inevitable. Meanwhile, like Robinson Crusoe, I settled

down as comfortably as possible on my desert island. When I look

back to those lonely years, away from the pressures and confusions of

to-day, it seems like a glorious heroic age. My ‘splendid isolation’¹ was

not without its advantages and charms. I did not have to read any

publications, nor listen to any ill-informed opponents; I was not subject

to influence from any quarter; there was nothing to hustle me. I learnt

to restrain speculative tendencies and to follow the unforgotten advice

of my master, Charcot: to look at the same things again and again

until they themselves begin to speak. My publications, which I was

able  to  place  with  a  little  trouble,  could  always  lag  far  behind  my

knowledge, and could be postponed as long as I pleased, since therewas  no  doubtful  ‘priority’  to  be  defended. The  Interpretation  of

Dreams, for instance, was finished in all essentials at the beginning of

1896 but was not written out until the summer of 1899. The analysis of

‘Dora’ was over at the end of 1899; the case history was written in the

next  two  weeks,  but  was  not  published  until  1905.  Meanwhile  my

writings  were  not  reviewed  in  the  medical  journals,  or,  if  as  an

exception they were reviewed, they were dismissed with expressions

of scornful or pitying superiority. Occasionally a colleague would make

some reference to me in one of his publications; it would be very short

and not at all flattering - words such as ‘eccentric’, ‘extreme’, or ‘very

peculiar’ would be used. It once happened that an assistant at the

clinic  in  Vienna  where  I  gave  my  University  lectures  asked  me  for

permission to attend the course. He listened very attentively and said

nothing; after the last lecture was over he offered to join me outside.

As we walked away, he told me that with his chief’s knowledge he had

written a book combating my views; he regretted very much, however,

that he had not first learnt more about them from my lectures, for in

that case he would have written much of it differently. He had indeed

enquired  at  the  clinic  whether  he  had  not  better  first  read The

Interpretation of Dreams, but had been advised against doing so - it

was not worth the trouble. He then himself compared the structure of

my theory, so far as he now understood it, with that of the Catholic

Church as regards its internal solidity. In the interests of the salvation

of his soul, I shall assume that this remark implied a certain amount of

appreciation. But he concluded by saying that it was too late to alter

anything  in  his  book,  since  it  was  already  in  print.  Nor  did  my

colleague think it necessary later to make any public avowal of his

change of views on the subject of psycho-analysis; but preferred, in

his capacity as a regular reviewer for a medical journal, to follow its

development with flippant comments.

 

   ¹ [In English in the original.]

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2891

 

      Whatever  personal  sensitiveness  I  possessed  became  bluntedduring  those  years,  to  my  advantage.  I  was  saved  from  becoming

embittered, however, by a circumstance which is not always present

to help lonely discoverers. Such people are as a rule tormented by the

need  to  account  for  the  lack  of  sympathy  or  the  aversion  of  their

contemporaries, and feel this attitude as a distressing contradiction of

the security of their own sense of conviction. There was no need for

me to feel so; for psycho-analytic theory enabled me to understand

this  attitude  in  my  contemporaries  and  to  see  it  as  a  necessary

consequence of fundamental analytic premisses. If it was true that the

set of facts I had discovered were kept from the knowledge of patients

themselves  by  internal  resistances  of  an  affective  kind,  then  these

resistances would be bound to appear in healthy people too, as soon

as some external source confronted them with what was repressed. It

was not surprising that they should be able to justify this rejection of

my ideas on intellectual grounds though it was actually affective in

origin.  The  same  thing  happened  equally  often  with  patients;  the

arguments  they  advanced  were  the  same  and  were  not  precisely

brilliant. In Falstaff’s words, reasons are ‘as plenty as blackberries’.

The only difference was that with patients one was in a position to

bring pressure to bear on them so as to induce them to get insight into

their resistances and overcome them, whereas one had to do without

this advantage in dealing with people who were ostensibly healthy.

How to compel these healthy people to examine the matter in a cool

and scientifically objective spirit was an unsolved problem which was

best left to time to clear up. In the history of science one can clearly

see that often the very proposition which has at first called out nothing

but  contradiction  has  later  come  to  be  accepted,  although  no  new

proofs in support of it have been brought forward.

   It was hardly to be expected, however, that during the years when I

alone  represented  psycho-analysis  I  should  develop  any  particular

respect  for  the  world’s  opinion  or  any  bias  towards  intellectual

appeasement.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2892

                                             II

 

   From the year 1902 onwards, a number of young doctors gathered

round  me  with  the  express  intention  of  learning,  practising  and

spreading the knowledge of psycho-analysis. The stimulus came from

a  colleague  who  had  himself  experienced  the  beneficial  effects  of

analytic therapy. Regular meetings took place on certain evenings at

my house, discussions were held according to certain rules and the

participants endeavoured to find their bearings in this new and strange

field of research and to interest others in it. One day a young man who

had  passed  through  a  technical  training  college  introduced  himself

with  a  manuscript  which  showed  very  unusual  comprehension.  We

persuaded him to go through the Gymnasium [Secondary School] and

the  University  and  to  devote  himself  to  the  non-medical  side  of

psycho-analysis.  The  little  society  acquired  in  him  a  zealous  and

dependable secretary and I gained in Otto Rank a most loyal helper

and co-worker.¹

   The small circle soon expanded, and in the course of the next few

years often changed its composition. On the whole I could tell myself

that it was hardly inferior, in wealth and variety of talent, to the staff of

any clinical teacher one could think of. It included from the beginning

the men who were later to play such a considerable, if not always a

welcome, part in the history of the psycho-analytic movement. At that

time, however, one could not yet guess at these developments. I had

every reason to be satisfied, and I think I did everything possible to

impart my own knowledge and experience to the others. There were

only  two  inauspicious  circumstances  which  at  last  estranged  me

inwardly from the group. I could not succeed in establishing among its

members the friendly relations that ought to obtain between men who

are all engaged upon the same difficult work; nor was I able to stifle

the disputes about priority for which there were so many opportunities

under these conditions of work in common. The difficulties in the way

of giving instruction in the practice of psycho-analysis, which are quite

particularly  great  and  are  responsible  for  much  in  the  present

dissensions,  were  evident  already  in  this  private  Vienna  Psycho-

Analytical  Society.  I  myself  did  not  venture  to  put  forward  a  still

unfinished technique and a theory still in the making with an authoritywhich would probably have enabled the others to avoid some wrong

turnings  and  ultimate  disasters.  The  self-reliance  of  intellectual

workers, their early independence of their teacher, is always gratifying

from  a  psychological  point  of  view;  but  it  is  only  of  advantage  to

science if those workers fulfil certain personal conditions which are

none too common. For psycho-analysis in particular a long and severe

discipline and training in self-discipline would have been required. In

view of the courage displayed by their devotion to a subject so much

frowned upon and so poor in prospects, I was disposed to tolerate

much among the members to which I should otherwise have made

objection.  Besides  doctors,  the  circle  included  others  -  men  of

education  who  had  recognized  something  important  in  psycho-

analysis: writers, painters and so on. My Interpretation of Dreams and

my book on jokes, among others, had shown from the beginning that

the  theories  of  psycho-analysis  cannot  be  restricted  to  the  medical

field,  but  are  capable  of  application  to  a  variety  of  other  mental

sciences.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] Now director of the Internationaler Psychoanalytischer Verlag

[International  Psycho-Analytical  Publishing  House]  and  editor  of  the Zeitschrift and Imago
from their inception.
 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2893

 

 

      In  1907  the  situation  changed  all  at  once  and  contrary  to  all

expectations.  It  appeared  that  psycho-analysis  had  unobtrusively

awakened interest and gained friends, and that there were even some

scientific workers who were ready to acknowledge it. A communication

from Bleuler had informed me before this that my works had been

studied and made use of in the Burghölzli. In January 1907, the first

member  of  the  Zurich  clinic  came  to  Vienna  -  Dr.  Eitingon.¹  Other

visits followed, which led to an animated exchange of ideas. Finally,

on the invitation of C. G. Jung, at that time still assistant physician at

the Burghölzli, a first meeting took place at Salzburg in the spring of

1908, which brought together friends of psycho-analysis from Vienna,Zurich  and  other  places.  One  of  the  results  of  this  first  Psycho-

Analytical  Congress  was  the  founding  of  a  periodical  called  the

Jahrbuch  für  psychoanalytische  und  psychopathologische

Forschungen, under the direction of Bleuler and Freud and edited by

Jung, which first appeared in 1909. This publication gave expression

to an intimate co-operation between Vienna and Zurich.

   I have repeatedly acknowledged with gratitude the great services

rendered by the Zurich School of Psychiatry in the spread of psycho-

analysis, particularly by Bleuler and Jung, and I have no hesitation in

doing  so  again,  even  in  the  greatly  altered  circumstances  of  the

present. True, it was not the support of the Zurich School which first

directed the attention of the scientific world to psycho-analysis at that

time. What had happened was that the latency period had expired and

everywhere  psycho-analysis  was  becoming  the  object  of  ever-

increasing interest. But in all other places this accession of interest at

first produced nothing but a very emphatic repudiation, mostly a quite

passionate  one;  whereas  in  Zurich,  on  the  contrary,  agreement  on

general  lines  was  the  dominant  note.  Moreover,  nowhere  else  did

such a compact little group of adherents exist, or could a public clinic

be placed at the service of psycho-analytic researches, or was there a

clinical teacher who included psycho-analytic theories as an integral

part  of  his  psychiatric  course.  The  Zurich  group  thus  became  the

nucleus  of  the  small  band  who  were  fighting  for  the  recognition  of

analysis. The only opportunity of learning the new art and working at it

in  practice  lay  there.  Most  of  my  followers  and  co-workers  at  the

present  time  came  to  me  by  way  of  Zurich,  even  those  who  were

geographically much nearer to Vienna than to Switzerland. In relation

to Western Europe, which contains the great centres of our culture,

the position of Vienna is an outlying one; and its prestige has for many

years been affected by strong prejudices. Representatives of all the

most important nations congregate in Switzerland, where intellectual

activity is so lively; a focus of infection there was bound to be of great

importance for the spread of the ‘psychical epidemic’, as Hoche of

Freiburg has called it.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] The subsequent founder of the ‘Psycho-Analytic Policlinic’ in

Berlin.
               On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2894

 

      According  to  the  evidence  of  a  colleague  who  witnessed

developments  at  the  Burghölzli,  it  appears  that  psycho-analysis

awakened  interest  there  very  early.  In  Jung’s  work  on  occult

phenomena, published in 1902, there was already an allusion to my

book on dream-interpretation. From 1903 or 1904, says my informant,

psycho-analysis  was  in  the  forefront  of  interest.  After  personal

relations  between  Vienna  and  Zurich  had  been  established,  an

informal  society  was  also  started,  in  the  middle  of  1907,  in  the

Burghölzli, where the problems of psycho-analysis were discussed at

regular  meetings.  In  the  alliance  between  the  Vienna  and  Zurich

schools  the  Swiss  were  by  no  means  mere  recipients.  They  had

already produced very creditable scientific work, the results of which

were  of  service  to  psycho-analysis.  The  association  experiments

started  by  the  Wundt  School  had  been  interpreted  by  them  in  a

psycho-analytic  sense,  and  had  proved  applicable  in  unexpected

ways.  By  this  means  it  had  become  possible  to  arrive  at  rapid

experimental  confirmation  of  psycho-analytic  observations  and  to

demonstrate directly to students certain connections which an analyst

would only have been able to tell them about. The first bridge linking

up experimental psychology with psycho-analysis had been built.

      In  psycho-analytic  treatment,  association  experiments  enable  a

provisional,  qualitative  analysis  of  the  case  to  be  made,  but  they

furnish  no  essential  contribution  to  the  technique  and  can  be

dispensed  with  in  carrying  out  analyses.  More  important,  however,

was another achievement by the Zurich school, or its leaders, Bleuler

and Jung. The former showed that light could be thrown on a large

number of purely psychiatric cases by adducing the same processes

as have been recognized through psycho-analysis to obtain in dreams

and neuroses (Freudian mechanisms); and Jung successfully applied

the analytic method of interpretation to the most alien and obscure

phenomena  of  dementia  praecox,  so  that  their  sources  in  the  life-

history and interests of the patient came clearly to light. After this it

was impossible for psychiatrists to ignore psycho-analysis any longer.

Bleuler’s great work on schizophrenia (1911), in which the psycho-analytic point of view was placed on an equal footing with the clinical

systematic one, completed this success.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2895

 

   I will not omit to point out a divergence which was already at that

time noticeable in the direction taken by the work of the two schools.

As  early  as  in  1897  I  had  published  the  analysis  of  a  case  of

schizophrenia, which however was of a paranoid character, so that the

solution of it could not take away from the impression made by Jung’s

analyses. But to me the important point had been, not so much the

possibility of interpreting the symptoms, as the psychical mechanism

of the disease, and above all the agreement of this mechanism with

that of hysteria, which had already been discovered. At that time no

light  had  yet  been  thrown  on  the  differences  between  the  two

mechanisms. For I was then already aiming at a libido theory of the

neuroses, which was to explain all neurotic and psychotic phenomena

as  proceeding  from  abnormal  vicissitudes  of  the  libido,  that  is,  as

diversions from its normal employment. This point of view was missed

by  the  Swiss  investigators.  As  far  as  I  know,  even  to-day  Bleuler

maintains the view that the various forms of dementia praecox have

an organic causation; and at the Salzburg Congress in 1908 Jung,

whose  book  on  this  disease  had  appeared  in  1907,  supported  the

toxic  theory  of  its  causation,  which  takes  no  account  of  the  libido

theory, although it is true that it does not rule it out. Later on (1912) he

came to grief on this same point, by making too much of the material

which he had previously refused to employ.

   There is a third contribution made by the Swiss School, probably to

be ascribed entirely to Jung, which I do not value so highly as others

do whose concern with these matters is more remote. I refer to the

theory  of  ‘complexes’  which  grew  out  of  the Diagnostische

Assoziationsstudien  [Studies  in  Word-Association]  (1906).  It  has

neither  itself  produced  a  psychological  theory,  not  has  it  proved

capable  of  easy  incorporation  into  the  context  of  psycho-analytic

theory.  The  word  ‘complex’,  on  the  other  hand,  had  becomenaturalized,  so  to  speak,  in  psycho-analytic  language;  it  is  a

convenient  and  often  indispensable  term  for  summing  up  a

psychological state descriptively. None of the other terms coined by

psycho-analysis  for  its  own  needs  has  achieved  such  widespread

popularity or been so misapplied to the detriment of the construction of

clearer concepts. Analysts began to speak among themselves of a

‘return of a complex’ where they meant a ‘return of the repressed’, or

fell into the habit of saying ‘I have a complex against him’, where the

only correct expression would have been ‘a resistance against him’.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2896

 

 

   In the years following 1907, when the schools of Vienna and Zurich

were united, psycho-analysis made the extraordinary surge forward of

which the momentum is felt even to-day; this is shown both by the

spread of psycho-analytic literature and by the constant increase in

the number of doctors who are practising or studying it, as well as by

the frequency of the attacks made on it at Congresses and in learned

societies.  It  has  penetrated  into  the  most  distant  lands  and  has

everywhere  not  merely  startled  psychiatrists  but  commanded  the

attention  of  the  educated  public  and  of  scientific  workers  in  other

fields.  Havelock  Ellis,  who  has  followed  its  development  with

sympathy though without ever calling himself an adherent, wrote in

1911  in  a  report  for  the  Australasian  Medical  Congress:  ‘Freud’s

psycho-analysis is now championed and carried out not only in Austria

and in Switzerland, but in the United States, in England, in India, in

Canada,  and,  I  doubt  not,  in  Australasia.’¹  A  physician  from  Chile

(probably a German) spoke at the International Congress at Buenos

Aires  in  1910  in  support  of  the  existence  of  infantile  sexuality  and

commended  highly  the  effects  of  psycho-analytic  therapy  on

obsessional  symptoms.²  An  English  neurologist  in  Central  India

(Berkeley-Hill)  informed  me,  through  a  distinguished  colleague  who

was visiting Europe, that the analyses of Mohammedan Indians which

he had carried out showed that the aetiology of their neuroses was nodifferent from what we find in our European patients.

 

   ¹ Havelock Ellis, 1911.

   ² G. Greve, 1910.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2897

 

      The  introduction  of  psycho-analysis  into  North  America  was

accompanied by very special marks of honour. In the autumn of 1909,

Stanley  Hall,  the  President  of  Clark  University,  Worcester,

Massachusetts, invited Jung and myself to take part in the celebration

of  the  twentieth  anniversary  of  the  foundation  of  the  University  by

giving  a  number  of  lectures  in  German.  To  our  great  surprise,  we

found the members of that small but highly esteemed University for

the study of education and philosophy so unprejudiced that they were

acquainted with all the literature of psycho-analysis and had given it a

place in their lectures to students. In prudish America it was possible,

in  academic  circles  at  least,  to  discuss  freely  and  scientifically

everything that in ordinary life is regarded as objectionable. The five

lectures  which  I  improvised  in  Worcester  appeared  in  an  English

translation in the American Journal of Psychology, and were shortly

afterwards published in German under the title Über Psychoanalyse.

Jung read a paper on diagnostic association experiments and another

on  conflicts  in  the  mind  of  the  child.  We  were  rewarded  with  the

honorary degree of Doctor of Laws. During that week of celebrations

at Worcester, psycho-analysis was represented by five men: besides

Jung  and  myself,  there  were  Ferenczi,  who  had  joined  me  for  the

journey, Ernest Jones, then at the University of Toronto (Canada) and

now in London, and A. A. Brill, who was already practising psycho-

analysis in New York.

      The  most  important  personal  relationship  which  arose  from  the

meeting at Worcester was that with James J. Putnam, Professor of

Neuropathology  at  Harvard  University.  Some  years  before,  he  had

expressed  an  unfavourable  opinion  of  psycho-analysis,  but  now  he

rapidly became reconciled to it and recommended it to his countrymen

and his colleagues in a series of lectures which were as rich in contentas  they  were  brilliant  in  form.  The  esteem  he  enjoyed  throughout

America on account of his high moral character and unflinching love of

truth was of great service to psycho-analysis and protected it against

the denunciations which in all probability would otherwise quickly have

overwhelmed it. Later on, yielding too much to the strong ethical and

philosophical bent of his nature, Putnam made what seems to me an

impossible demand - he expected psycho-analysis to place itself at

the  service  of  a  particular  moral-philosophical  conception  of  the

Universe  -  but  he  remains  the  chief  pillar  of  the  psycho-analytic

movement in his native land.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] See Putnam’s Addresses on Psycho-Analysis, 1921. Putnam died

in 1918.
 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2898

 

   For the further spread of this movement Brill and Jones deserve the

greatest credit: in their writings they drew their countrymen’s attention

with unremitting assiduity to the easily observable fundamental facts

of  everyday  life,  of  dreams  and  neurosis.  Brill  has  contributed  still

further to this effect by his medical practice and by his translations of

my  works,  and  Jones  by  his  instructive  lectures  and  by  his  skill  in

debate at congresses in America.¹ The absence of any deep-rooted

scientific  tradition  in  America  and  the  much  less  stringent  rule  of

official authority there have been of decided advantage to the impetus

given by Stanley Hall. It was characteristic of that country that from the

beginning professors and superintendents of mental hospitals showed

as  much  interest  in  analysis  as  independent  practitioners.  But  it  is

clear  that  precisely  for  this  reason  the  ancient  centres  of  culture,

where the greatest resistance has been displayed, must be the scene

of the decisive struggle over psycho-analysis.

   Among European countries France has hitherto shown itself the

least disposed to welcome psycho-analysis, although useful work in

French  by  A.  Maeder  of  Zurich  has  provided  easy  access  to  its

theories. The first indications of sympathy came from the provinces:

Morichau-Beauchant  (Poitiers)  was  the  first  Frenchman  to  adherepublicly  to  psycho-analysis.  Régis  and  Hesnard  (Bordeaux)  have

recently  attempted  to  disperse  the  prejudices  of  their  countrymen

against the new ideas by an exhaustive presentation, which, however,

is  not  always  understanding  and  takes  special  exception  to

symbolism. In Paris itself, a conviction still seems to reign (to which

Janet himself gave eloquent expression at the Congress in London in

1913) that everything good in psycho-analysis is a repetition of Janet’s

views with insignificant modifications, and that everything else in it is

bad. At this Congress itself, indeed, Janet had to submit to a number

of corrections by Ernest Jones, who was able to point out to him his

insufficient knowledge of the subject. Even though we deny his claims,

however, we cannot forget the value of his work on the psychology of

the neuroses.

 

   ¹ The publications of both authors have appeared in collected volumes: Brill, 1912, and

Ernest Jones, 1913.
 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2899

 

      In  Italy,  after  several  promising  starts,  no  real  interest  was

forthcoming. To Holland analysis found early access through personal

connections: Van Emden, Van Ophuijsen, Van Renterghem (Freud en

zijn School) and the two Stärckes are actively occupied with it both in

practice and theory.¹ In scientific circles in England interest in analysis

has  developed  very  slowly,  but  there  is  reason  to  expect  that  the

sense for the practical and the passionate love of justice in the English

will ensure it a brilliant future there.

   In Sweden, P. Bjerre, who succeeded to Wetterstrand’s practice,

gave up hypnotic suggestion, at least for the time, in favour of analytic

treatment. R. Vogt (Christiania) had already shown an appreciation of

psycho-analysis in his Psykiatriens grundtraek, published in 1907; so

that the first text-book of psychiatry to refer to psycho-analysis was

written  in  Norwegian.  In  Russia,  psycho-analysis  has  become

generally known and has spread widely; almost all my writings, as well

as  those  of  other  adherents  of  analysis,  have  been  translated  into

Russian. But a really penetrating comprehension of analytic theorieshas  not  yet  been  evinced  in  Russia;  so  that  the  contributions  of

Russian physicians are at present not very notable. The only trained

analyst there is M. Wulff who practises in Odessa. It is principally due

to  L.  Jekels  that  psycho-analysis  has  been  introduced  to  Polish

scientific  and  literary  circles.  Hungary,  so  near  geographically  to

Austria,  and  so  far  from  it  scientifically,  has  produced  only  one

collaborator,  S.  Ferenczi,  but  one  that  indeed  outweighs  a  whole

society.²

 

   ¹ The first official recognition of dream-interpretation and psycho-analysis in Europe was

extended to them by the psychiatrist Jelgersma, Rector of the University of Leyden, in his
rectorial address on February 9, 1914.

   ² (Footnote added 1923:) It is not my intention, of course, to bring this account, written in

1914, ‘up to date’ [in English in the original]. I will only add a few remarks to indicate how the
picture  has  altered  in  the  interval,  which  includes  the  World  War.  In  Germany  a  gradual
infiltration of analytic theories into clinical psychiatry is taking place, though this is not always
admitted. The French translations of my works that have been appearing during the last few
years have finally aroused a keen interest in psycho-analysis even in France, though for the
moment this is more active in literary circles than in scientific ones. In Italy M. Levi Bianchini
(of Nocera Superiore) and Edoardo Weiss (of Trieste) have come forward as translators and
champions of psycho-analysis (cf. the Biblioteca Psicoanalitica Italiana). A collected edition of
my works which is appearing in Madrid (translated by Lopez Ballesteros) is evidence of the
lively interest taken in it in Spanish-speaking countries (Prof. H. Delgado in Lima). As regards
England, the prophecy which I have made above seems to be in steady course of fulfilment; a
special centre for the study of analysis has been formed at Calcutta in British India. In North
America it is still true that the depth of understanding of analysis does not keep pace with its
popularity. In Russia, since the Revolution, psycho-analytic work has begun afresh at several
centres. In Poland the Polska Bibljoteka Psychoanalytyczna is now appearing. In Hungary a
brilliant  analytic  school  is  flourishing  under  the  leadership  of  Ferenczi.  (Cf.  the  Festschrift
issued in honour of his fiftieth birthday.) At the present time the Scandinavian countries are
still the least receptive.
 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2900

 

   As regards the position of psycho-analysis in Germany, it can only

be  said  that  it  forms  the  centre-point  of  scientific  discussions  and

provokes the most emphatic expressions of disagreement both among

doctors and laymen; these are not yet at an end, but are constantly

flaring  up  again,  sometimes  with  greater  intensity.  No  official

educational bodies there have up to now recognized psycho-analysis.

Successful practitioners who employ it are few; only a few institutions,such  as  Binswanger’s  in  Kreuzlingen  (on  Swiss  soil)  and

Marcinowski’s in Holstein, have opened their doors to it. One of the

most prominent representatives of analysis, Karl Abraham, at one time

an assistant of Bleuler’s, maintains himself in the critical atmosphere

of  Berlin.  One  might  wonder  that  this  state  of  things  should  have

continued  unaltered  for  several  years  if  one  did  not  know  that  the

account I have given only represents external appearances. Too much

significance  should  not  be  attributed  to  rejection  by  the  official

representatives  of  science  and  heads  of  institutions,  and  by  the

followers dependent on them. It is natural that its opponents should

give  loud  expression  to  their  views,  while  its  intimidated  adherents

keep silence. Some of the latter, whose first contributions to analysis

raised  favourable  expectations,  have  later  withdrawn  from  the

movement under the pressure of circumstances. The movement itself

advances surely though silently; it is constantly gaining new adherents

among psychiatrists and laymen, it brings in a growing stream of new

readers for psycho-analytic literature and for that very reason drives

its opponents to ever more violent defensive efforts. At least a dozen

times  in  recent  years,  in  reports  of  the  proceedings  of  certain

congresses and scientific bodies or in reviews of certain publications, I

have read that now psycho-analysis is dead, defeated and disposed of

once and for all. The best answer to all this would be in the terms of

Mark Twain’s telegram to the newspaper which had falsely published

news  of  his  death:  ‘Report  of  my  death  greatly  exaggerated.’  After

each  of  these  obituaries  psycho-analysis  regularly  gained  new

adherents and co-workers or acquired new channels of publicity. After

all, being declared dead was an advance on being buried in silence.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2901

 

 

   Hand in hand with this expansion of psycho-analysis in space went

an expansion in content; it extended from the field of the neuroses and

psychiatry to other fields of knowledge. I shall not treat this aspect of

the development of our discipline in much detail, since this has beendone  with  great  success  by  Rank  and  Sachs  in  a  volume  (one  of

Löwenfeld’s Grenzfragen) which deals exhaustively with precisely this

side  of  analytic  research.  Moreover,  this  development  is  still  in  its

infancy;  it  has  been  little  worked  at,  consists  mostly  of  tentative

beginnings and in part of no more than plans. No reasonable person

will see any grounds for reproach in this. An enormous mass of work

confronts a small number of workers, most of whom have their main

occupation  elsewhere  and  can  bring  only  the  qualifications  of  an

amateur to bear on the technical problems of these unfamiliar fields of

science. These workers, who derive from psycho-analysis, make no

secret  of  their  amateurishness.  Their  aim  is  merely  to  act  as  sign-

posts  and  stop-gaps  for  the  specialists,  and  to  put  the  analytic

technique and principles at their disposal against a time when they in

turn shall take up the work. That the results achieved are nevertheless

not  inconsiderable  is  due  partly  to  the  fruitfulness  of  the  analytic

method, and partly to the circumstance that there are already a few

investigators who are not doctors, and have taken up the application

of psycho-analysis to the mental sciences as their profession in life.

   Most of these applications of analysis naturally go back to a hint in

my  earliest  analytic  writings.  The  analytic  examination  of  neurotic

people and the neurotic symptoms of normal people necessitated the

assumption of psychological conditions which could not possibly be

limited  to  the  field  in  which  they  had  been  discovered.  In  this  way

analysis  not  only  provided  us  with  the  explanation  of  pathological

phenomena, but revealed their connection with normal mental life and

disclosed unsuspected relationships between psychiatry and the most

various  other  sciences  dealing  with  activities  of  the  mind.  Certain

typical dreams, for instance, yielded an explanation of some myths

and fairy-tales. Riklin and Abraham followed this hint and initiated the

researches into myths which have found their completion, in a manner

complying with even expert standards, in Rank’s works on mythology.

Further  investigation  into  dream-symbolism  led  to  the  heart  of  the

problems  of  mythology,  folklore  (Jones  and  Storfer)  and  the

abstractions of religion. A deep impression was made on all hearers at

one of the psycho-analytical Congresses when a follower of Jung’s

demonstrated the correspondence between schizophrenic phantasies

and  the  cosmogonies  of  primitive  times  and  races.  Mythologicalmaterial  later  received  further  elaboration  (which,  though  open  to

criticism, was none the less very interesting) at the hands of Jung, in

works  attempting  to  correlate  the  neuroses  with  religious  and

mythological phantasies.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2902

 

   Another path led from the investigation of dreams to the analysis of

works of imagination and ultimately to the analysis of their creators -

writers and artists themselves. At an early stage it was discovered that

dreams invented by writers will often yield to analysis in the same way

as  genuine  ones.  (Cf.  ‘Gradiva’.)  The  conception  of  unconscious

mental  activity  made  it  possible  to  form  a  preliminary  idea  of  the

nature of imaginative creative writing; and the realization, gained in

the study of neurotics, of the part played by the instinctual impulses

enabled  us  to  perceive  the  sources  of  artistic  production  and

confronted  us  with  two  problems:  how  the  artist  reacts  to  this

instigation  and  what  means  he  employs  to  disguise  his  reactions.¹

Most analysts with general interests have contributed something to the

solution of these problems, which are the most fascinating among the

applications of psycho-analysis. Naturally, opposition was not lacking

in  this  direction  either  on  the  part  of  people  who  knew  nothing  of

analysis; it took the same form as it did in the original field of psycho-

analytic research - the same misconceptions and vehement rejections.

It  was  only  to  be  expected  from  the  beginning  that,  whatever  the

regions into which psycho-analysis might penetrate, it would inevitably

experience the same struggles with those already in possession of the

field. These attempted invasions, however, have not yet stirred up the

attention in some quarters which awaits them in the future. Among the

strictly  scientific  applications  of  analysis  to  literature,  Rank’s

exhaustive work on the theme of incest easily takes the first place. Its

subject  is  bound  to  arouse  the  greatest  unpopularity.  Up  to  the

present, little work based on psycho-analysis has been done in the

sciences of language and history. I myself ventured the first approach

to the problems of the psychology of religion by drawing a parallelbetween religious ritual and the ceremonials of neurotics (1907b). Dr.

Pfister,  a  pastor  in  Zurich,  has  traced  back  the  origin  of  religious

fanaticism to perverse eroticism in his book on the piety of Count von

Zinzendorf, as well as in other contributions. In the latest works of the

Zurich  school,  however,  we  find  analysis  permeated  with  religious

ideas rather than the opposite outcome that had been in view.

 

   ¹ Cf. Rank’s Die Künstler [The Artist], analyses of imaginative writers by Sadger, Reik, and

others, my own small work on a childhood memory of Leonardo da Vinci’s, and Abraham’s
analysis of Segantini.
 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2903

 

   In the four essays with the title Totem and Taboo I have made an

attempt to deal with the problems of social anthropology in the light of

analysis; this line of investigation leads direct to the origins of the most

important institutions of our civilization, of the structure of the state, of

morality and religion, and, moreover, of the prohibition against incest

and  of  conscience.  It  is  no  doubt  too  early  to  decide  how  far  the

conclusions thus reached will be able to withstand criticism.

   The first example of an application of the analytic mode of thought to

the  problems  of  aesthetics  was  contained  in  my  book  on  jokes.

Everything beyond this is still awaiting workers, who may expect a

particularly rich harvest in this field. We are entirely without the co-

operation  of  specialists  in  all  these  branches  of  knowledge,  and  in

order to attract them Hanns Sachs, in 1912, founded the periodical

Imago which is edited by him and Rank. A beginning has been made

by Hitschmann and von Winterstein in throwing psycho-analytic light

on philosophical systems and personalities, and here there is much

need both of extended and of deeper investigation.

   The revolutionary discoveries of psycho-analysis in regard to the

mental life of children - the part played in it by sexual impulses (von

Hug-Hellmuth), and the fate of those components of sexuality which

become unserviceable in the function of reproduction - were bound

early to direct attention to education and to stimulate an attempt to

bring analytic points of view into the foreground in that field of work.Recognition is due to Dr. Pfister for having, with sincere enthusiasm,

initiated  the  application  of  psycho-analysis  in  this  direction  and

brought it to the notice of ministers of religion and those concerned

with  education.  (Cf. The  Psycho-Analytic  Method,  1913.)  He  has

succeeded in gaining the sympathy and participation of a number of

Swiss teachers in this. Other members of his profession are said to

share  his  views  but  to  have  preferred  nevertheless  to  remain

cautiously in the background. In their retreat from psycho-analysis, a

section  of  Vienna  analysts  seem  to  have  arrived  at  a  kind  of

combination of medicine and education.¹

 

   ¹ Adler and Furtmüller, Heilen und Bilden [Healing and Educating], 1914.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2904

 

 

   With this incomplete outline I have attempted to give some idea of

the still incalculable wealth of connections which have come to light

between medical psycho-analysis and other fields of science. There is

material here for a generation of investigators to work at, and I do not

doubt  that  the  work  will  be  carried  out  as  soon  as  the  resistances

against psycho-analysis are overcome on its original ground.¹

      To  write  the  story  of  these  resistances  would,  I  think,  be  both

fruitless and inopportune at the present time. The story is not very

creditable to the scientific men of our day. But I must add at once that

it has never occurred to me to pour contempt upon the opponents of

psycho-analysis merely because they were opponents - apart from the

few  unworthy  individuals,  the  adventurers  and  profiteers,  who  are

always to be found on both sides in time of war. I knew very well how

to account for the behaviour of these opponents and, moreover, I had

learnt  that  psycho-analysis  brings  out  the  worst  in  everyone.  But  I

made up my mind not to answer my opponents and, so far as my

influence went, to restrain others from polemics. Under the peculiar

conditions of the controversy over psycho-analysis it seemed to me

very doubtful whether either public or written discussion would avail

anything;  it  was  certain  which  way  the  majority  at  congresses  andmeetings  would  go,  and  my  faith  in  the  reasonableness  and  good

behaviour  of  the  gentlemen  who  opposed  me  was  not  at  any  time

great.  Experience  shows  that  only  very  few  people  are  capable  of

remaining polite, to say nothing of objective, in a scientific dispute, and

the impression made on me by scientific squabbles has always been

odious.  Perhaps  this  attitude  on  my  part  has  been  misunderstood;

perhaps I have been thought so good-natured or so easily intimidated

that no further notice need be taken of me. This was a mistake; I can

be  as  abusive  and  enraged  as  anyone;  but  I  have  not  the  art  of

expressing the underlying emotions in a form suitable for publication

and I therefore prefer to abstain completely.

 

   ¹ See my two articles in Scienta (1913j).

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2905

 

   Perhaps in some respects it would have been better if I had given

free rein to my own passions and to those of others round me. We

have all heard of the interesting attempt to explain psycho-analysis as

a product of the Vienna milieu. As recently as in 1913 Janet was not

ashamed to use this argument, although he himself is no doubt proud

of being a Parisian, and Paris can scarcely claim to be a city of stricter

morals than Vienna. The suggestion is that psycho-analysis, and in

particular its assertion that the neuroses are traceable to disturbances

in sexual life, could only have originated in a town like Vienna - in an

atmosphere of sensuality and immorality foreign to other cities - and

that it is simply a reflection, a projection into theory, as it were, of

these  peculiar  Viennese  conditions.  Now  I  am  certainly  no  local

patriot;  but  this  theory  about  psycho-analysis  always  seems  to  me

quite  exceptionally  senseless  -  so  senseless,  in  fact,  that  I  have

sometimes  been  inclined  to  suppose  that  the  reproach  of  being  a

citizen of Vienna is only a euphemistic substitute for another reproach

which no one would care to put forward openly. If the premisses on

which the argument rests were the opposite of what they are, then it

might be worth giving it a hearing. If there were a town in which the

inhabitants imposed exceptional restrictions on themselves as regardssexual satisfaction, and if at the same time they exhibited a marked

tendency to severe neurotic disorders, that town might certainly give

rise in an observer’s mind to the idea that the two circumstances had

some connection with each other, and might suggest that one was

contingent on the other. But neither of these assumptions is true of

Vienna. The Viennese are no more abstinent and no more neurotic

than  the  inhabitants  of  any  other  capital  city.  There  is  rather  less

embarrassment - less prudery - in regard to sexual relationships than

in the cities of the West and North which are so proud of their chastity.

These  peculiar  characteristics  of  Vienna  would  be  more  likely  to

mislead the observer on the causation of neurosis than to enlighten

him on it.

   Vienna has done everything possible, however, to deny her share in

the  origin  of  psycho-analysis.  In  no  other  place  is  the  hostile

indifference of the learned and educated section of the population so

evident to the analyst as in Vienna.

   It may be that my policy of avoiding wide publicity is to some extent

responsible  for  this.  If  I  had  encouraged  or  allowed  the  medical

societies  of  Vienna  to  occupy  themselves  with  psycho-analysis  in

stormy  debates  which  would  have  discharged  all  the  passions  and

brought into the open all the reproaches and invectives that were on

its opponents’ tongues or in their hearts - then, perhaps, the ban on

psycho-analysis would have been overcome by now and it would no

longer be a stranger in its native city. As it is, the poet may be right

when he makes his Wallenstein say:

 

                                                Doch das vergeben mir die Wiener nicht,
                                                dass ich um ein Spektakel sie betrog.¹

 

   ¹ [Literally: ‘But what the Viennese will not forgive me is having cheated them out of a

spectacle.’]
 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2906

 

   The task to which I was not equal - that of demonstrating to the

opponents  of  psycho-analysis suaviter  in  modo  their  injustice  andarbitrariness  -  was  undertaken  and  carried  out  most  creditably  by

Bleuler  in  a  paper  written  in  1910,  ‘Freud’s  Psycho-Analysis:  A

Defence and Some Critical Remarks’. It would seem so natural for me

to praise this work (which offers criticisms in both directions) that I will

hasten to say what I take exception to in it. It seems to me still to

display partiality, to be too lenient to the faults of the opponents of

psycho-analysis and too severe on the shortcomings of its adherents.

this trait in it may possibly explain why the opinion of a psychiatrist of

such high repute, such undoubted ability and independence, failed to

carry more weight with his colleagues. The author of Affectivity (1906)

ought not to be surprised if the influence of a work is determined not

by the strength of its arguments but by its affective tone. Another part

of its influence - its influence on the followers of psycho-analysis - was

destroyed  later  by  Bleuler  himself,  when  in  1913  he  showed  the

reverse side of his attitude to psycho-analysis in his ‘Criticism of the

Freudian  Theory’.  In  that  paper  he  subtracts  so  much  from  the

structure of psycho-analytic theory that our opponents may well be

glad  of  the  help  given  them  by  this  champion  of  psycho-analysis.

These adverse judgements of Bleuler’s, however, are not based on

new arguments or better observations. They rely simply on the state of

his  own  knowledge,  the  inadequacy  of  which  he  no  longer  himself

admits,  as  he  did  in  his  earlier  works.  It  seemed  therefore  that  an

almost  irreparable  loss  threatened  psycho-analysis  here.  But  in  his

last publication, ‘Criticisms of my Schizophrenia’ (1914), Bleuler rallies

his forces in the face of the attacks made on him for having introduced

psycho-analysis into his book on schizophrenia, and makes what he

himself  calls  a  ‘presumptuous  claim’.  ‘But  now  I  will  make  a

presumptuous  claim:  I  consider  that  up  to  the  present  the  various

schools  of  psychology  have  contributed  extremely  little  towards

explaining the nature of psychogenic symptoms and diseases, but that

depth-psychology offers something towards a psychology which still

awaits  creation  and  which  physicians  are  in  need  of  in  order  to

understand  their  patients  and  to  cure  them  rationally;  and  I  even

believe  that  in  my Schizophrenia  I  have  taken  a  very  short  step

towards  that  understanding.  The  first  two  assertions  are  certainly

correct; the last may be an error.’

   Since by ‘depth-psychology’ he means nothing else but psycho-analysis,  we  may  for  the  present  be  content  with  this

acknowledgement.

 


              On The History Of The Psycho-Analytic Movement

                                                                                      2907

 

                                            III

 

                                                                Mach es kurz!
                                                                Am Jüngsten Tag ist’s nur ein Furz!¹

                                                                                                                                GOETHE

 

   Two years after the first private Congress of psycho-analysts the

second  took  place,  this  time  at  Nuremberg,  in  March,  1910.  In  the

interval between them, influenced partly by the favourable reception in

America,  by  the  increasing  hostility  in  German-speaking  countries,

and  by  the  unforeseen  acquisition  of  support  from  Zurich,  I  had

conceived a project which with the help of my friend Ferenczi I carried

out at this second Congress. What I had in mind was to organize the

psycho-analytic movement, to transfer its centre to Zurich and to give

it a chief who would look after its future career. As this scheme has

met with much opposition among the adherents of psycho-analysis, I

will set out my reasons for it in some detail. I hope that these will

justify me, even though it turns out that what I did was in fact not very

wise.

   I judged that the new movement’s association with Vienna was no

recommendation but rather a handicap to it. A place in the heart of

Europe like Zurich, where an academic teacher had opened the doors

of  his  institution  to  psycho-analysis,  seemed  to  me  much  more

promising. I also took it that a second handicap lay in my own person,

opinion about which was too much confused by the liking or hatred of

the different sides: I was either compared to Columbus, Darwin and

Kepler,  or  abused  as  a  general  paralytic.  I  wished,  therefore,  to

withdraw into the background both myself and the city where psycho-

analysis first saw the light. Moreover, I was no longer young; I saw

that there was a long road ahead, and I felt oppressed by the thought

that the duty of being a leader should fall to me so late in life. Yet I felt