debatable  wisdom  to  start  with  it.  There  would  be  a  risk  of  not

discovering the unconscious and at the same time of overlooking the

great importance of the libido and of judging everything as it appears

to the ego of the neurotic subject. It is obvious that this ego is not a

trustworthy or impartial agency. The ego is indeed the power which

disavows the unconscious and has degraded it into being repressed;

so  how  can  we  trust  it  to  be  fair  to  the  unconscious?  The  most

prominent  elements  in  what  is  thus  repressed  are  the  repudiated

demands of sexuality, and it is quite self-evident that we should never

be  able  to  guess  their  extent  and  importance  from  the  ego’s

conceptions. From the moment the notion of repression dawns on us,

we are warned against making one of the two contesting parties (and

the victorious one, at that) into being judge in the dispute. We are

prepared to find that the ego’s assertions will lead us astray. If we are

to believe the ego, it was active at every point and itself willed and

created its symptoms. But we know that it puts up with a good amount

of passivity, which it afterwards tries to disguise and gloss over. It is

true  that  it  does  not  always  venture  on  such  am  attempt;  in  the

symptoms of obsessional neurosis it is obliged to admit that there is

something alien which is confronting it and against which it can only

defend itself with difficulty.

   Anyone whom these warnings do not deter from taking the ego’s

counterfeits as sterling coin will have an easy time of it and will avoid

all the resistances which oppose the psycho-analytic emphasis upon

the unconscious, sexuality and the passivity of the ego. He will be able

to declare like Alfred Adler that the ‘neurotic character’ is the cause of

neuroses  instead  of  their  consequence;  but  neither  will  he  be  in  a

position to explain a single detail of symptom-formation or a single

dream.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3434

 

   You will ask whether it may not be possible, however, to do justice

to the part played by the ego in neurotic states and in the formation of

symptoms  without  at  the  same  time  grossly  neglecting  the  factorsrevealed by psycho-analysis. My reply is that that must certainly be

possible and will sooner or later be done; but the road followed by the

work of psycho-analysis does not admit of actually beginning with this.

It  is  of  course  possible  to  foresee  when  psycho-analysis  will  be

confronted by this task. There are neuroses in which the ego plays a

far more intensive part than in those we have studied hitherto; we call

them the ‘narcissistic’ neuroses. The investigation of these disorders

will enable us to form an impartial and trustworthy judgement of the

share taken by the ego in the onset of neuroses.

 

      One  of  the  ways  in  which  the  ego  is  related  to  its  neuroses  is,

however, so obvious that it was possible to take it into account from

the  first.  It  seems  never  to  be  absent;  but  it  is  most  clearly

recognizable  in  a  disorder  which  we  are  even  to-day  far  from

understanding - traumatic neurosis. For you must know that the same

factors always come into operation in the causation and mechanism of

every  possible  form  of  neurosis;  but  the  chief  importance  in  the

construction  of  the  symptoms  falls  now  upon  one  and  now  upon

another of these factors. The position is like that among the members

of a theatrical company. Each of them is regularly cast for his own

stock role - hero, confidant, villain, and so on; but each of them will

choose a different piece for his benefit performance. In the same way

phantasies which turn into symptoms are nowhere more obvious than

in  hysteria;  the  anticathexes  or  reaction-formations  of  the  ego

dominate  the  picture  in  obsessional  neurosis;  what  in  the  case  of

dreams we have termed ‘secondary revision’ stands in the forefront in

paranoia in the shape of delusions, and so on.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3435

 

   Thus in traumatic neuroses, and particularly in those brought about

by  the  horrors  of  war,  we  are  unmistakably  presented  with  a  self-

interested motive on the part of the ego, seeking for protection and

advantage  -  a  motive  which  cannot,  perhaps,  create  the  illness  by

itself but which assents to it and maintains it when once it has comeabout.  This  motive  tries  to  preserve  the  ego  from  the  dangers  the

threat of which was the precipitating cause of the illness and it will not

allow recovery to occur until a repetition of these dangers seems no

longer  possible  or  until  compensation  has  been  received  for  the

danger that has been endured.

   The ego takes a similar interest, however, in the development and

maintenance  of  the  neurosis  in  every  other  case.  I  have  already

shown that symptoms are supported by the ego, too, because they

have  a  side  with  which  they  offer  satisfaction  to  the  repressing

purpose of the ego. Moreover, settling the conflict by constructing a

symptom is the most convenient way out and the one most agreeable

to  the  pleasure  principle:  it  unquestionably  spares  the  ego  a  large

amount of internal work which is felt as distressing. Indeed there are

cases in which even the physician must admit that for a conflict to end

in neurosis is the most harmless and socially tolerable solution. You

must  not  be  surprised  to  hear  that  even  the  physician  may

occasionally take the side of the illness he is combating. It is not his

business to restrict himself in every situation in life to being a fanatic in

favour of health. He knows that there is not only neurotic misery in the

world but real, irremovable suffering as well, that necessity may even

require a person to sacrifice his health; and he learns that a sacrifice

of  this  kind  made  by  a  single  person  can  prevent  immeasurable

unhappiness for many others. If we may say, then, that whenever a

neurotic is faced by a conflict he takes flight into illness, yet we must

allow that in some cases that flight is fully justified, and a physician

who has recognized how the situation lies will silently and solicitously

withdraw.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3436

 

   But let us disregard these exceptional cases and proceed with our

discussion. In average circumstances we recognize that by escaping

into a neurosis the ego obtains a certain internal ‘gain from illness’. In

some  circumstances  of  life  this  is  further  accompanied  by  an

appreciable external advantage bearing a greater or less real value.Consider  the  commonest  example  of  this  sort.  A  woman  who  is

roughly  treated  and  ruthlessly  exploited  by  her  husband  will  fairly

regularly  find  a  way  out  in  neurosis,  if  her  constitution  makes  it

possible, if she is too cowardly or too moral to console herself secretly

with another man, if she is not strong enough to separate from her

husband in the face of every external deterrent, if she has no prospect

of supporting herself or obtaining a better husband and if in addition

she is till attached to this brutal husband by her sexual feelings. Her

illness  now  becomes  a  weapon  in  her  battle  with  her  dominating

husband - a weapon which she can use for her defence and misuse

for  her  revenge.  To  complain  of  her  illness  is  allowable,  though  to

lament her marriage was probably not. She find a helper in her doctor,

she  forces  her  usually  inconsiderate  husband  to  look  after  her,  to

spend money on her, to allow her at times to be away from home and

so free from her married oppression. When an external or accidental

gain from illness like this is really considerable and no real substitute

for  it  is  available,  you  must  not  reckon  very  high  the  chances  of

influencing the neurosis by your treatment.

   You will now protest that what I have told you about the gain from

illness argues entirely in favour of the view I have rejected - that the

ego itself wills and creates he neurosis. Not too fast, Gentlemen! It

may perhaps mean nothing more than that the ego puts up with the

neurosis, which it cannot, after all, prevent, and that it makes the best

of it, if anything can be made of it at all. That is only one side of the

business,  the  pleasant  side,  it  is  true.  So  far  as  the  neurosis  has

advantages the ego no doubt accepts it; but it does not only have

advantages. As a rule it soon turns out that the ego has made a bad

bargain by letting itself in for the neurosis. It has paid too dearly for an

alleviation of the conflict, and the sufferings attached to the symptoms

are perhaps an equivalent substitute for the torments of the conflict,

but they probably involve an increase in unpleasure. The ego would

like to free itself from this unpleasure of the symptoms without giving

up the gain from illness, and this is just what it cannot achieve. This

shows, then, that it was not so entirely active as it thought it was; and

we shall bear this well in mind.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3437

 

   In your contact as doctors with neurotics, Gentlemen, you will soon

give up expecting that the ones who raise the most lamentations and

complaints about their illness will be the most eager to co-operate and

will  offer  you  the  least  resistance.  It  is  rather  the  opposite.  But  of

course you will easily realize that everything that contributes to the

gain from illness will intensify the resistance due to repression and will

increase  the  therapeutic  difficulties.  But  to  the  portion  of  gain  from

illness  which  is,  so  to  say,  born  with  the  illness  we  have  to  add

another portion which arises later. When a psychical organization like

an  illness  has  lasted  for  some  time,  it  behaves  eventually  like  an

independent organism; it manifests something like a self-preservative

instinct; it establishes a kind of modus vivendi between itself and other

parts of the mind, even with those which are at bottom hostile to it;

and there can scarcely fail to be occasions when it proves once again

useful and expedient and acquires, as it were, a secondary function

which  strengthens  its  stability  afresh.  Instead  of  an  example  from

pathology,  let  us  take  a  glaring  instance  from  daily  life.  A  capable

working-man, who earns his living, is crippled by an accident in the

course of his occupation. The injured man can no longer work, but

eventually he obtains a small disablement pension, and he learns how

to exploit his mutilation by begging. His new, though worsened, means

of livelihood is based precisely on the very thing that deprived him of

his former means of livelihood. If you could put an end to his injury you

would  make  him,  to  begin  with,  without  means  of  subsistence;  the

question would arise of whether he was still capable of taking up his

earlier work again. What corresponds in the case of neuroses to a

secondary exploitation like this of an illness may be described as the

secondary gain from illness in contrast to the primary one.

      In  general,  however,  I  should  like  to  recommend  that,  while  not

under-estimating the practical importance of the gain from illness, you

should not let yourselves be impressed by it theoretically. After all,

apart from the exceptions recognized earlier, it always calls to mind

the  examples  of  ‘animal  intelligence’  illustrated  by  Oberländer  in

Fliegende Blätter. An Arab was riding his camel along a narrow pathcut in the steep face of a mountain. At a turn in the path he suddenly

found  himself  face  to  face  with  a  lion,  which  prepared  to  make  a

spring. He saw no way out: on one side a perpendicular cliff and on

the  other  a  precipice;  retreat  and  flight  were  impossible.  He  gave

himself up for lost. But the animal thought otherwise. He took one leap

with his rider into the abyss - and the lion was left in the lurch. The

help provided by a neurosis has as a rule no better success with the

patient.  This  may  be  because  dealing  with  a  conflict  by  forming

symptoms  is  after  all  an  automatic  process  which  cannot  prove

adequate to meeting the demands of life, and in which the subject has

abandoned the use of his best and highest powers. If there were a

choice, it would be preferable to go down in an honourable struggle

with fate.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3438

 

 

   But I still owe you further enlightenment, Gentlemen, on my reasons

for  not  starting  my  account  of  the  theory  of  the  neuroses  with  the

common  neurotic  state.  You  may  perhaps  suppose  that  it  was

because in that case I should have had greater difficulty in proving the

sexual causation of the neuroses. But you would be wrong there. In

the  case  of  the  transference  neuroses  one  must  work  one’s  way

through the interpretation of symptoms before one can arrive at that

discovery.  In  the  common  forms  of  what  are  known  as  the  ‘actual

neuroses’ the aetiological significance of sexual life is a crude fact that

springs to the observer’s eyes. I came upon it more than twenty years

ago  when  one  day  I  asked  myself  the  question  of  why  in  the

examination  of  neurotics  their  sexual  activities  were  so  regularly

excluded from consideration. At that time I sacrificed my popularity

with my patients for the sake of these enquiries; but after only a brief

effort I was able to declare that ‘if the vita sexualis is normal, there can

be no neurosis’ - and by this I meant no ‘actual neurosis’. No doubt

this statement passes too lightly over people’s individual differences; it

suffers, too, from the indefiniteness inseparable from the judgement ofwhat is ‘normal’. But as a rough guide it retains its value to this day. I

had  by  then  reached  the  point  of  establishing  specific  relations

between particular forms of neurosis and particular sexual noxae; and

I have no doubt that I could repeat the same observations to-day if

similar pathological material were still at my disposal. I found often

enough that a man who indulged in a certain kind of incomplete sexual

satisfaction  (for  instance,  manual  masturbation)  had  fallen  ill  of  a

particular  form  of  ‘actual  neurosis’,  and  that  this  neurosis  promptly

gave place to another if he replaced this sexual régime by another

equally far from being irreproachable. I was then in a position to infer

the change in a patient’s sexual mode of life from an alteration in his

condition. I also learnt then to stand obstinately by my suspicions till I

had overcome the patients’ disingenuousness and compelled them to

confirm my views. It is true that thereafter they preferred to go to other

doctors who did not make such keen enquiries about their sexual life.

   Even at that time I could not fail to notice that the causation of the

illness did not always point to sexual life. One person, it was true, fell

ill directly from a sexual noxa; but another did so because he had lost

his fortune or had been through an exhausting organic illness. The

explanation of these varieties came later, when we gained an insight

into the suspected interrelations between the ego and the libido, and

the explanation became the more satisfactory the deeper that insight

extended. A person only falls ill of a neurosis if his ego has lost the

capacity to allocate his libido in some way. The stronger is his ego, the

easier will it be for it to carry out that task. Any weakening of his ego

from  whatever  cause  must  have  the  same  effect  as  an  excessive

increase in the claims of the libido and will thus make it possible for

him to fall ill of a neurosis. There are other and more intimate relations

between the ego and the libido; but these have not yet come within

our  scope,  so  I  will  not  bring  them  up  as  part  of  my  present

explanation. What remains essential and makes things clear to us is

that, in every case and no matter how the illness is set going, the

symptoms  of  the  neurosis  are  sustained  by  the  libido  and  are

consequently evidence that it is being employed abnormally.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      3439

 

   Now, however, I must draw your attention to the decisive difference

between  the  symptoms  of  the  ‘actual’  neuroses  and  those  of  the

psychoneuroses, the first group of which, the transference neuroses,

have  occupied  us  so  much  hitherto.  In  both  cases  the  symptoms

originate from the libido, and are thus abnormal employments of it,

substitutive satisfactions. But the symptoms of the ‘actual’ neuroses -

intracranial  pressure,  sensations  of  pain,  a  state  of  irritation  in  an

organ,  weakening  or  inhibition  of  a  function  -  have  no  ‘sense’,  no

psychical meaning. They are not only manifested predominantly in the

body (as are hysterical symptoms, for instance, as well), but they are

also themselves entirely somatic processes, in the generating of which

all the complicated mental mechanisms we have come to know are

absent. Thus they really are what psychoneurotic symptoms were so

long  believed  to  be.  But  if  so,  how  can  they  correspond  to

employments  of  the  libido,  which  we  have  recognized  as  a  force

operating in the mind? Well, Gentlemen, that is a very simple matter.

Let me remind you of one of the very first objections that were brought

up against psycho-analysis. It was said then that it was occupied in

finding a purely psychological theory of neurotic phenomena and this

was quite hopeless, since psychological theories could never explain

an illness. People had chosen to forget that the sexual function is not

a purely psychical thing any more than it is a purely somatic one. It

influences  bodily  and  mental  life  alike.  If  in  the  symptoms  of  the

psychoneuroses we have become acquainted with manifestations of

disturbances in the psychical operation of the sexual function, we shall

not  be  surprised  to  find  in  the  ‘actual’  neuroses  the  direct somatic

consequences of sexual disturbances.

      Clinical  medicine  has  given  us  a  valuable  pointer  towards  an

interpretation of these disturbances, and one that has been taken into

account by various enquirers. The ‘actual’ neuroses, in the details of

their  symptoms  and  also  in  their  characteristic  of  influencing  every

organic  system  and  every  function,  exhibit  an  unmistakable

resemblance to the pathological states which arise from the chronic

influence of external toxic substances and from a sudden withdrawal

of  them  -  to  intoxications  and  conditions  of  abstinence.  The  twogroups  of  disorders  are  brought  together  still  more  closely  by

intermediate conditions such as Grave’s disease which we have learnt

to recognize as equally due to the operation of toxic substances, but

of  toxins  which  are  not  introduced  into  the  body  from  outside  but

originate in the subject’s own metabolism. In view of these analogies,

we  cannot,  I  think,  avoid  regarding  the  neuroses  as  results  of

disturbances  in  the  sexual  metabolism,  whether  because  more  of

these  sexual  toxins  is  produced  than  the  subject  can  deal  with,  or

whether because internal and even psychical conditions restrict the

proper employment of these substances. The popular mind has from

time immemorial paid homage to hypotheses of this kind on the nature

of sexual desire, speaking of love as an ‘intoxication’ and believing

that falling in love is brought about by love philtres - though here the

operative agent is to some extent externalized. And for us this would

be an occasion for recalling the erotogenic zones and our assertion

that sexual excitation can be generated in the most various organs.

But  for  the  rest  the  phrase  ‘sexual  metabolism’  or  ‘chemistry  of

sexuality’  is  a  term  without  content;  we  know  nothing  about  it  and

cannot  even  decide  whether  we  are  to  assume  two  sexual

substances,  which  would  then  be  named  ‘male’  and  ‘female’,  or

whether we could be satisfied with one sexual toxin which we should

have  to  recognize  as  the  vehicle  of  all  the  stimulant  effects  of  the

libido.  The  theoretical  structure  of  psycho-analysis  that  we  have

created is in truth a superstructure, which will one day have to be set

upon its organic foundation. But we are still ignorant of this.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3440

 

   What characterizes psycho-analysis as a science is not the material

which  it  handles  but  the  technique  with  which  it  works.  It  can  be

applied to the history of civilization, to the science of religion and to

mythology, no less than to the theory of the neuroses, without doing

violence  to  its  essential  nature.  What  it  aims  at  and  achieves  is

nothing other than the uncovering of what is unconscious in mental

life.  The  problems  of  the  ‘actual’  neuroses,  whose  symptoms  areprobably generated by direct toxic damage, offer psycho-analysis no

points of attack. It can do little towards throwing light on them and

must leave the task to biologico-medical research.

   And now perhaps you understand better why I did not choose to

arrange my material differently. If I had promised you an ‘Introduction

to the Theory of the Neuroses’ the correct path would certainly have

led  from  the  simple  forms  of  the  ‘actual’  neuroses  to  the  more

complicated psychical illnesses due to disturbance of the libido. As

regards the former I should have had to collect from various sources

what we have learnt or believe we know, and in connection with the

psychoneuroses psycho-analysis would have come up for discussion

as  the  most  important  technical  aid  in  throwing  light  on  those

conditions. But what I intended to give and what I announced was an

‘Introduction to Psycho-Analysis’. It was more important for me that

you  should  gain  an  idea  of  psycho-analysis  than  that  you  should

obtain some pieces of knowledge about the neuroses; and for that

reason the ‘actual’ neuroses, unproductive so far as psycho-analysis

is  concerned,  could  no  longer  have  a  place  in  the  foreground.  I

believe,  too,  that  I  have  made  the  better  choice  for  you.  For,  on

account  of  the  profundity  of  its  hypotheses  and  the

comprehensiveness  of  its  connections,  psycho-analysis  deserves  a

place in the interest of every educated person, while the theory of the

neuroses is a chapter in medicine like any other.

   Nevertheless you will rightly expect that we should devote some

interest  to  the  ‘actual’  neuroses  as  well.  Their  intimate  clinical

connection with the psychoneuroses would alone compel us to do so.

I may inform you, then, that we distinguish three pure forms of ‘actual’

neuroses: neurasthenia, anxiety neurosis and hypochondria. Even this

assertion is not uncontradicted. All the names are in use, it is true, but

their content is indefinite and fluctuating. There are even doctors who

oppose any dividing lines in the chaotic world of neurotic phenomena,

any segregation of clinical entities or individual diseases, and who do

not even recognize the distinction between the ‘actual’ neuroses and

the  psychoneuroses.  I  think  they  are  going  too  far  and  have  not

chosen the path which leads to progress. The forms of neurosis which

I have mentioned occur occasionally in their pure form; more often,

however,  they  are  intermixed  with  each  other  and  with  apsychoneurotic  disorder.  This  need  not  lead  us  to  abandon  the

distinction between them. Consider the difference between the study

of minerals and of rocks in mineralogy. The minerals are described as

individuals, no doubt on the basis of the fact that they often occur as

crystals, sharply separated from their environment. Rocks consist of

aggregations  of  minerals,  which,  we  may  be  sure,  have  not  come

together by chance but as a result of what determined their origin. In

the theory of the neuroses we still know too little of the course of their

development to produce anything resembling petrology. But we are

certainly doing the right thing if we start by isolating from the mass the

individual  clinical  entities  which  we  recognize  and  which  are

comparable to the minerals.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3441

 

      A  noteworthy  relation  between  the  symptoms  of  the  ‘actual’

neuroses  and  of  the  psychoneuroses  makes  a  further  important

contribution  to  our  knowledge  of  the  formation  of  symptoms  in  the

latter. For a symptom of an ‘actual’ neurosis is often the nucleus and

first stage of a psychoneurotic symptom. A relation of this kind can be

most  clearly  observed  between  neurasthenia  and  the  transference

neurosis  known  as  ‘conversion  hysteria’,  between  anxiety  neurosis

and anxiety hysteria, but also between hypochondria and the forms of

disorder which will be mentioned later under the name of paraphrenia

(dementia praecox and paranoia). Let us take as an example a case

of  hysterical  headache  or  lumbar  pain.  Analysis  shows  us  that,  by

condensation  and  displacement,  it  has  become  a  substitutive

satisfaction for a whole number of libidinal phantasies or memories.

But this pain was also at one time a real one and it was then a direct

sexual-toxic symptom, the somatic expression of a libidinal excitation.

We  are  far  from  asserting  that all  hysterical  symptoms  contain  a

nucleus of this kind. But it remains a fact that this is especially often

the  case  and  that  whatever  somatic  influences  (whether  normal  or

pathological) are brought about by libidinal excitation are preferred for

the construction of hysterical symptoms. In such cases they play thepart of the grain of sand which a mollusc coats with layers of mother-

of-pearl.  In  the  same  way,  the  passing  indications  of  sexual

excitement  which  accompany  the  sexual  act  are  employed  by  the

psychoneurosis as the most convenient and appropriate material for

the construction of symptoms.

      A  similar  course  of  events  affords  peculiar  diagnostic  and

therapeutic interest. It not at all infrequently happens in the case of a

person who is disposed to a neurosis without actually suffering from a

manifest  one,  that  a  pathological  somatic  change  (through

inflammation or injury perhaps) sets the activity of symptom-formation

going; so that this activity hastily turns the symptom which has been

presented to it by reality into the representative of all the unconscious

phantasies which have only been lying in wait to seize hold of some

means  of  expression.  In  such  a  case  the  physician  will  adopt

sometimes  one  and  sometimes  another  line  of  treatment.  He  will

either endeavour to remove the organic basis, without bothering about

its noisy neurotic elaboration; or he will attack the neurosis which has

taken this favourable opportunity for arising and will pay little attention

to its organic precipitating cause. The outcome will prove the one or

the  other  line  of  approach  right  or  wrong;  it  is  impossible  to  make

general recommendations to meet such mixed cases.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3442

 

                                      LECTURE XXV

 

                                        ANXIETY

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - What I said to you in my last lecture about the

general  neurotic  state  will  no  doubt  have  struck  you  as  the  most

incomplete and inadequate of all my pronouncements. I know that is

true,  and  nothing  will  have  surprised  you  more,  I  expect,  than  that

there  was  nothing  in  it  about  anxiety,  of  which  most  neurotics

complain, which they themselves describe as their worst suffering and

which does in fact attain enormous intensity in them and may result in

their  adopting  the  craziest  measures.  But  there  at  least  I  had  nointention  of  giving  you  short  measure.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  my

intention  to  attack  the  problem  of  anxiety  in  neurotics  particularly

keenly and to discuss it at length with you.

   I have no need to introduce anxiety itself to you. Every one of us has

experienced that sensation, or, to speak more correctly, that affective

state, at one time or other on our own account. But I think the question

has never been seriously enough raised of why neurotics in particular

suffer from anxiety so much more and so much more strongly than

other people. Perhaps it has been regarded as something self-evident:

the  words  ‘nervös’  and  ‘ängstlich’  are  commonly  used

interchangeably, as though they meant the same thing. But we have

no right to do so: there are ‘ängstlich’ people who are otherwise not at

all  ‘nervös’  and,  moreover,  ‘nervös’  people  who  suffer  from  many

symptoms, among which a tendency to ‘Angst’ is not included.

      However  that  may  be,  there  is  no  question  that  the  problem  of

anxiety  is  a  nodal  point  at  which  the  most  various  and  important

questions converge, a riddle whose solution would be found to throw a

flood of light on our whole mental existence. I will not assert that I can

give you this complete solution; but you will certainly expect psycho-

analysis  to  approach  this  subject  too  in  quite  a  different  way  from

academic  medicine.  Interest  there  seems  mainly  to  be  centred  on

tracing  the  anatomical  paths  along  which  the  state  of  anxiety  is

brought about. We are told that the medulla oblongata is stimulated,

and the patient learns that he is suffering from a neurosis of the vagus

nerve. The medulla oblongata is a very serious and lovely object. I

remember quite clearly how much time and trouble I devoted to its

study many years ago. To-day, however, I must remark that I know

nothing  that  could  be  of  less  interest  to  me  for  the  psychological

understanding of anxiety than knowledge of the path of the nerves

along which its excitations pass.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3443

 

 

   It is possible at the start to work upon the subject of anxiety for quitea time without thinking at all of neurotic states. You will understand me

at once when I describe this kind of anxiety as ‘realistic’ anxiety in

contrast to ‘neurotic’ anxiety. Realistic anxiety strikes us as something

very rational and intelligible. We may say of it that it is a reaction to the

perception  of  an  external  danger  -  that  is,  of  an  injury  which  is

expected and foreseen. It is connected with the flight reflex and it may

be regarded as a manifestation of the self-preservative instinct. On

what occasions anxiety appears - that is to say, in the face of what

objects and in what situations - will of course depend to a large extent

on the state of a person’s knowledge and on his sense of power vis-à-

vis  the  external  world.  We  can  quite  understand  how  a  savage  is

afraid of a cannon and frightened by an eclipse of the sun, while a

white man, who knows how to handle the instrument and can foretell

the eclipse, remains without anxiety in these circumstances. On other

occasions  it  is  actually  superior  knowledge  that  promotes  anxiety,

because it makes an early recognition of the danger possible. Thus

the  savage  will  be  terrified  at  a  trail  in  the  jungle  that  tells  an

uninformed person nothing, because it warns him of the proximity of a

wild animal; and an experienced sailor will look with terror at a small

cloud in the sky that seems trivial to a passenger, because it tells him

of an approaching hurricane.

   On further consideration we must tell ourselves that our judgement

that realistic anxiety is rational and expedient calls for drastic revision.

For the only expedient behaviour when a danger threatens would be a

cool estimate of one’s own strength in comparison with the magnitude

of the threat and, on the basis of that, a decision as to whether flight or

defence,  or  possibly  even  attack,  offers  the  best  prospect  of  a

successful  issue.  But  in  this  situation  there  is  no  place  at  all  for

anxiety; everything that happens would be achieved just as well and

probably  better  if  no  anxiety  were  generated.  And  you  can  see,

indeed, that if the anxiety is excessively great it proves in the highest

degree  inexpedient;  it  paralyses  all  action,  including  even  flight.

Usually the reaction to danger consists n a mixture of the affect of

anxiety and defensive action. A terrified animal is afraid and flees; but

the expedient part of this is the ‘flight’ and not the ‘being afraid’.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3444

 

   Thus one feels tempted to assert that the generation of anxiety is

never an expedient thing. It may perhaps help us to see more clearly if

we dissect the situation of anxiety more carefully. The first thing about

it is preparedness for the danger, which manifests itself in increased

sensory  attention  and  motor  tension.  This  expectant  preparedness

can  be  unhesitatingly  recognized  as  an  advantage;  indeed,  its

absence may be made responsible for serious consequences. From it

there then proceeds on the one hand motor action - flight in the first

instance and at a higher level active defence - and on the other hand

what we feel as a state of anxiety. The more the generation of anxiety

is limited to a mere abortive beginning - to a signal - the more will the

preparedness  for  anxiety  transform  itself  without  disturbance  into

action and the more expedient will be the shape taken by the whole

course of events. Accordingly, the preparedness for anxiety seems to

me  to  be  the  expedient  element  in  what  we  call  anxiety,  and  the

generation of anxiety the inexpedient one.

   I shall avoid going more closely into the question of whether our

linguistic usage means the same thing or something clearly different

by ‘Angst [anxiety]’, ‘Furcht [fear]’ and ‘Schreck [fright]’. I will only say

that I think ‘Angst’ relates to the state and disregards the object, while

‘Furcht’ draws attention precisely to the object. It seems that ‘Schreck’,

on the other hand, does have a special sense; it lays emphasis, that

is,  on  the  effect  produced  by  a  danger  which  is  not  met  by  any

preparedness  for  anxiety.  We  might  say,  therefore,  that  a  person

protects himself from fright by anxiety.

   A certain ambiguity and indefiniteness in the use of the word ‘Angst’

will  not  have  escaped  you.  By  ‘anxiety’  we  usually  understand  the

subjective state into which we are put by perceiving the ‘generation of

anxiety’ and we call this an affect. And what is an affect in the dynamic

sense?  It  is  in  any  case  something  highly  composite.  An  affect

includes in the first place particular motor innervations or discharges

and secondly certain feelings; the latter are of two kinds - perceptions

of  the  motor  actions  that  have  occurred  and  the  direct  feelings  of

pleasure and unpleasure which, as we say, give the affect its keynote.But I do not think that with this enumeration we have arrived at the

essence of an affect. We seem to see deeper in the case of some

affects and to recognize that the core which holds the combination we

have described together is the repetition of some particular significant

experience. This experience could only be a very early impression of a

very general nature, placed in the prehistory not of the individual but of

the  species.  To  make  myself  more  intelligible  -  an  affective  state

would be constructed in the same way as a hysterical attack; and, like

it, would be the precipitate of a reminiscence. A hysterical attack may

thus be likened to a freshly constructed individual affect, and a normal

affect to the expression of a general hysteria which has become a

heritage.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3445

 

   Do not suppose that the things I have said to you here about affects

are the recognized stock-in-trade of normal psychology. They are on

the contrary views that have grown up on the soil of psycho-analysis

and  are  native  only  to  it.  What  you  may  gather  about  affects  from

psychology - the James-Lange theory, for example - is quite beyond

understanding  or  discussion  to  us  psycho-analysts.  But  we  do  not

regard our knowledge about affects as very assured either; it is a first

attempt at finding our bearings in this obscure region. I will proceed,

however. We believe that in the case of the affect of anxiety we know

what the early impression is which it repeats. We believe that it is in

the act  of  birth  that  there  comes  about  the  combination  of

unpleasurable feelings, impulses of discharge and bodily sensations

which has become the prototype of the effects of a mortal danger and

has  ever  since  been  repeated  by  us  as  the  state  of  anxiety.  The

immense  increase  of  stimulation  owing  to  the  interruption  of  the

renovation of the blood (internal respiration) was at the time the cause

of the experience of anxiety; the first anxiety was thus a toxic one. The

name ‘Angst - ‘augustiae’, ‘Enge’¹ - emphasizes the characteristic of

restriction in breathing which was then present as a consequence of

the real situation and is now almost invariably reinstated in the affect.We  shall  also  recognize  it  as  highly  relevant  that  this  first  state  of

anxiety arose out of separation from the mother. It is, of course, our

conviction that the disposition to repeat the first state of anxiety has

been  so  thoroughly  incorporated  into  the  organism  through  a

countless series of generations that a single individual cannot escape

the affect of anxiety even if, like the legendary Macduff, he ‘was from

his  mother’s  womb  untimely  ripped’  and  has  therefore  not  himself

experienced the act of birth. We cannot say what has become the

prototype of the state of anxiety in the case of creatures other than

mammals. And in the same way we do not know either what complex

of feelings is in such creatures the equivalent to our anxiety.

   It may perhaps interest you to learn how anyone could have formed

such an idea as that the act of birth is the source and prototype of the

affect of anxiety. Speculation had a very small share in it; what I did,

rather, was to borrow from the naïve popular mind. Long years ago,

while I was sitting with a number of other young hospital doctors at our

mid-day  meal  in  an  inn,  a  house  physician  from  the  midwifery

department told us of a comic thing that had happened at the last

examination  for  midwives.  A  candidate  was  asked  what  it  meant  if

meconium (excreta) made its appearance at birth in the water coming

away, and she promptly replied: ‘it means the child’s frightened.’ She

was laughed at and failed in the examination. But silently I took her

side and began to suspect that this poor woman from the humbler

classes had laid an unerring finger on an important correlation.

 

   ¹ [These Latin and German words, meaning ‘narrow place’, ’straits’, are from the same root

as ‘angst’ (and ‘anxiety’).]

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3446

 

 

   If we now pass over to consider neurotic anxiety, what fresh forms

and  situations  are  manifested  by  anxiety?  There  is  much  to  be

described here. In the first place we find a general apprehensiveness,

a kind of freely floating anxiety which is ready to attach itself to any

idea that is in any way suitable, which influences judgement, selectswhat is to be expected, and lies in wait for any opportunity that will

allow it to justify itself. We call this state ‘expectant anxiety’ or ‘anxious

expectation’. People who are tormented by this kind of anxiety always

foresee  the  most  frightful  of  all  possibilities,  interpret  every  chance

event as a premonition of evil and exploit every uncertainty in a bad

sense. A tendency to an expectation of evil of this sort is to be found

as  a  character  trait  in  many  people  whom  one  cannot  otherwise

regard as sick; one calls them over-anxious or pessimistic. A striking

amount of expectant anxiety, however, forms a regular feature of a

nervous disorder to which I have given the name of ‘anxiety neurosis’

and which I include among the ‘actual’ neuroses.

      A  second  form  of  anxiety,  in  contrast  to  the  ones  I  have  just

described,  is  bound  psychically  and  attached  particular  objects  or

situations. This is the anxiety of the extremely multifarious and often

very  strange  ‘phobias’.  Stanley  Hall,  the  respected  American

psychologist, has recently taken the trouble to present us with a whole

series of these phobias in all the magnificence of Greek names. This

sounds like a list of the ten Plagues of Egypt, though their number

goes  far  beyond  ten.  Listen  to  all  the  things  that  can  become  the

object or content of a phobia: darkness, open air, open spaces, cats,

spiders,  caterpillars,  snakes,  mice,  thunderstorms,  sharp  points,

blood,  enclosed  spaces,  crowds,  solitude,  crossing  bridges,  sea

voyages and railway journeys, etc., etc. A first attempt at finding one’s

way  about  in  this  confusion  suggests  a  division  into  three  groups.

Some of the dreaded objects and situations have something uncanny

about them for normal people as well, some relation to danger; and

such phobias, therefore, do not strike us as unintelligible, though their

strength  is  greatly  exaggerated.  Thus  most  of  us  have  a  sense  of

repulsion if we meet with a snake. Snake phobia, we might say, is a

universal  human  characteristic;  and  Darwin  has  described  most

impressively how he could not avoid feeling fear of a snake that struck

at him, even though he knew that he was protected from it by a thick

sheet of glass. We may refer to a second group the cases in which a

relation  to  a  danger  is  still  present,  though  we  are  accustomed  to

minimize the danger and not to anticipate it. The majority of situation

phobias belong to this group. We know that there is more chance of

an accident when we are on a railway-journey than when we stay athome - the chance of a collision; we know, too, that a ship may go

down, in which case there is a probability of being drowned; but we do

not  think  about  these  dangers,  and  travel  by  rail  and  ship  without

anxiety. It cannot be disputed that we should fall into the river if the

bridge collapsed at the moment we were crossing it; but that happens

so exceedingly seldom that it does not arise as a danger. Solitude,

too, has its dangers and in certain circumstances we avoid it; but there

is no question of our not being able to tolerate it under any condition

even for a moment. Much the same is true of crowds, of enclosed

spaces, of thunderstorms and so on. What in general appears to us

strange in these phobias of neurotics is not so much their content as

their intensity. The anxiety of phobias is positively overwhelming. And

sometimes we get an impression that what neurotics are afraid of are

not  at  all  the  same  things  and  situations  which  may  in  certain

circumstances cause anxiety in us too and which they describe by the

same names.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3447

 

   We are left with a third group of phobias, which is quite beyond our

comprehension.  When  a  strong,  grown-up  man  is  unable  owing  to

anxiety to walk along a street or cross a square in his own familiar

home-town,  when  a  healthy,  well-developed  woman  is  thrown  into

insensate anxiety because a cat has brushed against the edge of her

dress or because a mouse has run across the room, how are we to

relate these things to the danger which they obviously constitute for

the phobic subject? In the case of such animal phobias there can be

no question of an exaggeration of universal human antipathies, since,

as though to demonstrate the contrary, there are numerous people

who  cannot  pass  by  a  cat  without  coaxing  it  and  stroking  it.  The

mouse that these women are so much afraid of is also [in German]

one of the chief terms of affection; a girl who is delighted when her

lover calls her one will often scream with terror when she sees the

pretty creature which bears that name. In the case of the man with

agoraphobia  the  only  explanation  that  we  can  reach  is  that  he  isbehaving like a small child. A child is actually taught as part of his

education to avoid such situations as dangerous; and our agoraphobic

will in fact be saved from his anxiety if we accompany him across the

square.

      The  two  forms  of  anxiety  that  I  have  just  described  -  the  freely

floating expectant anxiety and the sort which is bound to phobias - are

independent of each other. One is not a higher stage, as it were, of

the other; and they only appear simultaneously in exceptional cases

and,  so  to  speak,  accidentally.  The  most  powerful  general

apprehensiveness need not be expressed in phobias; people whose

whole existence is restricted by agoraphobia may be entirely free from

pessimistic  expectant  anxiety.  Some  phobias  -  for  instance,

agoraphobia  and  railway  phobia  -  are  demonstrably  acquired  at  a

fairly  mature  age,  while  others  -  such  as  fear  of  darkness,

thunderstorms and animals - seem to have been present from the first.

Those of the former kind have the significance of severe illnesses; the

latter make their appearance rather as eccentricities or whims. If a

person exhibits one of these latter, one may suspect as a rule that he

will have other similar ones. I must add that we class all these phobias

as anxiety  hysteria;  that  is  to  say,  we  regard  them  as  a  disorder

closely related to the familiar conversion hysteria.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3448

 

   The third of the forms of neurotic anxiety faces us with the puzzling

fact  that  here  the  connection  between  anxiety  and  a  threatening

danger is completely lost to view. For instance, anxiety may appear in

hysteria  as  an  accompaniment  to  hysterical  symptoms,  or  in  some

chance condition of excitement in which, it is true, we should expect

some manifestation of affect but least of all one of anxiety; or it may

make  its  appearance,  divorced  from  any  determinants  and  equally

incomprehensible to us and to the patient, as an unrelated attack of

anxiety. Here there is no sign whatever of any danger or of any cause

that  could  be  exaggerated  into  one.  We  next  learn  from  these

spontaneous attacks that the complex which we describe as a state ofanxiety  is  capable  of  fragmentation.  The  total  attack  can  be

represented by a single, intensely developed symptom, by a tremor, a

vertigo, by palpitation of the heart, or by dyspnoea; and the general

feeling by which we recognize anxiety may be absent or have become

indistinct.  Yet  these  conditions,  which  we  describe  as  ‘anxiety-

equivalents’,  have  to  be  equated  with  anxiety  in  all  clinical  and

aetiological respects.

 

   Two questions now arise. Can we relate neurotic anxiety, in which

danger plays little or no part, to realistic anxiety, which is invariably a

reaction to danger? And how are we to understand neurotic anxiety?

We shall certainly be inclined in the first instance to hold fast to our

expectation that where there is anxiety there must be something that

one is afraid of.

      Clinical  observation  affords  us  a  number  of  hints  towards

understanding neurotic anxiety, and I will give you their tenor:-

   (a) It is not difficult to establish the fact that expectant anxiety or

general apprehensiveness is closely dependent on certain happenings

in sexual life, or, let us say, certain employments of the libido. The

simplest and most instructive case of this sort occurs in people who

expose themselves to what is known as unconsummated excitation -

that  is,  people  in  whom  violent  sexual  excitations  meet  with  no

sufficient  discharge,  cannot  be  brought  to  a  satisfying  conclusion  -

men for instance, while they are engaged to be married, and women

whose husbands are insufficiently potent or, as a precaution, perform

the  sexual  act  in  an  incomplete  or  curtailed  fashion.  In  such

circumstances the libidinal excitation vanishes and anxiety appears in

its place whether in the form of expectant anxiety or in attacks and

anxiety-equivalents. Interruption of the sexual act as a precaution, if it

is practised as a sexual régime, is such a regular cause of anxiety

neurosis  in  men,  but  more  particularly  in  women,  that  in  medical

practice  it  is  advisable  in  such  cases  to  begin  by  investigating  this

aetiology. It will then be found on countless occasions that the anxiety

neurosis disappears when the sexual abuse is discontinued.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      3449

 

   The fact of there being a connection between sexual restraint and

anxiety  states  is,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  longer  disputed  even  by

physicians who have no contact with psycho-analysis. But I can well

believe  that  an  attempt  is  made  to  reverse  the  relation  and  to  put

forward the view that the people concerned are such as are already

inclined to apprehensiveness and for that reason practise restraint in

sexual matters as well. This, however, is decisively contradicted by

the  behaviour  of  women,  whose  sexual  activity  is  essentially  of  a

passive nature - is determined, that is to say, by their treatment by the

man. The more passionate a woman is - the more inclined, therefore,

to sexual intercourse and the more capable of being satisfied - the

more certain she is to react with manifestations of anxiety to a man’s

impotence or to coitus interruptus, whereas in the case of anaesthetic

women  or  those  without  much  libido  such  ill-treatment  plays  a  far

smaller part.

   Of course, the sexual abstinence now so warmly recommended by

doctors  only  has  the  same  importance  in  generating  anxiety  states

when the libido which is prevented from finding a satisfying discharge

is correspondingly strong and has not been dealt with for the greater

part by sublimation. Indeed, the decision on whether the outcome is to

be illness or not always lies with quantitative factors. Even where what

is  in  question  is  not  illness  but  the  form  assumed  by  a  person’s

character, it is easy to recognize that sexual restriction goes hand in

hand with some kind of anxiousness and hesitancy, while intrepidity

and impudent daring bring along with them a free indulgence of sexual

needs. However much these relations are altered and complicated by

a  variety  of  cultural  influences,  it  nevertheless  remains  true  of  the

average of mankind that anxiety has a close connection with sexual

limitation.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3450

 

   I am far from having told you of all the observations that speak in

favour of the genetic relation I have asserted to exist between libidoand  anxiety.  Among  them,  for  instance,  is  the  influence  on  anxiety

disorders of certain phases of life to which, as in the case of puberty

and  the  time  of  the  menopause,  a  considerable  increase  in  the

production of libido may be attributed. In some states of excitement,

too, it is possible to observe directly a mixture of libido and anxiety

and  the  final  replacement  of  libido  by  anxiety.  The  impression  one

gains from all these facts is twofold: first, that what is in question is an

accumulation of libido which is kept away from its normal employment,

and  secondly,  that  here  we  are  entirely  in  the  sphere  of  somatic

processes. How anxiety arises from libido is not at first discernible; we

can only recognize that libido is absent and that anxiety is observed in

its place.

      (b)  A  second  pointer  is  to  be  found  in  the  analysis  of  the

psychoneuroses, and especially of hysteria. We have seen that in this

illness anxiety often appears in company with the symptoms, but that

unbound anxiety appears, too, manifested as an attack or as a chronic

condition. The patients cannot say what it is they are afraid of, and, by

the  help  of  an  unmistakable  secondary  revision,  link  it  to  the  first

phobias that come to hand - such as dying, going mad, or having a

stroke.  If  the  situation  out  of  which  the  anxiety  (or  the  symptoms

accompanied by anxiety) arose is subjected to analysis, we can as a

rule  discover  what  normal  course  of  psychical  events  has  failed  to

occur and has been replaced by phenomena of anxiety. To express it

in  another  way:  we  construct  the  unconscious  process  as  it  would

have  been  if  it  had  not  experienced  any  repression  and  had

proceeded unhindered into consciousness. This process would have

been  accompanied  by  a  particular  affect,  and  we  now  learn  to  our

surprise that this affect accompanying the normal course of events is

invariably replaced by anxiety after repression has occurred, no matter

what its own quality may be. Thus, when we have a hysterical anxiety-

state  before  us,  its  unconscious  correlate  may  be  an  impulse  of  a

similar character - anxiety, shame, embarrassment - or, just as easily,

a positive libidinal excitation or a hostile aggressive one, such as rage

or anger. Anxiety is therefore the universally current coinage for which

any affective impulse is or can be exchanged if the ideational content

attached to it is subjected to repression.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3451

 

   (c) We make a third discovery when we come to patients suffering

from obsessional actions, who seem in a remarkable way exempt from

anxiety. If we try to hinder their carrying out of their obsessional action

-  their  washing  or  their  ceremonial  -  or  if  they  themselves  venture

upon an attempt to give up one of their compulsions, they are forced

by the most terrible anxiety to yield to the compulsion. We can see

that the anxiety was screened by the obsessional action, and that the

latter  was  only  performed  in  order  to  avoid  the  anxiety.  In  an

obsessional  neurosis,  therefore,  anxiety  which  would  otherwise

inevitably set in is replaced by the formation of a symptom, and if we

turn to hysteria we find a similar relation: the result of the process of

repression is either a generating of anxiety pure and simple, or anxiety

accompanied  by  the  formation  of  a  symptom,  or  a  more  complete

formation of a symptom without anxiety. It would thus seem not to be

wrong in an abstract sense to assert that in general symptoms are

only  formed  to  escape  an  otherwise  unavoidable  generating  of

anxiety. If we adopt this view, anxiety is placed, as it were, in the very

centre of our interest in the problems of neurosis.

 

   Our observations on anxiety neurosis led us to conclude that the

deflection of the libido from its normal employment, which causes the

development  of  anxiety,  takes  place  in  the  region  of  somatic

processes.  Analyses  of  hysteria  an  obsessional  neurosis  yield  the

additional conclusion that a similar deflection with the same outcome

may  also  be  the  result  of  a  refusal  on  the  part  of  the psychical

agencies. This much, therefore, we know about the origin of neurotic

anxiety. It still sounds fairly indefinite; but for the moment I see no path

that would lead us further. The second problem we set ourselves - of

establishing a connection between neurotic anxiety, which is libido put

to an abnormal employment, and realistic anxiety, which corresponds

to  a  reaction  to  danger  -  seems  even  harder  to  solve.  One  might

suppose that these were two quite disparate things; and yet we have

no means of distinguishing in our feelings between realistic anxiety

and neurotic anxiety. 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3452

 

   We finally arrive at the connection we are in search of, if we take as

our starting-point the opposition we have so often asserted between

the ego and the libido. As we know, the generation of anxiety is the

ego’s reaction to danger and the signal for taking flight. If so, it seems

plausible  to  suppose  that  in  neurotic  anxiety  the  ego  is  making  a

similar attempt at flight from the demand by its libido, that it is treating

this  internal  danger  as  though  it  were  an  external  one.  This  would

therefore fulfil our expectation that where anxiety is shown there is

something one is afraid of. But the analogy could be carried further.

Just as the attempt at flight from an external danger is replaced by

standing firm and the adoption of expedient measures of defence, so

too the generation of neurotic anxiety gives place to the formation of

symptoms, which results in the anxiety being bound.

   The difficulty in understanding now lies else here. The anxiety which

signifies a flight of the ego from its libido is after all supposed to be

derived from that libido itself. This is obscure and it reminds us not to

forget that after all a person’s libido is fundamentally something of his

and cannot be contrasted with him as something external. It is the

topographical  dynamics  of  the  generation  of  anxiety  which  are  still

obscure to us - the question of what mental energies are produced in

what process and from what mental systems they derive. This is once

more a question which I cannot promise to answer: but there are two

other tracks which we must not fail to follow and in doing so we shall

once more be making use of direct observation and analytic enquiry

as a help to our speculations. We will turn to the genesis of anxiety in

children and to the source of the neurotic anxiety which is attached to

phobias.

 

   Apprehensiveness in children is something very usual, and it seems

most difficult to distinguish whether it is neurotic or realistic anxiety.

Indeed the value of making the distinction is put in question by the

behaviour of children. For on the one hand we are not surprised if achild is frightened of all strangers, or of new situations and things; and

we account for this reaction very easily as being due to his weakness

and  ignorance.  Thus  we  attribute  to  children  a  strong  inclination  to

realistic  anxiety  and  we  should  regard  it  as  quite  an  expedient

arrangement  if  this  apprehensiveness  were  an  innate  heritage  in

them.  Children  would  merely  be  repeating  in  this  the  behaviour  of

prehistoric men and of modern primitive peoples who as a result of

their ignorance and helplessness are afraid of every novelty and of

many familiar things which no longer cause us any anxiety to-day. And

it would fit in perfectly with our expectation if children’s phobias, in part

at  least,  were  the  same  as  those  which  we  may  attribute  to  the

primaeval periods of human development.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3453

 

   On the other hand we cannot overlook the fact that not all children

are  anxious  to  the  same  degree,  and  that  precisely  children  who

exhibit a special timidity towards objects and in situations of every kind

turn out later to be neurotic. Thus the neurotic disposition betrays itself

also by an outspoken tendency to realistic anxiety; apprehensiveness

appears to be the primary thing and we reach the conclusion that the

reason why children and, later, growing youths and girls are afraid of

the  height  of  their  libido  is  because  in  fact  they  are  afraid  of

everything. The genesis of anxiety from libido would in this way be

denied; and if one examined into the determinants of realistic anxiety,

consistency would lead one to the view that consciousness of one’s

own  weakness  and  helplessness  -  inferiority  according  to  Adler’s

terminology, - if it can be prolonged from childhood into adult life, is

the final basis of neuroses.

   This sounds so simple and seductive that it has a claim on our

attention. It is true that it would involve a displacement of the riddle of

the neurotic state. The continued existence of the sense of inferiority -

and thus, of what determine anxiety and the formation of symptoms -

seems  so  well  assured  that  what  calls  for  an  explanation  is  rather

how, as an exception, what we know as health can come about. Butwhat  is  revealed  by  a  careful  examination  of  apprehensiveness  in

children? At the very beginning, what children are afraid of is strange

people;  situations  only  become  important  because  they  include

people, and impersonal things do not come into account at all until

later. But a child is not afraid of these strangers because he attributes

evil intentions to them and compares his weakness with their strength,

and accordingly assesses them as dangers to his existence, safety

and  freedom  from  pain.  A  child  who  is  mistrustful  in  this  way  and

terrified  of  the  aggressive  instinct  which  dominates  the  world  is  a

theoretical construction that has quite miscarried. A child is frightened

of a strange face because he is adjusted to the sight of a familiar and

beloved figure - ultimately of his mother. It is his disappointment and

longing that are transformed into anxiety - his libido, in fact, which has

become unemployable, which cannot at that time be held in suspense

and  is  discharged  as  anxiety.  And  it  can  scarcely  be  a  matter  of

chance,  either,  that  in  this  situation  which  is  the  prototype  of  the

anxiety of children there is a repetition of the determinant of the first

state of anxiety during the act of birth - namely, separation from the

mother.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3454

 

      In  children  the  first  phobias  relating  to  situations  are  those  of

darkness and solitude. The former of these often persists throughout

life; both are involved when a child feels the absence of some loved

person who looks after it - its mother, that is to say. While I was in the

next room, I heard a child who was afraid of the dark call out: ‘Do

speak to me, Auntie! I’m frightened!’ ‘Why, what good would that do?

You can’t see me.’ To this the child replied: ‘If someone speaks, it gets

lighter.’ Thus a longing felt in the dark is transformed into a fear of the

dark.  Far  from  its  being  the  case  that  neurotic  anxiety  is  only

secondary  and  a  special  case  of  realistic  anxiety,  we  see  on  the

contrary  that  in  a  small  child  something  that  behaves  like  realistic

anxiety shares its essential feature - origin from unemployed libido -

with neurotic anxiety. Innately, children seem to have little true realisticanxiety. In all the situations which can later become determinants of

phobias  (on  heights,  on  narrow  bridges  over  water,  on  railway

journeys, on ships) children exhibit no anxiety; and, to be sure, the

greater their ignorance the less their anxiety. It would have been a

very  good  thing  if  they  had  inherited  more  of  such  life-preserving

instincts, for that would have greatly facilitated the task of watching

over them to prevent their running into one danger after another. The

fact  is  that  children,  to  begin  with,  over-estimate  their  strength  and

behave fearlessly because they are ignorant of dangers. They will run

along  the  brink  of  the  water,  climb  on  to  the  window-sill,  play  with

sharp objects and with fire - in short, do everything that is bound to

damage them and to worry those in charge of them. When in the end

realistic  anxiety  is  awakened  in  them,  that  is  wholly  the  result  of

education;  for  they  cannot  be  allowed  to  make  the  instructive

experiences themselves.

      If,  then,  there  are  children  who  come  some  way  to  meet  this

education in anxiety, and who go on to find dangers themselves that

they have not been warned against, this is sufficiently explained by the

fact that they have a greater amount of innate libidinal need in their

constitution or have been prematurely spoiled by libidinal satisfaction.

It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  if  such  children  include,  too,  the  later

neurotics:  as  we  know,  what  most  facilitates  the  development  of  a

neurosis  is  an  incapacity  to  tolerate  a  considerable  damming-up  of

libido over any great length of time. You will observe that here once

more the constitutional factor comes into its rights - and these, indeed,

we have never sought to dispute. We are only on our guard against

those who in its favour neglect all other claims, and who introduce the

constitutional  factor  at  points  at  which  the  combined  results  of

observation and analysis show that it does not belong or must take the

last place.

   Let me sum up what we have learnt from our observations of the

apprehensiveness of children. Infantile anxiety has very little to do with

realistic  anxiety,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  is  closely  related  to  the

neurotic  anxiety  of  adults.  Like  the  latter,  it  is  derived  from

unemployed  libido  and  it  replaces  the  missing  love-object  by  an

external object or by a situation.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3455

 

 

   You will be glad to hear that the analysis of phobias has not much

more that is new to teach us. For the same thing happens with them

as  with  children’s  anxiety:  unemployable  libido  is  being  constantly

transformed  into  an  apparently  realistic  anxiety  and  thus  a  tiny

external  danger  is  introduced  to  represent  the  claims  of  the  libido.

There is nothing to be wondered at in this agreement, for the infantile

phobias are not only the prototype of the later ones which we class as

‘anxiety hysteria’ but are actually their precondition and the prelude to

them. Every hysterical phobia goes back to an infantile anxiety and is

a continuation of it, even if it has a different content and must thus be

given another name. The difference between the two disorders lies in

their mechanism. In order that libido shall be changed into anxiety, it

no longer suffices in the case of adults for the libido to have become

momentarily unemployable in the form of a longing. Adults have long

since learnt how to hold such libido in suspense or to employ it in

some other way. If, however, the libido belongs to a psychical impulse

which has been subjected to repression, then circumstances are re-

established similar to those in the case of a child in whom there is still

no distinction between conscious and unconscious; and by mean of

regression to the infantile phobia a passage is opened, as it were,

through  which  the  transformation  of  libido  into  anxiety  can  be

comfortably accomplished.

   As you will recall, we have dealt with repression at great length, but

in doing so we have always followed the vicissitudes only of the idea

that is to be repressed - naturally, since this was easier to recognize

and describe. We have always left on one side the question of what

happens to the affect that was attached to the repressed idea; and it is

only now that we learn that the immediate vicissitude of that affect is

to be transformed into anxiety, whatever quality it may have exhibited

apart from this in the normal course of events. This transformation of

affect is, however, by far the most important part of the process of

repression. It is not so easy to speak of this, since we cannot assert

the  existence  of  unconscious  affects  in  the  same  sense  as  that  ofunconscious  ideas.  An  idea  remains  the  same,  except  for  the  one

difference, whether it is conscious or unconscious; we can state what

it  is  that  corresponds  to  an  unconscious  idea.  But  an  affect  is  a

process  of  discharge  and  must  be  judged  quite  differently  from  an

idea; what corresponds to it in the unconscious cannot be declared

without deeper reflection and a clarification of our hypotheses about

psychical  processes.  And  that  we  cannot  undertake  here.  We  will,

however,  emphasize  the  impression  we  have  now  gained  that  the

generation  of  anxiety  is  intimately  linked  to  the  system  of  the

unconscious.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3456

 

   I have said that transformation into anxiety - it would be better to say

discharge in the form of anxiety - is the immediate vicissitude of libido

which is subjected to repression. I must add that that vicissitude is not

the only or the definitive one. In the neuroses processes are in action

which endeavour to bind this generating of anxiety and which even

succeed  in  doing  so  in  various  ways.  In  phobias,  for  instance,  two

phases of the neurotic process can be clearly distinguished. The first

is concerned with repression and the changing of libido into anxiety,

which is then bound to an external danger. The second consists in the

erection of all the precautions and guarantees by means of which any

contact  can  be  avoided  with  this  danger,  treated  as  it  is  like  an

external thing. Repression corresponds to an attempt at flight by the

ego from libido which is felt as a danger. A phobia may be compared

to an entrenchment against an external danger which now represents

the dreaded libido. The weakness of the defensive system in phobias

lies, of course, in the fact that the fortress which has been so greatly

strengthened towards the outside remains assailable from within. A

projection  outwards  of  the  danger  of  libido  can  never  succeed

thoroughly.  For  that  reason,  in  other  neuroses  other  systems  of

defence are in use against the possible generation of anxiety. That is

a most interesting part of the psychology of the neuroses; but unluckily

it  would  lead  us  too  far  and  it  presupposes  a  deeper  specializedknowledge. I will only add one thing more. I have already spoken to

you of the ‘anticathexis’ which is employed by the ego in the process

of repression and which must be permanently maintained in order that

the repression may have stability. This anticathexis has the task of

carrying through the various forms of defence against the generating

of anxiety after repression.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3457

 

   Let us return to the phobias. I can safely say that you now see how

inadequate it is merely to seek to explain their content, to take no

interest in anything but how it comes about that this or that object or

some particular situation or other has been made into the object of the

phobia. The content of a phobia has just about as much importance in

relation to it as the manifest façade of a dream has in relation to the

dream. It must be admitted, subject to the necessary qualifications,

that  among  the  contents  of  phobias  there  are  a  number  which,  as

Stanley Hall insists, are adapted to serve as objects of anxiety owing

to phylogenetic inheritance. It tallies with this, indeed, that many of

these anxiety-objects can only establish their connection with danger

by a symbolic tie.

 

      We  thus  find  ourselves  convinced  that  the  problem  of  anxiety

occupies a place in the question of the psychology of the neuroses

which may rightly be described as central. We have received a strong

impression of the way in which the generation of anxiety is linked to

the vicissitudes of the libido and the system of the unconscious. There

is only a single point that we have found disconnected - a gap in our

views:  the  single,  yet  scarcely  disputable,  fact  that  realistic  anxiety

must  be  regarded  as  a  manifestation  of  the  ego’s  self-preservative

instincts.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3458

                                       LECTURE XXVI

 

                THE LIBIDO THEORY AND NARCISSISM

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - We have repeatedly (and only recently once

again) had to deal with the distinction between the ego-instincts and

the sexual instincts. In the first place, repression showed us that the

two can come into opposition to each other, that the sexual instincts

are then ostensibly subdued and are obliged to find satisfaction for

themselves along regressive and roundabout paths, and that in doing

so  they  are  able  to  find  compensation  for  their  defeat  in  their

indomitability. We next learnt that the two kinds of instincts are from

the  first  differently  related  to  Necessity  the  educator,  so  that  their

course of development is not the same and they do not enter into the

same connection with the reality principle. Lastly, we seem to have

found that the sexual instincts are linked by much closer bonds than

the ego-instincts to the affective state of anxiety - a conclusion which

seems incomplete in only one important respect. In order to establish

it more firmly, therefore, I will bring forward the further noteworthy fact

that  if  hunger  and  thirst  (the  two  most  elementary  self-preservative

instincts) are unsatisfied, the result is never their transformation into

anxiety, whereas the changing of unsatisfied libido into anxiety is, as

we have seen, among the best known and most frequently observed

of phenomena.

   Our right to separate the ego-instincts from the sexual ones cannot,

no doubt, be shaken: it is implied in the existence of sexual life as a

distinct activity of the individual. The only question is what importance

we attribute to this separation, how deep-going we wish to consider it.

The answer to this question, however, will be guided by how far we

are able to establish the extent to which the sexual instincts behave

differently in their somatic and mental manifestations from the others

which  we  are  contrasting  with  them,  and  how  important  the

consequences are which arise from those differences. Moreover, we

have,  of  course,  no  motive  for  asserting  an  essential  difference

between the two groups of instincts which is not plainly appreciable.

Both of them come before us merely as designations of sources of

energy in the individual, and the discussion as to whether they arefundamentally one or essentially different and as to when, if they are

one, they became separate from each other - this discussion cannot

be conducted on the basis of the connotation of the terms but must

keep to the biological facts lying behind them. At the moment we know

too little about these, and even if we knew more it would have no

relevance for our analytic task.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3459

 

   It is obvious, too, that we shall profit very little if, following Jung’s

example, we insist upon the original unity of all the instincts and give

the name of ‘libido’ to the energy manifested in all of them. Since no

device whatever will make it possible to eliminate the sexual function

from mental life, we shall in that case find ourselves obliged to speak

of  sexual  and  asexual  libido.  But  the  name  of  libido  is  properly

reserved for the instinctual forces of sexual life, as has hitherto been

our practice.

   In my opinion, therefore, the question of how we are to carry the

undoubtedly  justifiable  separation  between  the  sexual  and  self-

preservative instincts is not of much importance for psycho-analysis.

Nor  is  psycho-analysis  competent  answer  the  question.  Biology,

however, offers a number of suggestive possibilities which speak in

favour of the distinction having some importance. Sexuality is, indeed,

the single function of the living organism which extends beyond the

individual and is concerned with his relation to the species. It is an

unmistakable  fact  that  it  does  not  always,  like  the  individual

organism’s other functions, bring it advantages, but, in return for an

unusually high degree of pleasure, brings dangers which threaten the

individual’s life and often enough destroy it. It is probable, too, that

quite  special  metabolic  processes  are  necessary,  differing  from  all

others,  in  order  to  maintain  a  portion  of  the  individual  life  as  a

disposition for its descendants. And finally, the individual organism,

which regards itself as the main thing and its sexuality as a means,

like  any  other,  for  its  own  satisfaction,  is  from  the  point  of  view  of

biology only an episode in a succession of generations, a short-livedappendage to a germ-plasm endowed with virtual immortality - like the

temporary holder of an entail which will outlast him.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3460

 

   The psycho-analytic explanation of the neuroses does not, however,

call for such far-ranging considerations. The separate following-up of

the  sexual  and  ego-instincts  has  helped  us  to  find  the  key  to  an

understanding of the group of transference neuroses. We have been

able  to  trace  them  back  to  the  basic  situation  in  which  the  sexual

instincts have come into a dispute with the self-preservative instincts,

or,  to  put  it  in  biological  (though  less  precise)  terms,  a  situation  in

which one aspect of the ego, as an independent individual organism,

comes into conflict with its other aspect, as a member of a succession

of generations. A dissension of this kind may perhaps only occur in

human beings, and on that account neurosis may, generally speaking,

constitute  their  prerogative  over  the  animals.  The  excessive

development  of  their  libido  and  -  what  is  perhaps  made  possible

precisely by that - their development of a richly articulated mental life

seem to have created the determinants for the occurrence of such a

conflict. It is at once obvious that these are also the determinants for

the great advances that human beings have made beyond what they

have  in  common  with  the  animals;  so  that  their  susceptibility  to

neurosis would only be the reverse side of their other endowments.

But these too are only speculations, which are diverting us from our

immediate task.

 

   Hitherto it has been a premiss of our work that we can distinguish

the ego-instincts from the sexual ones by their manifestations. With

the transference neuroses this could be done without difficulty. We

termed  the  cathexes  of  energy  which  the  ego  directs  towards  the

objects of its sexual desires ‘libido’; all the others, which are sent out

by the self-preservative instincts, we termed ‘interest’. By tracing the

course  of  the  libidinal  cathexes,  their  transformations  and  final

vicissitudes, we were able to obtain a first insight into the machinery ofthe mental forces. For this purpose the transference neuroses offered

us the most favourable material. But the ego, its composition out of

various organizations and their construction and mode of functioning,

remained hidden from us; and we were driven to suspect that only the

analysis  of  other  neurotic  disorders  would  be  able  to  bring  us  the

necessary insight.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3461

 

   We began at an early date to extend psycho-analytic observations to

these  other  illnesses.  Already  in  1908  Karl  Abraham,  after  an

exchange of thoughts with me, pronounced the main characteristic of

dementia praecox (which was reckoned among the psychoses) to be

that in it the libidinal cathexis of objects was lacking. But the question

then  arose  of  what  happened  to  the  libido  of  dementia  praecox

patients  which  was  turned  away  from  objects.  Abraham  did  not

hesitate to give the answer: it is turned back on to the ego and this

reflexive turning-back is the source of the megalomania in dementia

praecox.  Megalomania  is  in  every  way  comparable  to  the  familiar

sexual overvaluation of the object in erotic life. In this way for the first

time we learnt to understand a trait in a psychotic illness by relating it

to normal erotic life.

   I may tell you at once that these first explanations of Abraham’s

have been accepted in psycho-analysis and have become the basis of

our attitude to the psychoses. We thus slowly became familiar with the

notion that the libido, which we find attached to objects and which is

the expression of an effort to obtain satisfaction in connection with

those objects, can also leave the objects and set the subject’s own

ego in their place; and this notion was gradually built up more and

more  consistently.  The  name  for  this  way  of  allocating  the  libido  -

‘narcissism’  -  was  borrowed  by  us  from  a  perversion  described  by

Paul Näcke in which an adult treats his own body with all the caresses

that are usually devoted to an outside sexual object.

   Reflection will quickly suggest that if any such fixation of the libido to

the subject’s own body and personality, instead of to an object doesoccur, it cannot be an exception or a trivial event. On the contrary it is

probable  that  this  narcissism  is  the  universal  and  original  state  of

things,  from  which  object-love  is  only  later  developed,  without  the

narcissism necessarily disappearing on that account. Indeed we had

to recall from the history of the development of object-libido that many

sexual instincts begin by finding satisfaction in the subject’s own body

- auto-erotically, as we say - and that this capacity for auto-erotism is

the basis of the lagging-behind of sexuality in the process of education

in the reality principle. Auto-erotism would thus be the sexual activity

of the narcissistic stage of allocation of the libido.

   To put the matter shortly, we pictured the relation of ego libido to

object-libido in a way which I can make plain to you by an analogy

from  zoology.  Think  of  those  simplest  of  living  organisms  which

consist  of  a  little-differentiated  globule  of  protoplasmic  substance.

They  put  out  protrusions,  known  as  pseudopodia,  into  which  they

cause  the  substance  of  their  body  to  flow  over.  They  are  able,

however, to withdraw the protrusions once more and form themselves

again into a globule. We compare the putting-out of these protrusions,

then, to the emission of libido on to objects while the main mass of

libido  can  remain  in  the  ego;  and  we  suppose  that  in  normal

circumstances ego-libido can be transformed unhindered into object-

libido and that this can once more be taken back into the ego.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3462

 

   With the help of these ideas we are now able to explain a whole

number of mental states or, to express it more modestly, to describe

them in terms of the libido theory - states which we must reckon as

belonging to normal life, such as the psychical behaviour of a person

in love, during an organic illness or when asleep. As regards the state

of  sleep,  we  assumed  that  it  was  based  on  turning-away  from  the

external world and adopting a wish to sleep. The mental activity during

the  night  which  is  manifested  in  dreams  takes  place,  we  found,  in

obedience to a wish to sleep and is moreover dominated by purely

egoistic motives. We may now add, on the lines of the libido theory,that sleep is a state in which all object-cathexes, libidinal as well as

egoistic, are given up and withdrawn into the ego. May not this throw a

fresh light on the recuperating effect of sleep and on the nature of

fatigue in general? The picture of the blissful isolation of intra-uterine

life which a sleeper conjures up once more before us every night is in

this  way  completed  on  its  psychical  side  as  well.  In  a  sleeper  the

primal state of distribution of the libido is restored - total narcissism, in

which libido and ego-interest, still united and indistinguishable, dwell in

the self-sufficing ego.

 

   This is the place for two remarks. First, how do we differentiate

between the concepts of narcissism and egoism? Well, narcissism, I

believe,  is  the  libidinal  complement  to  egoism.  When  we  speak  of

egoism, we have in view only the individual’s advantage; when we talk

of narcissism we are also taking his libidinal satisfaction into account.

As  practical  motives  the  two  can  be  traced  separately  for  quite  a

distance.  It  is  possible  to  be  absolutely  egoistic  and  yet  maintain

powerful object-cathexes, in so far as libidinal satisfaction in relation to

the object forms part of the ego’s needs. In that case, egoism will see

to it that striving for the object involves no damage to the ego. It is

possible  to  be  egoistic  and  at  the  same  time  to  be  excessively

narcissistic  -  that  is  to  say,  to  have  very  little  need  for  an  object,

whether, once more, for the purpose of direct sexual satisfaction, or in

connection  with  the  higher  aspirations,  derived  from  sexual  need,

which we are occasionally in the habit of contrasting with ‘sensuality’

under the name of ‘love’. In all these connections egoism is what is

self-evident  and  constant,  while  narcissism  is  the  variable  element.

The opposite to egoism, altruism, does not, as a concept, coincide

with  libidinal  object-cathexis,  but  is  distinguished  from  it  by  the

absence  of  longings  for  sexual  satisfaction.  When  someone  is

completely in love, however, altruism converges with libidinal object

cathexis. As a rule the sexual object attracts a portion of the ego’s

narcissism to itself, and this becomes noticeable as what is known as

the  ‘sexual  overvaluation’  of  the  object.  If  in  addition  there  is  an

altruistic transposition of egoism on to the sexual object, the object

becomes supremely powerful; it has, as it were, absorbed the ego.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3463

 

   You will find it refreshing, I believe, if, after what is the essentially dry

imagery of science, I present you with a poetic representation of the

economic contrast between narcissism and being in love. Here is a

quotation from Goethe’s Westöstlicher Diwan:

 

                                                                ZULEIKA

 
                                                The slave, the lord of victories,
                                                         The crowd, when’er you ask, confess
                                                In sense of personal being lies
                                                         A child of earth’s chief happiness.
 
                                                There’s not a life we need refuse
                                                         If our true self we do not miss,
                                                There’s not a thing we may not lose
                                                         If one remain the man one is.
 

                                                                HATEM

 
                                                So it is held, so well may be;
                                                         But down a different track I come;
                                                Of all the bliss earth holds for me
                                                         I in Zuleika find the sum.
 
                                                Does she expend her being on me,
                                                         Myself grows to myself of cost;
                                                Turns she away, then instantly
                                                         I to my very self am lost.
 
                                                That day with Hatem all were over;
                                                         And yet I should but change my state;
                                                Swift, should she grace some happy lover,
                                                         In him I were incorporate.
 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3464

 

   My second remark is a supplement to the theory of dreams. We

cannot explain the origin of dreams unless we adopt the hypothesis

that  the  repressed  unconscious  has  achieved  some  degree  ofindependence of the ego, so that it does not acquiesce in the wish to

sleep  and  retains  its  cathexes  even  when  all  the  object-cathexes

depending on the ego have been withdrawn in order to encourage

sleep. Only if that is so can we understand how the unconscious can

make use of the lifting or reduction of the censorship which occurs at

night, and can succeed in obtaining control over the day’s residues so

as to construct a forbidden dream-wish out of their material. On the

other  hand,  it  may  be  that  these  day’s  residues  have  to  thank  an

already existing connection with the repressed unconscious for some

of their resistance to the withdrawal of libido commanded by the wish

to sleep. We will, then, insert this dynamically important feature into

our view of the formation of dreams by way of supplement.

      Organic  illness,  painful  stimulation  or  inflammation  of  an  organ,

creates a condition which clearly results in a detachment of the libido

from its objects. The libido which is withdrawn is found in the ego once

more, as an increased cathexis of the diseased part of the body. One

may venture to assert, indeed, that the withdrawal of the libido from its

objects in these circumstances is more striking than the diversion of

egoistic interest from the external world. This seems to offer us a path

to an understanding of hypochondria, in which an organ excites the

ego’s attention in the same way, without being ill so far as we can

perceive.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3465

 

 

   But I shall resist the temptation of going further here or of discussing

other situations which can be understood or pictured if we adopt the

hypothesis that the object-libido may withdraw into the ego - for I am

obliged to meet two objections which, as I know, are now attracting

your  attention.  In  the  first  place  you  want  to  call  me  to  account

because in talking of sleep, illness and similar situations I invariably try

to  separate  libido  from  interest,  sexual  from  ego-instincts,  where

observations can be fully satisfied by the hypothesis of a single and

uniform energy which, being freely mobile, cathects now the objectand now the ego, in obedience to one or the other instinct. And in the

second  place  you  want  to  know  how  I  can  venture  to  treat  the

detaching of the libido from the object as the source of a pathological

state, when a transposition of this kind of object-libido into ego-libido

(or, more generally, into ego-energy) is among the normal processes

of mental dynamics which are repeated daily and every night.

      Here  is  my  reply.  Your  first  objection  sounds  well  enough.

Consideration of the states of sleep, of illness and of being in love in

themselves would probably never have led us to distinguish an ego-

libido from an object-libido or libido from interest. But there you are

neglecting the investigations from which we started and in the light of

which  we  now  look  at  the  mental  situations  under  discussion.  The

differentiation between libido and interest - that is to say, between the

sexual and the self-preservative instincts - was forced upon us by our

discovery of the conflict out of which the transference neuroses arise.

Since then we cannot give it up. The hypothesis that object-libido can

be transformed into ego-libido, that we must therefore take an ego-

libido into account, seems to us the only one which is able to resolve

the enigma of what are termed the narcissistic neuroses - dementia

praecox,  for  instance  -  and  to  account  for  the  resemblances  and

dissimilarities between them and hysteria or obsessions. We are now

applying to illness, sleep and being in love what we have elsewhere

found  inescapably  established.  We  should  proceed  further  with

applications of this kind and see where they will take us to. The only

thesis which is not an immediate precipitate of our analytic experience

is  to  the  effect  that  libido  remains  libido,  whether  it  is  directed  to

objects or to one’s own ego, and never turns into egoistic interest, and

the converse is also true. This thesis, however, is equivalent to the

separation  between  the  sexual  and  ego-instincts  which  we  have

already considered critically and to which we shall continue to hold for

heuristic reasons until its possible collapse.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3466

 

   Your second observation, too, raises a justifiable question, but it isaimed in the wrong direction. It is true that a withdrawal of the object-

libido into the ego is not directly pathogenic; it takes place, indeed, as

we know, every time before we go to sleep, only to be reversed when

we wake up. The amoeba withdraws its protrusions only to send them

out again at the first opportunity. But it is quite a different thing when a

particular, very energetic process forces a withdrawal of libido from

objects. Here the libido that has become narcissistic cannot find its

way  back  to  objects,  and  this  interference  with  the  libido’s  mobility

certainly  becomes  pathogenic.  It  seems  that  an  accumulation  of

narcissistic libido beyond a certain amount is not tolerated. We may

even  imagine  that  it  was  for  that  very  reason  that  object-cathexes

originally came about, that the ego was obliged to send out its libido

so as not to fall ill as a result of its being dammed up. If it lay within

our plan to go more deeply into dementia praecox, I would show you

that the process which detaches the libido from objects and cuts off its

return to them is closely related to the process of repression and is to

be looked at as its counterpart. But you would, first and foremost, find

yourselves on familiar ground when you learnt that the determinants of

this process are almost identical - so far as we know at present - with

those  of  repression.  The  conflict  seems  to  be  the  same  and  to  be

carried on between the same forces. If the outcome is so different

from, for instance, that in hysteria, the reason can only depend on a

difference  in  innate  disposition.  The  weak  spot  in  the  libidinal

development  of  these  patients  lies  in  a  different  phase;  the

determining fixation, which, as you will recollect, permits the irruption

that leads to the formation of symptoms, lies elsewhere, probably in

the stage of primitive narcissism to which dementia praecox returns in

its  final  outcome.  It  is  very  remarkable  that  in  the  case  of  all  the

narcissistic neuroses we have to assume fixation points for the libido

going back to far earlier phases of development than in hysteria or

obsessional neurosis. As you heard, however, the concepts which we

arrived at during our study of the transference neuroses are adequate

in helping us to find our way about in the narcissistic neuroses which

are so much more severe in practice. The conformities go very far; at

bottom the field of phenomena is the same. And you can imagine how

small  a  prospect  anyone  has  of  explaining  these  disorders  (which

belong within the sphere of psychiatry) who is not forearmed for histask with an analytic knowledge of the transference neuroses.

   The clinical picture of dementia praecox (which, incidentally, is very

changeable) is not determined exclusively by the symptoms arising

from the forcing away of the libido on objects and its accumulation in

the ego as narcissistic libido. A large part, rather, is played by other

phenomena,  which  are  derived  from  efforts  of  the  libido  to  attain

objects  once  more  and  which  thus  correspond  to  an  attempt  at

restitution or recovery. These latter symptoms are indeed the more

striking and noisy; they exhibit an undeniable resemblance to those of

hysteria or, less frequently, of obsessional neurosis, but nevertheless

differ  from  them  in  every  respect.  It  seems  as  though  in  dementia

praecox the libido, in its efforts once more to reach objects (that is, the

presentations of objects), does in fact snatch hold something of them,

but, as it were, only their shadows - I mean the word-presentations

belonging to them. I cannot say more about this now, but I believe that

this  behaviour  of  the  libido  as  it  strives  to  find  its  way  back  has

enabled  us  to  obtain  an  insight  into  what  really  constitutes  the

difference between a conscious and an unconscious idea.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3467

 

 

   I have now led you into the region in which the next advances in the

work  of  analysis  are  to  be  expected.  Since  we  have  ventured  to

operate with the concept of ego-libido the narcissistic neuroses have

become accessible to us; the task before us is to arrive at a dynamic

elucidation of these disorders and at the same time to complete our

knowledge of mental life by coming to understand the ego. The ego-

psychology after which we are seeking must not be based on the data

of our self-perceptions but (as in the case of the libido) on the analysis

of disturbances and disruptions of the ego. It is likely that we shall

have a low opinion of our present knowledge of the vicissitudes of the

libido,  which  we  have  gained  from  a  study  of  the  transference

neuroses, when we have achieved this greater task. But hitherto we

have not made much progress with it. The narcissistic neuroses canscarcely be attacked with the technique that has served us with the

transference  neuroses.  You  will  soon  learn  why.  What  always

happens with them is that, after proceeding for a short distance, we

come  up  against  a  wall  which  brings  us  to  a  stop.  Even  with  the

transference  neuroses,  as  you  know,  we  met  with  barriers  of

resistance,  but  we  were  able  to  demolish  them  bit  by  bit.  In  the

narcissistic neuroses the resistance is unconquerable; at the most, we

are able to cast an inquisitive glance over the top of the wall and spy

out what is going on on the other side of it. Our technical methods

must  accordingly  be  replaced  by  others;  and  we  do  not  know  yet

whether we shall succeed in finding substitute. Nevertheless, we have

no  lack  of  material  with  these  patients  either.  They  make  a  large

number of remarks, even if they do not answer our questions, and for

the time being it is our business to interpret these remarks with the

help of the understanding we have gained from the symptoms of the

transference neuroses. The agreement is great enough to guarantee

us some initial advantage. It remains to be seen how far this technique

will take us.

   There are difficulties in addition which hold up our advance. The

narcissistic disorders and the psychoses related to them can only be

deciphered by observers who have been trained through the analytic

study  of  the  transference  neuroses.  But  our  psychiatrists  are  not

students  of  psycho-analysis  and  we  psycho-analysts  see  too  few

psychiatric cases. A race of psychiatrists must first grow up who have

passed  through  the  school  of  psycho-analysis  as  a  preparatory

science. A start in that direction is now being made in America, where

very many leading psychiatrists lecture to students on the theories of

psycho-analysis  and  where  the  proprietors  of  institutions  and  the

directors  of  insane  asylums  endeavour  to  observe  their  patients  in

conformity with those theories. Nevertheless we too, over here, have

succeeded sometimes in casting a glance over the narcissistic wall

and in what follows I shall tell you a little of what we think we have

detected.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3468 

 

   The form of disease known as paranoia, chronic systematic insanity,

occupies an unsettled position in the attempts at classification made

by present-day psychiatry. There is, however, no doubt of its close

affinity to dementia praecox. I once ventured to suggest that paranoia

and dementia praecox should be brought together under the common

designation  of  ‘paraphrenia’.  The  forms  of  paranoia  are  described

according  to  their  content  as  megalomania,  persecution  mania,

erotomania,  delusions  of  jealousy,  and  so  on.  We  shall  not  expect

anything  much  in  the  way  of  an  attempt  at  an  explanation  from

psychiatry. Here is an example of one, though, it is true, one that is

out of date and does not carry much weight - an attempt to derive one

symptom from another by means of an intellectual rationalization: it is

suggested  that  the  patient,  who,  owing  to  a  primary  disposition,

believes that he is being persecuted, infers from his persecution that

he must be someone of quite particular importance and so develops

megalomania. According to our analytic view the megalomania is the

direct result of a magnification of the ego due to the drawing in of he

libidinal object-cathexes - a secondary narcissism which is a return of

the  original  early  infantile  one.  We  have,  however,  made  a  few

observations of persecution mania which have induced us to follow a

particular  track.  The  first  thing  that  struck  us  was  that  in  the  large

majority  of  cases  the  persecutor  was  of  the  same  sex  as  the

persecuted patient. This was still open to an innocent explanation; but

in  a  few  cases  that  were  thoroughly  studied  it  was  clear  that  the

person of the same sex whom the patient loved most had, since his

illness,  been  turned  into  his  persecutor.  This  made  a  further

development  possible:  namely,  the  replacement  of  the  beloved

person, along the line of familiar resemblances, by someone else - for

instance,  a  father  by  a  schoolmaster  or  by  some  superior.

Experiences of this kind in ever increasing numbers led us to conclude

that paranoia persecutoria is the form of the disease in which a person

is defending himself against a homosexual impulse which has become

too powerful. The change over from affection to hatred, which, it is

well known, may become a serious threat to the life of the loved and

hated  object,  corresponds  in  such  cases  to  the  transformation  oflibidinal  impulses  into  anxiety  which  is  a  regular  outcome  of  the

process of repression. Listen, for instance, to what is, once again, the

most recent instance of my observations in this connection.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3469

 

   A young doctor had to be expelled from the town in which. he lived

because he had threatened the life of the son of a university professor

residing  there,  who  had  up  till  then  been  his  greatest  friend.  He

attributed really fiendish intentions and demonic power to this former

friend, whom he regarded as responsible for all the misfortunes that

had  befallen  his  family  in  recent  years,  for  every  piece  of  ill-luck

whether  in  his  home  or  in  his  social  life.  But  that  was  not  all.  He

believed that this bad friend and the friend’s father, the Professor, had

caused the war, too, and brought the Russians into the country. His

friend  had  forfeited  his  life  a  thousand  times,  and  our  patient  was

convinced that the criminal’s death would put an end to every evil. Yet

his affection for him was still so strong that it had paralysed his hand

when, on one occasion, he had an opportunity of shooting down his

enemy at close range. In the course of the short conversations I had

with the patient, it came to light that their friendship went back far into

their  schooldays.  Once  at  least  it  had  overstepped  the  bounds  of

friendship:  a  night  which  they  had  spent  together  had  been  an

occasion  for  complete  sexual  intercourse.  Our  patient  had  never

acquired  the  emotional  relation  to  women  which  would  have

corresponded to his age and his attractive personality. He had once

been engaged to a beautiful young girl of good social position; but she

had broken off the engagement because she found that her fiancé

was without any affection. Years later, his illness broke out just at the

moment  when  he  had  succeeded  for  the  first  time  in  satisfying  a

woman completely. When this woman embraced him in gratitude and

devotion, he suddenly had a mysterious pain that went round the top

of his head like a sharp cut. Later on he interpreted this sensation as

though an incision were being made at an autopsy for exposing the

brain. And as his friend had become a pathological anatomist, it slowlydawned on him that he alone could have sent this last woman to him

to seduce him- From that point onwards his eyes were opened to the

other persecutions to which he believed he had been made a victim by

the machinations of his one-time friend.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3470

 

   But what about the cases in which the persecutor is not of the same

sex  as  the  patient  and  which  appear,  therefore,  to  contradict  our

explanation of their being a defence against homosexual libido? A little

time ago I had an opportunity of examining such a case and was able

to derive a confirmation from the apparent contradiction. A girl, who

believed she was being persecuted by a man with whom she had had

affectionate  assignations  on  two  occasions,  had  in  fact  first  had  a

delusion that was directed against a woman who could be looked on

as a substitute for her mother. It was only after her second assignation

that she took the step of detaching the delusion from the woman and

transferring it to the man. To begin with, therefore, the precondition of

the persecutor being of the same sex as the patient was fulfilled in this

case  too.  In  making  a  complaint  to  a  lawyer  and  to  a  doctor,  the

patient made no mention of this preliminary stage of her delusion and

thus gave rise to an appearance of there being a contradiction of our

explanation of paranoia.

   Homosexual object-choice originally lies closer to narcissism than

does  the  heterosexual  kind.  When  it  is  a  question,  therefore,  of

repelling an undesirably strong homosexual impulse, the path back to

narcissism is made particularly easy. Hitherto I have had very little

opportunity of talking to you about the foundations of erotic life so far

as we have discovered them, and it is too late now to catch up on the

omission.  This  much,  however,  I  can  emphasize  to  you.  Object-

choice,  the  step  forward  in  the  development  of  the  libido  which  is

made  after  the  narcissistic  stage,  can  take  place  according  to  two

different  types:  either  according  to  the narcissistic  type,  where  the

subject’s own ego is replaced by another one that is as similar as

possible, or according to the attachment type, where people who havebecome precious through satisfying the other vital needs are chosen

as  objects  by  the  libido  as  well.  A  strong  libidinal  fixation  to  the

narcissistic type of object-choice is to be included in the predisposition

to manifest homosexuality.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3471

 

   You will recall that at our first meeting of the present academic year I

described  a  case  to  you  of  a  woman  suffering  from  delusions  of

jealousy. Now that we are so near its end you would no doubt like to

hear how delusions are explained by psycho-analysis. But I have less

to tell you about that than you expect. The fact that a delusion cannot

be shaken by logical arguments or real experiences is explained in the

same  way  as  in  the  case  of  an  obsession  -  by  its  relation  to  the

unconscious, which is represented and held down by the delusion or

by the obsession. The difference between the two is based on the

difference between the topography and dynamics of the two illnesses.

   As with paranoia, so also with melancholia (of which, incidentally,

many different clinical forms have been described) we have found a

point at which it has become possible to obtain some insight into the

internal structure of the disease. We have discovered that the self-

reproaches,  with  which  these  melancholic  patients  torment

themselves  in  the  most  merciless  fashion,  in  fact  apply  to  another

person, the sexual object which they have lost or which has become

valueless to them through its own fault. From this we can conclude

that  the  melancholic  has,  it  is  true,  withdrawn  his  libido  from  the

object,  but  that,  by  a  process  which  we  must  call  ‘narcissistic

identification’, the object has been set up in the ego itself, has been as

it were, projected on to the ego. (Here I can only give you a pictorial

description and not an ordered account on topographical and dynamic

lines.) The subject’s own ego is then treated like the object that has

been abandoned, and it is subjected to all the acts of aggression and

expressions of vengefulness which have been aimed at the object. A

melancholic’s propensity to suicide is also made more intelligible if we

consider that the patient’s embitterment strikes with a single blow athis own ego and at the loved and hated object. In melancholia, as well

as  in  other  narcissistic  disorders,  a  particular  trait  in  the  patient’s

emotional life emerges with peculiar emphasis - what, since Bleuler,

we have been accustomed to describe as ‘ambivalence’. By this we

mean the direction towards the same person of contrary - affectionate

and hostile - feelings. Unluckily I have been unable in the course of

these lectures to tell you more about this emotional ambivalence.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3472

 

   In addition to narcissistic identification, there is a hysterical kind,

which has been familiar to us very much longer. I wish it were possible

to illustrate for you the differences between the two forms by a few

clear  specifications.  There  is  something  I  can  tell  you  about  the

periodic and cyclical forms of melancholia which I am sure you will be

glad to hear. For in favourable circumstances - I have experienced this

twice  -  it  is  possible  by  analytic  treatment  in  the  lucid  intervals  to

prevent  the  return  of  the  condition  in  the  same  or  the  opposite

emotional mood. We learn from such cases that in melancholia and

mania we are concerned once more with a special method of dealing

with  a  conflict  whose  underlying  determinants  agree  precisely  with

those of the other neuroses. You can imagine how much more there is

for psycho-analysis to learn in this field of knowledge.

   I told you too that we hoped that the analysis of the narcissistic

disorders would give us an insight into the way in which our ego is put

together and built up out of different agencies. We have already made

a  start  with  this  at  one  point.  From  the  analysis  of  delusions  of

observation we have drawn the conclusion that there actually exists in

the  ego  an  agency  which  unceasingly  observes,  criticizes  and

compares, and in that way sets itself over against the other part of the

ego. We believe, therefore, that the patient is betraying a truth to us

which is not yet sufficiently appreciated when he complains that he is

spied upon and observed at every step he takes and that every one of

his thoughts is reported and criticized. His only mistake is in regarding

this  uncomfortable  power  as  something  alien  to  him  and  placing  itoutside himself. He senses an agency holding sway in his ego which

measures his actual ego and each of its activities by an ideal ego that

he  has  created  for  himself  in  the  course  of  his  development.  We

believe,  too,  that  this  creation  was  made  with  the  intention  of  re-

establishing  the  self-satisfaction  which  was  attached  to  primary

infantile  narcissism  but  which  since  then  has  suffered  so  many

disturbances and mortifications. We know the self-observing agency

as the ego-censor, the conscience; it is this that exercises the dream-

censorship  during  the  night,  from  which  the  repressions  of

inadmissible  wishful  impulses  proceed.  When  in  delusions  of

observation  it  becomes  split  up,  it  reveals  to  us  its  origin  from  the

influences  of  parents,  educators  and  social  environment  -  from  an

identification with some of these model figures.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3473

 

   These are a few of the findings which have hitherto been reached

from the application of psycho-analysis to the narcissistic disorders.

No  doubt  there  are  not  yet  enough  of  them  and  they  still  lack  the

precision which can only be attained from established familiarity with a

new field. We owe all of them to a use of the concept of ego-libido or

narcissistic  libido,  by  whose  help  we  can  extend  to  the  narcissistic

neuroses  the  views  which  have  proved  their  value  with  the

transference  neuroses.  Now,  however,  you  will  ask  whether  it  is

possible that we shall succeed in subsuming all the disturbances of

the narcissistic illnesses and of the psychoses under the libido theory,

whether we look upon the libidinal factor in mental life as universally

guilty  of  the  causation  of  illness,  and  need  never  attribute  the

responsibility  for  it  to  changes  in  the  functioning  of  the  self-

preservative  instinct.  Well,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  question

seems to me to call for no urgent reply, and, above all, not to be ripe

for judgement. We can confidently leave it over in expectation of the

progress of our scientific work. I should not be surprised if it turned out

that the power to produce pathogenic effects was in fact a prerogative

of the libidinal instincts, so that the libido theory could celebrate itstriumph  all  along  the  line  from  the  simplest  ‘actual’  neurosis  to  the

most severe alienation of the personality. We after all know that it is a

characteristic feature of the libido that it struggles against submitting to

the reality of the universe - to Ananke. But I regard it as extremely

probable that the ego-instincts are carried along secondarily by the

pathogenic  instigation  of  the  libido  and  forced  into  functional

disturbances. Nor can I think that it would be a disaster to the trend of

our researches, if what lies before us is the discovery that in severe

psychoses  the  ego-instincts  themselves  have  gone  astray  as  a

primary fact. The future will give the answer - to you, at any rate.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3474

 

 

   Let me once more, however, return for a moment to anxiety, to

throw light on a last obscurity that we left there. I have said that there

is  something  that  does  not  tally  with  the  relation  (so  thoroughly

recognized  apart  from  this)  between  anxiety  and  libido:  the  fact,

namely,  that  realistic  anxiety  in  face  of  a  danger  seems  to  be  a

manifestation  of  the  self-preservative  instinct  -  which,  after  all,  can

scarcely  be  disputed.  How  would  it  be,  though,  if  what  was

responsible for the affect of anxiety was not the egoistic ego-instincts

but the ego-libido? After all, the state of anxiety is in every instance

inexpedient,  and  its  inexpedience  becomes  obvious  if  it  reaches  a

fairly high pitch. In such cases it interferes with action, whether flight

or defence, which alone is expedient and alone serves the cause of

self-preservation.  If,  therefore,  we  attribute  the  affective  portion  of

realistic anxiety to ego-libido and the accompanying action to the self-

preservative instinct, we shall have got rid of the theoretical difficulty.

After all, you do not seriously believe that one runs away because one

feels anxiety? No. One feels anxiety and one runs away for a common

motive, which is roused by the perception of danger. People who have

been through a great mortal danger tell us that they were not at all

afraid but merely acted - for instance, that they aimed their rifle at the

wild beast - and that is unquestionably what was most expedient. 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3475

 

                                      LECTURE XXVII

 

                                  TRANSFERENCE

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - Since we are now drawing towards the end of

our discussions, there is a particular expectation which will be in your

minds and which should not be disappointed. You no doubt suppose

that I would not have led you through thick and thin of the subject-

matter  of  psycho-analysis  only  to  dismiss  you  at  the  end  without

saying  a  word  about  therapy,  on  which,  after  all,  the  possibility  of

practising psycho-analysis at all is based. The subject, moreover, is

one  that  I  cannot  withhold  from  you,  since  what  you  learn  in

connection with it will enable you to make the acquaintance of a new

fact  in  whose  absence  your  understanding  of  the  illnesses

investigated by us will remain most markedly incomplete.

   You do not, I know, expect me to initiate you into the technique by

which analysis for therapeutic ends should be carried out. You only

want to know in the most general way the method by which psycho-

analytic therapy operates and what, roughly, it accomplishes. And you

have an indisputable right to learn this. I shall not, however, tell it you

but shall insist on your discovering it for yourselves.

      Think  it  over!  You  have  learnt  all  that  is  essential  about  the

determinants of falling ill as well as all the factors that come into effect

after  the  patient  has  fallen  ill.  Where  do  these  leave  room  for  any

therapeutic influence? In the first place there is hereditary disposition.

We  have  not  talked  about  it  very  often  because  it  is  emphatically

stressed from other directions and we have nothing new to say about

it. But do not suppose that we underestimate it; precisely as therapists

we come to realize its power clearly enough. In any case we can do

nothing to alter it; we too must take it as something given, which sets

a limit to our efforts. Next there is the influence of early experiences in

childhood,  to  which  we  are  in  the  habit  of  giving  prominence  in

analysis:  they  belong  to  the  past  and  we  cannot  undo  them.  Thencomes everything that we have summarized as ‘real frustration’ - the

misfortunes of life from which arise deprivation of love, poverty, family

quarrels, ill-judged choice of a partner in marriage, unfavourable social

circumstances, and the strictness of the ethical standards to whose

pressure the individual is subject. Here, to be sure, there would be

handles enough for a very effective therapy, but it would have to be of

the kind which Viennese folklore attributes to the Emperor Joseph -

the benevolent interference of a powerful personage before whose will

people bow and difficulties vanish. But who are we, that we should be

able  to  adopt  benevolence  of  this  kind  as  an  instrument  of  our

therapy?  Poor  ourselves  and  socially  powerless,  and  compelled  to

earn our livelihood from our medical activity, we are not even in a

position  to  extend  our  efforts  to  people  without  means,  as  other

doctors with other methods of treatment are after all able to do. Our

therapy  is  too  time-consuming  and  too  laborious  for  that  to  be

possible. Perhaps, however, you are clutching at one of the factors I

have mentioned and believe that there you have found the point at

which  our  influence  can  make  its  attack.  If  the  ethical  restrictions

demanded by society play a part in the deprivation imposed on the

patient, treatment can, after all, give him the courage, or perhaps a

direct injunction, to disregard those barriers and achieve satisfaction

and recovery while forgoing the fulfilment of an ideal that is exalted,

but so often not adhered to, by society. The patient will thus become

healthy by ‘living a full life’ sexually. This, it is true, casts a shadow on

analytic treatment for not serving general morality. What it has given

to the individual it will have taken from the community.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3476

 

   But, Ladies and Gentlemen, who has so seriously misinformed you?

A recommendation to the patient to ‘live a full life’ sexually could not

possibly play a part in analytic therapy - if only because we ourselves

have declared that an obstinate conflict is taking place in him between

a libidinal impulse and sexual repression, between a sensual and an

ascetic trend. This conflict would not be solved by our helping one ofthese  trends  to  victory  over  its  opponent.  We  see,  indeed,  that  in

neurotics asceticism has the upper hand; and the consequence of this

is precisely that the suppressed sexual tendency finds a way out in

symptoms. If, on the contrary, we were to secure victory for sensuality,

then  the  sexual  repression  that  had  been  put  on  one  side  would

necessarily be replaced by symptom. Neither of these two alternative

decisions could end the internal conflict; in either case one party to it

would remain unsatisfied. There are only a few cases in which the

conflict is so unstable that a factor such as the doctor’s taking sides

could decide it; and such cases do not in fact stand in need of analytic

treatment. Anyone on whom the doctor could have so much influence

would have found the same way out without the doctor. You must be

aware that if an abstinent young man decides in favour of illicit sexual

intercourse or if an unsatisfied wife seeks relief with another man, they

have not as a rule waited for permission from a doctor or even from

their analyst.

   In this connection people usually overlook the one essential point -

that the pathogenic conflict in neurotics is not to be confused with a

normal struggle between mental impulses both of which are on the

same  psychological  footing.  In  the  former  case  the  dissension  is

between two powers, one of which has made its way to the stage of

what is preconscious or conscious while the other has been held back

at the stage of the unconscious. For that reason the conflict cannot be

brought to an issue; the disputants can no more come to grips than, in

the familiar simile, a polar bear and a whale. A true decision can only

be reached when they both meet on the same ground. To make this

possible is, I think, the sole task of our therapy.

   Moreover, I can assure you that you are misinformed if you suppose

that advice and guidance in the affairs of life play an integral part in

analytic influence. On the contrary, so for as possible we avoid the

role of a mentor such as this and there is nothing we would rather

bring about than the patient should make his decisions for himself.

With this purpose, too, we require him to postpone for the term of his

treatment  any  vital  decisions  on  choice  of  a  profession,  business

undertakings, marriage or divorce, and only to put them in practice

when the treatment is finished. You must admit that all this is different

from what you pictured. Only in the case of some very youthful orquite helpless or unstable individuals are we unable to put the desired

limitation of our role into effect. With them we have to combine the

functions of a doctor and an educator; but when this is so we are quite

conscious of our responsibility and behave with the necessary caution.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3477

 

   But you must not conclude from my eagerness in defending myself

against the charge that neurotics are encouraged in analytic treatment

to live a full life - you must not conclude from this that we influence

them in favour of conventional virtue. That is at least as far from being

the case. It is true that we are not reformers but merely observers;

nevertheless,  we  cannot  help  observing  with  a  critical  eye  and  we

have found it impossible to side with conventional sexual morality or to

form a very high opinion of the manner in which society attempts the

practical  regulation  of  the  problems  of  sexual  life.  We  can  present

society with a blunt calculation that what is described as its morality

calls for a bigger sacrifice than it is worth and that its proceedings are

not based on honesty and do not display wisdom. We do not keep

such criticisms from our patients’ ears, we accustom them to giving

unprejudiced  consideration  to  sexual  matters  no  less  than  to  any

others; and if, having grown independent after the completion of their

treatment,  they  decide  on  their  own  judgement  in  favour  of  some

midway position between living a full life and absolute asceticism, we

feel our conscience clear whatever their choice. We tell ourselves that

anyone who has succeeded in educating himself to truth about himself

is  permanently  defended  against  the  danger  of  immorality,  even

though his standard of morality may differ in some respect from that

which is customary in society. Moreover, we must guard against over-

estimating  the  importance  of  the  part  played  by  the  question  of

abstinence in influencing neuroses. Only in a minority of cases can the

pathogenic situation of frustration and the subsequent damming-up of

libido be brought to an end by the sort of sexual intercourse that can

be procured without much trouble.

    Thus you cannot explain the therapeutic effect of psycho-analysis by

its permitting a full sexual life. Look around, then, for something else. I

fancy that, while I was rejecting this suggestion of yours, one remark

of mine put you on the right track. What we make use of must no

doubt be the replacing of what is unconscious by what is conscious,

the translation of what is unconscious into what is conscious. Yes, that

is it. By carrying what is unconscious on into what is conscious, we lift

the  repressions,  we  remove  the  preconditions  for  the  formation  of

symptoms, we transform the pathogenic conflict to a normal one for

which it must be possible somehow to find a solution. All that we bring

about in a patient is this single psychical change: the length to which it

is  carried  is  the  measure  of  the  help  we  provide.  Where  no

repressions (or analogous psychical processes) can be undone, our

therapy nothing to expect.

      We  can  express  the  aim  of  our  efforts  in  a  variety  of  formulas:

making conscious what is unconscious, lifting repressions, filling gaps

in the memory - all these amount to the same thing. But perhaps you

will  be  dissatisfied  by  this  admission.  You  had  formed  a  different

picture  of  the  return  to  health  of  a  neurotic  patient  -  that,  after

submitting  to  the  tedious  hours  of  a  psycho-analysis,  he  would

become another man; but the total result, so it seems, is that he has

rather less that is unconscious and rather more that is conscious in

him  than  he  had  before.  The  fact  is  that  you  are  probably  under-

estimating  the  importance  of  an  internal  change  of  this  kind.  The

neurotic  who  is  cured  has  really  become  another  man,  though  a

bottom, of course, he has remained the same; that is to say, he has

become  what  he  might  have  become  at  best  under  the  most

favourable conditions. But that is a very great deal. If you now hear all

that  has  to  be  done  and  what  efforts  it  needs  to  bring  about  this

apparently  trivial  change  in  a  man’s  mental  life,  you  will  no  doubt

begin to realize the importance of this difference in psychical levels.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3478

 

   I will digress for a moment to ask if you know what is meant by acausal therapy. That is how we describe procedure which does not

take the symptoms of an illness as its point of attack but sets about

removing  its causes.  Well,  then,  is  our  psycho-analytic  method  a

causal  therapy  or  not?  The  reply  is  not  a  simple  one,  but  it  may

perhaps  give  us  an  opportunity  of  realizing  the  worthlessness  of  a

question framed in this way. In so far as analytic therapy does not

make it its first task to remove the symptoms, it is behaving like a

causal therapy. In another respect, you may say, it is not. For we long

ago  traced  the  causal  chain  back  through  the  repressions  to  the

instinctual dispositions, their relative intensities in the constitution and

the deviations in the course of their development. Supposing, now,

that it was possible, by some chemical means, perhaps, to interfere in

this mechanism, to increase or diminish the quantity of libido present

at a given time or to strengthen one instinct at the cost of another -

this then would be a causal therapy in the true sense of the word, for

which  our  analysis  would  have  carried  out  the  indispensable

preliminary work of reconnaissance. At present, as you know, there is

no question of any such method of influencing libidinal processes; with

our psychical therapy we attack at a different point in the combination

- not exactly at what we know are the roots of the phenomena, but

nevertheless far enough away from the symptoms, at a point which

has  been  made  accessible  to  us  by  some  very  remarkable

circumstances.

   What, then, must we do in order to replace what is unconscious in

our patients by what is conscious? There was a time when we thought

this was a very simple matter: all that was necessary was for us to

discover this unconscious material and communicate it to the patient.

But  we  know  already  that  this  was  a  short-sighted  error. Our

knowledge  about  the  unconscious  material  is  not  equivalent  to his

knowledge; if we communicate our knowledge to him, he does not

receive it instead of his unconscious material but beside it; and that

makes very little change in it. We must rather picture this unconscious

material topographically, we must look for it in his memory at the place

where it became unconscious owing to a repression. The repression

must  be  got  rid  of  -  after  which  the  substitution  of  the  conscious

material for the unconscious can proceed smoothly. How, then, do we

lift a repression of this kind? Here our task enters a second phase.First,  the  search  for  the  repression  and  then  the  removal  of  the

resistance which maintains the repression.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3479

 

   How do we remove the resistance? In the same way: by discovering

it and showing it to the patient. Indeed, the resistance too is derived

from a repression - from the same one that we are endeavouring to

resolve,  or  from  one  that  took  place  earlier.  It  was  set  up  by  the

anticathexis which arose in order to repress the objectionable impulse.

Thus we now do the same thing that we tried to do to begin with:

interpret, discover and communicate; but now we are doing it at the

right place. The anticathexis or the resistance does not form part of

the unconscious but of the ego, which is our collaborator, and is so

even  if  it  is  not  conscious.  As  we  know,  the  word  ‘unconscious’  is

being used here in two senses: on the one hand as a phenomenon

and on the other as a system. This sounds very difficult and obscure;

but  is  it  not  only  repeating  what  we  have  already  said  in  earlier

passages? We have long been prepared for it. We expect that this

resistance will be given up and the anticathexis withdrawn when our

interpretation has made it possible for the ego to recognize it. What

are the motive forces that we work with in such a case? First with the

patient’s desire for recovery, which has induced him to take part with

us in our joint work, and secondly with the help of his intelligence, to

which we give support by our interpretation. There is no doubt that it is

easier for the patient’s intelligence to recognize the resistance and to

find  the  translation  corresponding  to  what  is  repressed  if  we  have

previously given him the appropriate anticipatory ideas. If I say to you:

‘Look up at the sky! There’s a balloon there!’ you will discover it much

more easily than if I simply tell you to look up and see if you can see

anything.  In  the  same  way,  a  student  who  is  looking  through  a

microscope for the first time is instructed by his teacher as to what he

will see; otherwise he does not see it at all, though it is there and

visible.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3480

 

 

   And now for the fact! In a whole number of nervous diseases - in

hysteria,  anxiety  states,  obsessional  neurosis  -  our  expectation  is

fulfilled. By searching for the repression in this way, by uncovering the

resistances, by pointing out what is repressed, we really succeed in

accomplishing our task - that is, in overcoming the resistances, lifting

the  repression  and  transforming  the  unconscious  material  into

conscious. In doing so we gain the clearest impression of the way in

which a violent struggle takes place in the patient’s mind about the

overcoming  of  each  resistance  -  a normal  mental  struggle,  on  the

same  psychological  ground,  between  the  motives  which  seek  to

maintain the anticathexis and those which are prepared to give it up.

The former are the old motives which in the past put the repression

into effect; among the latter are the newly arrived ones which, we may

hope,  will  decide  the  conflict  in  our  favour.  We  have  succeeded  in

reviving the old conflict which led to repression and in bringing up for

revision the process that was then decided. The new material that we

produce  includes,  first  the  reminder  that  the  earlier  decision  led  to

illness and the promise that a different path will lead to recovery, and,

second, the enormous change in all the circumstances that has take

place since the time of the original rejection. Then the ego was feeble,

infantile,  and  may  perhaps  have  had  grounds  for  banning  the

demands of the libido as a danger. To-day it has grown strong and

experienced, and moreover has a helper at and in the shape of the

doctor. Thus we may expect to lead the revived conflict to a better

outcome than that which ended in repression, and, as I have said, in

hysteria and in the anxiety and obsessional neuroses success proves

us in general to be correct,

   There are, however, other forms of illness in which, in spite of the

conditions  being  the  same,  our  therapeutic  procedure  is  never

successful. In them, too, it had been a question of an original conflict

between the ego and the libido which led to repression - though this

may call for a different topographical description; in them, too, it is

possible  to  trace  the  points  in  the  patient’s  life  at  which  therepressions occurred; we make use of the same procedure, are ready

to make the same promises and give the same help by the offer of

anticipatory  ideas;  and  once  again  the  lapse  of  time  between  the

repressions and the present day favours a different outcome to the

conflict. And yet we do not succeed in lifting a single resistance or

getting  rid  of  a  single  repression.  These  patients,  paranoics,

melancholics, sufferers from dementia praecox, remain on the whole

unaffected and proof against psycho-analytic therapy. What can be

the reason for this? Not any lack of intelligence. A certain amount of

intellectual capacity is naturally required in our patients; but there is

certainly  no  lack  of  it  in,  for  instance,  the  extremely  shrewd

combinatory paranoics. Nor do any of the other motives seem to be

absent.  Thus  the  melancholics  have  a  very  high  degree  of

consciousness, absent in paranoics, that they are ill and that that is

why  they  suffer  so  much;  but  this  does  not  make  them  more

accessible. We are faced here by a fact which we do not understand

and  which  therefore  leads  us  to  doubt  whether  we  have  really

understood all the determinants of our possible success with the other

neuroses.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3481

 

      If  we  continue  to  concern  ourselves  only  with  our  hysterics  and

obsessional neurotics, we are soon met by a second fact for which we

were  not  in  the  least  prepared.  For  after  a  while  we  cannot  help

noticing that these patients behave in a quite peculiar manner to us.

We believed, to be sure, that we had reckoned with all the motives

concerned in the treatment, that we had completely rationalized the

situation between us and the patients so that it could be looked over at

a lance like a sum in arithmetic; yet, in spite of all this, something

seems to creep in which has not been taken into account in our sum.

This unexpected novelty itself takes many shapes, and I will begin by

describing to you the commoner and more easily understandable of

the forms in which it appears.

   We notice, then, that the patient, who ought to want nothing else butto find a way out of his distressing conflict, develops a special interest

in  the  person  of  the  doctor.  Everything  connected  with  the  doctor

seems to be more important to him than his own affairs and to be

diverting him from his illness. For a time, accordingly, relations with

him become very agreeable; he is particularly obliging, tries wherever

possible to show his gratitude, reveals refinements and merits in his

nature which we should not, perhaps, have expected to find in him.

The doctor, too, thereupon forms a favourable opinion of the patient

and appreciates the good fortune which has enabled him to give his

assistance to such a particularly valuable personality. If the doctor has

an  opportunity  of  talking  to  the  patient’s  relatives,  he  learns  to  his

satisfaction that the liking is a mutual one. The patient never tires in

his home of praising the doctor and of extolling ever new qualities in

him.  ‘He’s  enthusiastic  about  you,’  say  his  relatives,  ‘he  trusts  you

blindly; everything you say is like a revelation to him.’ Here and there

someone in this chorus has sharper eyes and says: ‘It’s becoming a

bore, the way he talks of nothing else but you and has your name on

his lips all the time.’

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3482

 

      Let  us  hope  that  the  doctor  is  modest  enough  to  attribute  his

patient’s high opinion of him to the hopes he can rouse in him and to

the widening of his intellectual horizon by the surprising and liberating

enlightenment that the treatment brings with it. Under these conditions

the analysis makes fine progress too. The patient understands what is

interpreted to him and becomes engrossed in the tasks set him by the

treatment; the material of memories and associations floods in I upon

him in plenty, the certainty and appositeness of his interpretations are

a  surprise  to  the  doctor,  and  the  latter  can  only  take  note  with

satisfaction  that  here  is  a  patient  who  readily  accepts  all  the

psychological  novelties  which  are  apt  to  provoke  the  most  bitter

contradiction among healthy people in the outside world. Moreover the

cordial  relations  that  prevail  during  the  work  of  analysis  are

accompanied by an objective improvement, which is recognized on allsides, in the patient’s illness.

   But such fine weather cannot last for ever. One day it clouds over.

Difficulties  arise  in  the  treatment;  the  patient  declares  that  nothing

more occurs to him. He gives the clearest impression of his interest

being  no  longer  in  the  work  and  of  his  cheerfully  disregarding  the

instructions given him to say everything that comes into his head and

not to give way to any critical obstacle to doing so. He behaves as

though he were outside the treatment and as though he had not made

this  agreement  with  the  doctor.  He  is  evidently  occupied  with

something, but intends to keep it to himself. This is a situation that is

dangerous for the treatment. We are unmistakably confronted by a

formidable resistance. But what has happened to account for it?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3483

 

   If we are able once more to clarify the position, we find that the

cause of the disturbance is that the patient has transferred on to the

doctor intense feelings of affection which are justified neither by the

doctor’s behaviour nor by the situation that has developed during the

treatment. The form in which this affection is expressed and what its

aims are depend of course on the personal relation between the two

people involved. If those concerned are a young girl and a youngish

man, we shall get the impression of a normal case of falling in love;

we shall find it understandable that a girl should fall in love with a man

with whom she can be much alone and talk of intimate things and who

has the advantage of having met her as a helpful superior; and we

shall probably overlook the fact that what we should expect from a

neurotic girl would rather be an impediment in her capacity for love.

The further the personal relations between doctor and patient diverge

from  this  supposed  case,  the  more  we  shall  be  surprised  to  find

nevertheless the same emotional relationship constantly recurring. It

may  still  pass  muster  if  a  woman  who  is  unhappy  in  her  marriage

appears to be seized with a serious passion for a doctor who is still

unattached, if she is ready to seek a divorce in order to be his or if,

where there are social obstacles, she even expresses no hesitationabout entering into a secret liaison with him. Such things come about

even  outside  psycho-analysis.  But  in  these  circumstances  we  are

astonished  to  hear  declarations  by  married  women  and  girls  which

bear witness to a quite particular attitude to the therapeutic problem:

they had always known, they say, that they could only be cured by

love, and before the treatment began they had expected that through

this  relation  they  would  at  last  be  granted  what  life  had  hitherto

withheld from them; it had only been in this hope that they had taken

so much trouble over the treatment and overcome all the difficulties in

communicating their thoughts - and we on our part can add: and had

so  easily  understood  what  is  otherwise  so  hard  to  believe.  But  an

admission of this sort surprises us: it throws all our calculations to the

winds. Can it be that we have left the most important item out of our

account?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3484

 

   And indeed, the greater our experience the less we are able to resist

making  this  correction,  though  having  to  do  so  puts  our  scientific

pretensions to shame. On the first few occasions one might perhaps

think that the analytic treatment had come up against a disturbance

due  to  a  chance  event  -  an  event,  that  is,  not  intended  and  not

provoked  by  it.  But  when  a  similar  affectionate  attachment  by  the

patient to the doctor is repeated regularly in every new case, when it

comes  to  light  again  and  again,  under  the  most  unfavourable

conditions  and  where  there  are  positively  grotesque  incongruities,

even  in  elderly  women  and  in  relation  to  grey-bearded  men,  even

where, in our judgement, there is nothing of any kind to entice - then

we must abandon the idea of a chance disturbance and recognize that

we are dealing with a phenomenon which is intimately bound up with

the nature of the illness itself.

   This new fact, which we thus recognize so unwillingly, is known by

us  as transference.  We  mean  a  transference  of  feelings  on  to  the

person of the doctor, since we do not believe that the situation in the

treatment could justify the development of such feelings. We suspect,on the contrary, that the whole readiness for these feelings is derived

from elsewhere, that they were already prepared in the patient and,

upon the opportunity offered by the analytic treatment, are transferred

on  to  the  person  of  the  doctor.  Transference  can  appear  as  a

passionate demand for love or in more moderate forms; in place of a

wish to be loved, a wish can emerge between a girl and an old man to

be received as a favourite daughter; the libidinal desire can be toned

down  into  a  proposal  for  an  inseparable,  but  ideally  non-sensual,

friendship. Some women succeed in sublimating the transference and

in moulding it till it achieves a kind of viability; others must express it in

its  crude,  original,  and  for  the  most  part,  impossible  form.  But  at

bottom  it  is  always  the  same,  and  never  allows  its  origin  from  the

same source to be mistaken.

   Before we enquire where we are to find a place for this new fact, I

will complete my description of it. What happens with male patients?

There at least one might hope to escape the troublesome interference

caused  by  difference  of  sex  and  by  sexual  attraction.  Our  answer,

however, must be much the same as in the case of women. There is

the  same  attachment  to  the  doctor,  the  same  overvaluation  of  his

qualities, the same absorption in his interests, the same jealousy of

everyone  close  to  him  in  real  life.  The  sublimated  forms  of

transference are more frequent between one man and another and

straightforward sexual demands are rarer, in proportion as manifest

homosexuality is unusual as compared with the other ways in which

these instinctual components are employed. With his male patients,

again, more often than with women, the doctor comes across a form

of  expression  of  the  transference  which  seems  at  first  sight  to

contradict  all  our  previous  descriptions  -  a  hostile  or negative

transference.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3485

 

 

   I must begin by making it clear that a transference is present in the

patient from the beginning of the treatment and for a while is the mostpowerful motive in its advance. We see no trace of it and need not

bother about it so long as it operates in favour of the joint work of

analysis.  If  it  then  changes  into  a  resistance,  we  must  turn  our

attention  to  it  and  we  recognize  that  it  alters  its  relation  to  the

treatment under two different and contrary conditions: firstly, if as an

affectionate trend it has become so powerful, and betrays signs of its

origin  in  a  sexual  need  so  clearly,  that  it  inevitably  provokes  an

internal  opposition  to  itself,  and,  secondly,  if  it  consists  of  hostile

instead  of  affectionate  impulses.  The  hostile  feelings  make  their

appearance  as  a  rule  later  than  the  affectionate  ones  and  behind

them;  their  simultaneous  presence  gives  a  good  picture  of  the

emotional  ambivalence  which  is  dominant  in  the  majority  of  our

intimate relations with other people. The hostile feelings are as much

an indication of an emotional tie as the affectionate ones, in the same

way as defiance signifies dependence as much as obedience does,

though with a ‘minus’ instead of a ‘plus’ sign before it. We can be in no

doubt that the hostile feelings towards the doctor deserve to be called

a  ‘transference’,  since  the  situation  in  the  treatment  quite  certainly

offers no adequate grounds for their origin; this necessary view of the

negative transference assures us, therefore, that we have not gone

wrong in our judgement of the positive or affectionate one.

   Where the transference arises, what difficulties it raises for us, how

we overcome them and what advantages we eventually derive from it

- these are questions to be dealt with in a technical guide to analysis,

and I shall only touch on them lightly to-day. It is out of the question

for us to yield to the patient’s demands deriving from the transference;

it would be absurd for us to reject them in an unfriendly, still more in

an indignant, manner. We overcome the transference by pointing out

to the patient that his feelings do not arise from the present situation

and  do  not  apply  to  the  person  of  the  doctor,  but  that  they  are

repeating  something  that  happened  to  him  earlier.  In  this  way  we

oblige him to transform his repetition into a memory. By that means

the  transference,  which,  whether  affectionate  or  hostile,  seemed  in

every case to constitute the greatest threat to the treatment, becomes

its best tool, by whose help the most secret compartments of mental

life can be opened.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3486

 

   But I should like to say a few words to you to relieve you of your

surprise at the emergence of this unexpected phenomenon. We must

not  forget  that  the  patient’s  illness,  which  we  have  undertaken  to

analyse, is not something which has been rounded off and become

rigid but that it is still growing and developing like a living organism.

The  beginning  of  the  treatment  does  not  put  an  end  to  this

development;  when,  however,  the  treatment  has  obtained  mastery

over the patient, what happens is that the whole of his illness’s new

production  is  concentrated  upon  a  single  point  -  his  relation  to  the

doctor. Thus the transference may be compared to the cambium layer

in  a  tree  between  the  wood  and  the  bark,  from  which  the  new

formation of tissue and the increase in the girth of the trunk derive.

When the transference has risen to this significance, work upon the

patient’s memories retreats far into the background. Thereafter it is not

incorrect to say that we are no longer concerned with the patient’s

earlier  illness  but  with  a  newly  created  and  transformed  neurosis

which has taken the former’s place. We have followed this new edition

of  the  old  disorder  from  its  start,  we  have  observed  its  origin  and

growth, and we are especially well able to find our way about in it

since, as its object, we are situated at its very centre. All the patient’s

symptoms have abandoned their original meaning and have take on a

new sense which lies in a relation to the transference; or only such

symptoms  have  persisted  as  are  capable  of  undergoing  such  a

transformation.  But  the  mastering  of  this  new,  artificial  neurosis

coincides with getting rid of the illness which was originally brought to

the  treatment  -  with  the  accomplishment  of  our  therapeutic  task.  A

person  who  has  become  normal  and  free  from  the  operation  of

repressed instinctual impulse in his relation to the doctor will remain

so in his own life after the doctor has once more withdrawn from it.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3487

       The  transference  possesses  this  extraordinary,  and  for  the

treatment, positively central, importance in hysteria, anxiety hysteria

and obsessional neurosis, which are for that reason rightly classed

together as ‘transference neuroses’. No one who has taken in a full

impression of the fact of transference from his analytic work will any

longer  doubt  the  nature  of  the  suppressed  impulses  that  obtain

expression in the symptoms of these neuroses, and will call for no

more powerful evidence of their libidinal character. It may be said that

our  conviction  of  the  significance  of  symptoms  as  substitutive

satisfactions of the libido only received its final confirmation after the

enlistment of the transference.

   There is every reason now for us to improve our earlier dynamic

account of the therapeutic process and to bring it into harmony with

our new realization. If the patient is to fight his way through the normal

conflict with the resistances which we have uncovered for him in the

analysis, he is in need of a powerful stimulus which will influence the

decision in the sense which we desire, leading to recovery. Otherwise

it might happen that he would choose in favour of repeating the earlier

outcome  and  would  allow  what  had  been  brought  up  into

consciousness to slip back again into repression. At this point what

turns the scale in his struggle is not his intellectual insight which is

neither strong enough nor free enough for such an achievement - but

simply  and  solely  his  relation  to  the  doctor.  In  so  far  as  his

transference bears a ‘plus’ sign, it clothes the doctor with authority and

is transformed into belief in his communications and explanations. In

the  absence  of  such  a  transference,  or  if  it  is  a  negative  one,  the

patient  would  never  even  give  a  hearing  to  the  doctor  and  his

arguments.  In  this  his  belief  is  repeating  the  story  of  its  own

development; it is a derivative of love and, to start with, needed no

arguments. Only later did he allow them enough room to submit them

to examination, provided they were brought forward by someone he

loved.  Without  such  supports  arguments  carried  no  weight,  and  in

most  people’s  lives  they  never  do.  Thus  in  general  a  man  is  only

accessible from the intellectual side too, in so far as he is capable of a

libidinal cathexis of objects; and we have good reason to recognize

and to dread in the amount of his narcissism a barrier against the

possibility of being influenced by even the best analytic technique. 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3488

 

   A capacity for directing libidinal object-cathexes on to people must of

course  be  attributed  to  every  normal  person.  The  tendency  to

transference of the neurotics I have spoken of is only an extraordinary

increase  of  this  universal  characteristic.  It  would  indeed  be  very

strange if a human trait so widespread and so important had never

been noticed or appreciated. And in fact it has been. Bernheim, with

an unerring eye based his theory of hypnotic phenomena on the thesis

that  everyone  is  in  some  way  ‘suggestible’.  His  suggestibility  was

nothing  other  than  the  tendency  to  transference,  somewhat  too

narrowly conceived, so that it did not include negative transference.

But Bernheim was never able to say what suggestion actually was and

how it came about. For him it was a fundamental fact on whose origin

he  could  throw  no  light.  He  did  not  know  that  his  ‘suggestibilité'

depended on sexuality, on the activity of the libido. And it must dawn

on  us  that  in  our  technique  we  have  abandoned  hypnosis  only  to

rediscover suggestion in the shape of transference.

 

   But here I will pause, and let you have a word; for I see an objection

boiling  up  in  you  so  fiercely  that  it  would  make  you  incapable  of

listening if it were not put into words: ‘Ah! so you’ve admitted it at last!

You work with the help of suggestion, just like the hypnotists! That is

what we’ve thought for a long time. But, if so, why the roundabout

road by way of memories of the past, discovering the unconscious,

interpreting  and  translating  back  distortions  -  this  immense

expenditure of labour, time and money - when the one effective thing

is after all only suggestion? Why do you not make direct suggestion

against  the  symptoms,  as  the  others  do  -  the  honest  hypnotists?

Moreover, if you try to excuse yourself for your long detour on the

ground  that  you  have  made  a  number  of  important  psychological

discoveries which are hidden by direct suggestion - what about the

certainty of these discoveries now? Are not they a result of suggestion

too, of unintentional suggestion? Is it not possible that you are forcingon the patient what you want and what seems to you correct, in this

field as well?’

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3489

 

   What you are throwing up at me in this is uncommonly interesting

and must be answered. But I cannot do so to-day: we have not the

time. Till our next meeting, then. I will answer you, you will see. But to-

day  I  must  finish  what  I  have  begun.  I  promised  to  make  you

understand by the help of the fact of transference why our therapeutic

efforts have no success with the narcissistic neuroses.

   I can do so in a few words, and you will see how simply the riddle

can  be  solved  and  how  well  everything  fits  together.  Observation

shows that sufferers from narcissistic neuroses have no capacity for

transference or only insufficient residues of it. They reject the doctor,

not with hostility but with indifference. For that reason they cannot be

influenced by him either; what he says leaves them cold, makes no

impression on them; consequently the mechanism of cure which we

carry through with other people - the revival of the pathogenic conflict

and the overcoming of the resistance due to repression - cannot be

operated with them. They remain as they are. Often they have already

undertaken attempts at recovery on their own account which have led

to pathological results. We cannot alter this in any way.

   On the basis of our clinical impressions we maintained that these

patients’  object-cathexes  must  have  been  given  up  and  that  their

object-libido must have been transformed into ego-libido. Through this

characteristic we distinguished them from the first group of neurotics

(sufferers from hysteria, anxiety-hysteria and obsessional neurosis).

This suspicion is now confirmed by their behaviour in our attempts at

therapy.  They  manifest  no  transference  and  for  that  reason  are

inaccessible to our efforts and cannot be cured by us.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3490

                                       LECTURE XXVIII

 

                              ANALYTIC THERAPY

 

LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, - You know what we are going to talk about to-

day. You asked me why we do not make use of direct suggestion in

psycho-analytic  therapy,  when  we  admit  that  our  influence  rests

essentially on transference - that is, on suggestion; and you added a

doubt whether, in view of this predominance of suggestion, we are still

able  to  claim  that  our  psychological  discoveries  are  objective.  I

promised I would give you a detailed reply.

   Direct suggestion is suggestion aimed against the manifestation of

the symptoms; it is a struggle between your authority and the motives

for the illness. In this you do not concern yourself with these motives;

you  merely  request  the  patient  to  suppress  their  manifestation  in

symptoms.  It  makes  no  difference  of  principle  whether  you  put  the

patient  under  hypnosis  or  not.  Once  again  Bernheim,  with  his

characteristic  perspicacity,  maintained  that  suggestion  was  the

essential element in the phenomena of hypnotism, that hypnosis itself

was  already  a  result  of  suggestion,  a  suggested  state;  and  he

preferred to practise suggestion in a waking state, which can achieve

the same effects as suggestion under hypnosis.

   Which would you rather hear first on this question - what experience

tells us or theoretical considerations?

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3491

 

 

   Let us begin with the former. I was a pupil of Bernheim’s, whom I

visited at Nancy in 1889 and whose book on suggestion I translated

into German. I practised hypnotic treatment for many years, at first by

prohibitory suggestion and later in combination with Breuer’s method

of  questioning  the  patient.  I  can  therefore  speak  of  the  results  of

hypnotic or suggestive therapy on the basis of a wide experience. If, in

the words of the old medical aphorism, an ideal therapy should be

rapid, reliable and not disagreeable for the patient, Bernheim’s methodfulfilled at least two of these requirements. It could be carried through

much quicker - or, rather, infinitely quicker - than analytic treatment

and it caused the patient neither trouble nor unpleasantness. For the

doctor it became, in the long run, monotonous: in each case, in the

same way, with the same ceremonial, forbidding the most variegated

symptoms to exist, without being able to learn anything of their sense

and  meaning.  It  was  hackwork  and  not  a  scientific  activity,  and  it

recalled magic, incantations and hocus-pocus. That could not weigh,

however,  against  the  patient’s  interest.  But  the  third  quality  was

lacking: the procedure was not reliable in any respect. It could be used

with one patient, but not with another; it achieved a great deal with

one and very little with another, and one never knew why. Worse than

the capriciousness of the procedure was the lack of permanence in its

successes. If, after a short time, one had news of the patient once

more, the old ailment was back again or its place had been taken by a

new one. One might hypnotize him again. But in the background there

was the warning given by experienced workers against robbing the

patient  of  his  self-reliance  by  frequently  repeated  hypnosis  and  so

making  him  an  addict  to  this  kind  of  therapy  as  though  it  were  a

narcotic.  Admittedly  sometimes  things  went  entirely  as  one  would

wish: after a few efforts, success was complete and permanent. But

the  conditions  determining  such  a  favourable  outcome  remained

unknown. On one occasion a severe condition in a woman, which I

had  entirely  got  rid  of  by  a  short  hypnotic  treatment,  returned

unchanged after the patient had, through no action on my part, got

annoyed with me; after a reconciliation, I removed the trouble again

and far more thoroughly; yet it returned once more after she had fallen

foul  of  me  a  second  time.  On  another  occasion  a  woman  patient,

whom  I  had  repeatedly  helped  out  of  neurotic  states  by  hypnosis,

suddenly, during the treatment of a specially obstinate situation, threw

her arms round my neck. After this one could scarcely avoid, whether

one  wanted  to  or  not,  investigating  the  question  of  the  nature  and

origin of one’s authority in suggestive treatment.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3492 

 

   So much for experiences. They show us that in renouncing direct

suggestion we are not giving up anything of irreplaceable value. Now

let us add a few reflections to this. The practice of hypnotic therapy

makes  very  small  demands  on  either  the  patient  or  the  doctor.  It

agrees most beautifully with the estimate in which neuroses are still

held by the majority of doctors. The doctor says to the neurotic patient:

‘There’s nothing wrong with you, it’s only a question of nerves; so I

can blow away your trouble in two or three minutes with just a few

words.’ But our views on the laws of energy are offended by the notion

of its being possible to move a great weight by a tiny application of

force, attacking it directly, without the outside help of any appropriate

appliances. In so far as the conditions are comparable, experience

shows that this feat is not successfully accomplished in the case of the

neuroses  either.  But  I  am  aware  that  this  argument  is  not

unimpeachable. There is such a thing as a ‘trigger-action’.

   In the light of the knowledge we have gained from psycho-analysis

we can describe the difference between hypnotic and psycho-analytic

suggestion as follows. Hypnotic treatment seeks to cover up and gloss

over something in mental life; analytic treatment seeks to expose and

get rid of something. The former acts like a cosmetic, the latter like

surgery. The former makes use of suggestion in order to forbid the

symptoms; it strengthens the repressions, but, apart from that, leaves

all  the  processes  that  have  led  to  the  formation  of  the  symptoms

unaltered. Analytic treatment makes its impact further back towards

the roots, where the conflicts are which gave rise to the symptoms,

and uses suggestion in order to alter the outcome of those conflicts.

Hypnotic treatment leaves the patient inert and unchanged, and for

that reason, too, equally unable to resist any fresh occasion for falling

ill. An analytic treatment demands from both doctor and patient the

accomplishment of serious work, which is employed in lifting internal

resistances.  Through  the  overcoming  of  these  resistances  the

patient’s mental life is permanently changed, is raised to a high level

of  development  and  remains  protected  against  fresh  possibilities  of

falling ill. This work of overcoming resistances is the essential function

of analytic treatment; the patient has to accomplish it and the doctormakes this possible for him with the help of suggestion operating in an

educative sense. For that reason psycho-analytic treatment has justly

been described as a kind of after-education.

   I hope I have now made it clear to you in what way our method of

employing  suggestion  therapeutically  differs  from  the  only  method

possible in hypnotic treatment. You will understand too, from the fact

that  suggestion  can  be  traced  back  to  transference,  the

capriciousness  which  struck  us  in  hypnotic  therapy,  while  analytic

treatment remains calculable within its limits. In using hypnosis we are

dependent  on  the  state  of  the  patient’s  capacity  for  transference

without being able to influence it itself. The transference of a person

who  is  to  be  hypnotized  may  be  negative  or,  as  most  frequently,

ambivalent, or he may have protected himself against his transference

by  adopting  special  attitudes;  of  that  we  learn  nothing.  In  psycho-

analysis we act upon the transference itself, resolve what opposes it,

adjust the instrument with which we wish to make our impact. Thus it

becomes possible for us to derive an entirely fresh advantage from the

power of suggestion; we get it into our hands. The patient does not

suggest to himself whatever he pleases: we guide his suggestion so

far as he is in any way accessible to its influence.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3493

 

 

   But you will now tell me that, no matter whether we call the motive

force of our analysis transference or suggestion, there is a risk that the

influencing  of  our  patient  may  make  the  objective  certainty  of  our

findings doubtful. What is advantageous to our therapy is damaging to

our researches. This is the objection that is most often raised against

psycho-analysis, and it must be admitted that, though it is groundless,

it  cannot  be  rejected  as  unreasonable.  If  it  were  justified,  psycho-

analysis would be nothing more than a particularly well-disguised and

particularly effective form of suggestive treatment and we should have

to attach little weight to all that it tells us about what influences our

lives, the dynamics of the mind or the unconscious. That is what ouropponents believe; and in especial they think that we have ‘talked’ the

patients  into  everything  relating  to  the  importance  of  sexual

experiences - or even into those experiences themselves - after such

notions  have  grown  up  in  our  own  depraved  imagination.  These

accusations are contradicted more easily by an appeal to experience

than  by  the  help  of  theory.  Anyone  who  has  himself  carried  out

psycho-analyses will have been able to convince himself on countless

occasions that it is impossible to make suggestions to a patient in that

way. The doctor has no difficulty, of course, in making him a supporter

of some particular theory and in thus making him share some possible

error of his own. In this respect the patient is behaving like anyone

else - like a pupil - but this only affects his intelligence, not his illness.

After  all,  his  conflicts  will  only  be  successfully  solved  and  his

resistances overcome if the anticipatory ideas he is given tally with

what is real in him. Whatever in the doctor’s conjectures is inaccurate

drops out in the course of the analysis; it has to be withdrawn and

replaced  by  something  more  correct.  We  endeavour  by  a  careful

technique  to  avoid  the  occurrence  of  premature  successes  due  to

suggestion; but no harm is done even if they do occur, for we are not

satisfied by a first success. We do not regard an analysis as at an end

until all the obscurities of the case are cleared up, the gaps in the

patient’s memory filled in, the precipitating causes of the repressions

discovered. We look upon successes that set in too soon as obstacles

rather than as a help to the work of analysis; and we put an end to

such  successes  by  constantly  resolving  the  transference  on  which

they are based. It is this last characteristic which is the fundamental

distinction between analytic and purely suggestive therapy, and which

frees the results of analysis from the suspicion of being successes

due  to  suggestion.  In  every  other  kind  of  suggestive  treatment  the

transference is carefully preserved and left untouched; in analysis it is

itself subjected to treatment and is dissected in all the shapes in which

it appears. At the end of an analytic treatment the transference must

itself be cleared away; and if success is then obtained or continues, it

rests, not on suggestion, but on the achievement by its means of an

overcoming of internal resistances, on the internal change that has

been brought about in the patient.

      The  acceptance  of  suggestions  on  individual  points  is  no  doubtdiscouraged by the fact that during the treatment we are struggling

unceasingly  against  resistances  which  are  able  to  transform

themselves into negative (hostile) transferences. Nor must we fail to

point out that a large number of the individual findings of analysis,

which might otherwise be suspected to being products of suggestion,

are  confirmed  from  another  and  irreproachable  source.  Our

guarantors in this case are the sufferers from dementia praecox and

paranoia,  who  are  of  course  far  above  any  suspicion  of  being

influenced  by  suggestion.  The  translations  of  symbols  and  the

phantasies, which these patients produce for us and which in them

have forced their way through into consciousness, coincide faithfully

with  the  results  of  our  investigations  into  the  unconscious  of

transference neurotics and thus confirm the objective correctness of

our interpretations, on which doubt is so often thrown. You will not, I

think, be going astray if you trust analysis on these points.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3494

 

 

   I will now complete my picture of the mechanism of cure by clothing

it  in  the  formulas  of  the  libido  theory.  A  neurotic  is  incapable  of

enjoyment  and  of  efficiency  -  the  former  because  his  libido  is  not

directed on to any real object and the latter because he is obliged to

employ  a  great  deal  of  this  available  energy  on  keeping  his  libido

under repression and on warding off its assaults. He would become

healthy if the conflict between his ego and his libido came to an end

and if his ego had his libido again at its disposal. The therapeutic task

consists, therefore, in freeing the libido from its present attachments,

which  are  withdrawn  from  the  ego,  and  in  making  it  once  more

serviceable to the ego. Where, then, is the neurotic’s libido situated? It

is easily found: it is attached to the symptoms, which yield it the only

substitutive satisfaction possible at the time. We must therefore make

ourselves  masters  of  the  symptoms  and  resolve  them  -  which  is

precisely the same thing that the patient requires of us. In order to

resolve the symptoms, we must go back as far as their origin, we mustrenew the conflict from which they arose, and, with the help of motive

forces which were not at the patient’s disposal in the past, we must

guide  it  to  a  different  outcome.  This  revision  of  the  process  of

repression can be accomplished only in part in connection with the

memory traces of the processes which led to repression. The decisive

part of the work is achieved by creating in the patient’s relation to the

doctor - in the ‘transference’ - new editions of the old conflicts; in these

the patient would like to behave in the same way as he did in the past,

while we, by summoning up every available mental force, compel him

to  come  to  a  fresh  decision.  Thus  the  transference  becomes  the

battlefield on which all the mutually struggling forces should meet one

another.

   All the libido, as well as everything opposing it, is made to converge

solely on the relation with the doctor. In this process the symptoms are

inevitably divested of libido. In place of his patient’s true illness there

appears the artificially constructed transference illness, in place of the

various unreal objects of the libido there appears a single, and once

more imaginary, object in the person of the doctor. But, by the help of

he doctor’s suggestion, the new struggle around this object is lifted to

the highest psychical level: it takes place as a normal mental conflict.

Since a fresh repression is avoided, the alienation between ego and

libido is brought to an end and the subject’s mental unity is restored.

When the libido is released once more from its temporary object in the

person of the doctor, it cannot return to its earlier objects, but is at the

disposal of the ego. The forces against which we have been struggling

during our work of therapy are, on the one hand, the ego’s antipathy to

certain trends of the libido - an antipathy expressed in a tendency to

repression - and, on the other hand, the tenacity or adhesiveness of

the libido, which dislikes leaving objects that it has once cathected.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3495

 

   Thus our therapeutic work falls into two phases. In the first, all the

libido  is  forced  from  the  symptoms  into  the  transference  and

concentrated there; in the second, the struggle is waged around thisnew object and the libido is liberated from it. The change which is

decisive for a favourable outcome is the elimination of repression in

this  renewed  conflict  so  that  the  libido  cannot  withdraw  once  more

from the ego by flight into the unconscious. This is made possible by

the alteration of the ego which is accomplished under the influence of

the doctor’s suggestion. By means of the work of interpretation, which

transforms  what  is  unconscious  into  what  is  conscious,  the  ego  is

enlarged at the cost of this unconscious; by means of instruction, it is

made  conciliatory  towards  the  libido  and  inclined  to  grant  it  some

satisfaction,  and  its  repugnance  to  the  claims  of  the  libido  is

diminished  by  the  possibility  of  disposing  of  a  portion  of  it  by

sublimation. The more closely events in the treatment coincide with

this ideal description, the greater will be the success of the psycho-

analytic therapy. It finds its limits in the lack of mobility of the libido,

which may refuse to leave its objects, and the rigidity of narcissism,

which  will  not  allow  transference  on  to  objects  to  increase  beyond

certain bounds. Further light may perhaps be thrown on the dynamics

of the process of cure if I say that we get hold of the whole of the libido

which  has  been  withdrawn  from  the  dominance  of  the  ego  by

attracting a portion of it on to ourselves by means of the transference.

   It will not be out of place to give a warning that we can draw no

direct conclusion from the distribution of the libido during and resulting

from  the  treatment  as  to  how  it  was  distributed  during  the  illness.

Suppose we succeeded in bringing a case to a favourable conclusion

by setting up and then resolving a strong father-transference to the

doctor.  It  would  not  be  correct  to  conclude  that  the  patient  had

suffered previously from a similar unconscious attachment of his libido

to  his  father.  His  father-transference  was  merely  the  battlefield  on

which we gained control of his libido; the patient’s libido as directed to

it from other positions. A battlefield need not necessarily coincide with

one of the enemy’s key fortresses. The defence of a hostile capital

need  not  take  place  just  in  front  of  its  gates.  Not  until  after  the

transference has once more been resolved can we reconstruct in our

thoughts the distribution of the libido which had prevailed during the

illness.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3496

 

 

   From the standpoint of the libido theory, too, we may say a last word

on dreams. A neurotic’s dreams help us, like his parapraxes and his

free associations to them, to discover the sense of his symptoms and

to reveal the way in which his libido is allocated. They show us, in the

form of a wish-fulfilment, what wishful impulses have been subjected

to repression and to what objects the libido withdrawn from the ego

has  become  attached.  For  this  reason  the  interpretation  of  dreams

plays a large part in a psycho-analytic treatment, and in some cases it

is over long periods the most important instrument of our work. We

already  know  that  the  state  of  sleep  in  itself  leads  to  a  certain

relaxation  of  the  repressions.  A  repressed  impulse,  owing  to  this

reduction  in  the  pressure  weighing  down  upon  it,  becomes  able  to

express itself far more clearly in a dream than it can be allowed to be

expressed  by  a  symptom  during  the  day.  The  study  of  dreams

therefore  becomes  the  most  convenient  means  of  access  to  a

knowledge  of  the  repressed  unconscious,  of  which  the  libido

withdrawn from the ego forms a part.

   But the dreams of neurotics do not differ in any important respect

from those of normal people; it is possible, indeed, that they cannot be

distinguished from them at all. It would be absurd to give an account

of the dreams of neurotics which could not also apply to the dreams of

normal  people.  We  must  therefore  say  that  the  difference  between

neurosis and health holds only during the day; it is not prolonged into

dream-life. We are obliged to carry over to healthy people a number of

hypotheses which arise in connection with neurotics as a result of the

link between the latter’s dreams and their symptoms. We cannot deny

that  healthy  people  as  well  possess  in  their  mental  life  what  alone

makes possible the formation both of dreams and of symptoms, and

we must conclude that they too have carried out repressions, that they

expend a certain amount of energy in order to maintain them, that

their unconscious system conceals repressed impulses which are still

cathected with energy, and that a portion of their libido is withdrawn

from their ego’s disposal. Thus a healthy person, too, is virtually aneurotic;  but  dreams  appear  to  be  the  only  symptoms  which  he  is

capable of forming. It is true that if one subjects his waking life to a

closer  examination  one  discovers  something  that  contradicts  this

appearance - namely that this ostensibly healthy life is interspersed

with a great number of trivial and in practice unimportant symptoms.

      The  distinction  between  nervous  health  and  neurosis  is  thus

reduced to a practical question and is decided by the outcome - by

whether  the  subject  is  left  with  a  sufficient  amount  of  capacity  for

enjoyment and of efficiency. It probably goes back to the relative sizes

of the quota of energy that remains free and of that which is bound by

repression, and is of a quantitative not of a qualitative nature. I need

not tell you that this discovery is the theoretical justification for our

conviction that neuroses are in principle curable in spite of their being

based on constitutional disposition.

   The identity of the dreams of healthy and neurotic people enables us

to infer thus much in regard to defining the characteristics of health.

But in regard to dreams themselves we can make a further inference:

we  must  not  detach  them  from  their  connection  with  neurotic

symptoms,  we  must  not  suppose  that  their  essential  nature  is

exhausted  by  the  formula  that  describes  them  as  a  translation  of

thoughts into an archaic form of expression, but we must suppose that

they exhibit to us allocations of the libido and object-cathexes that are

really present.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3497

 

 

   We shall soon have reached the end. You are perhaps disappointed

that on the topic of the psycho-analytic method of therapy I have only

spoken  to  you  about  theory  and  not  about  the  conditions  which

determine  whether  a  treatment  is  to  be  undertaken  or  about  the

results it produces. I shall discuss neither: the former because it is not

my intention to give you practical instructions on how to carry out a

psycho-analysis,  and  the  latter  because  several  reasons  deter  me

from it. At the beginning of our talks, I emphasized the fact that underfavourable  conditions  we  achieve  successes  which  are  second  to

none of the finest in the field of internal medicine; and I can now add

something further - namely that they could not have been achieved by

any  other  procedure.  If  I  were  to  say  more  than  this  I  should  be

suspected of trying to drown the loudly raised voices of depreciation

by self-advertisement. The threat has repeatedly been made against

psycho-analysts  by  our  medical  ‘colleagues’  -  even  at  public

congresses - that a collection of the failures and damaging results of

analysis would be published which would open the suffering public’s

eyes to the worthlessness of this method of treatment. But, apart from

the malicious, denunciatory character of such a measure, it would not

even be calculated to make it possible to form a correct judgement of

the  therapeutic  effectiveness  of  analysis.  Analytic  therapy,  as  you

know, is in its youth; it has taken a long time to establish its technique,

and that could only be done in the course of working and under the

influence of increasing experience. In consequence of the difficulties

in giving instruction, the doctor who is a beginner in psycho-analysis is

thrown  back  to  a  greater  extent  than  other  specialists  on  his  own

capacity for further development, and the results of his first years will

never make it possible to judge the efficacy of analytic therapy.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3498

 

   Many attempts at treatment miscarried during the early period of

analysis  because  they  were  undertaken  in  cases  which  were

altogether unsuited to the procedure and which we should exclude to-

day on the basis of our present view of the indications for treatment.

But these indications, too, could only be arrived at by experiment. In

those  days  we  did  not  know a  priori  that  paranoia  and  dementia

praecox in strongly marked forms are inaccessible, and we had a right

to make trial of the method on all kinds of disorders. But most of the

failures of those early years were due not to the doctor’s fault or an

unsuitable choice of patients but to unfavourable external conditions.

Here we have only dealt with internal resistances, those of the patient,

which are inevitable and can be overcome. The external resistanceswhich arise from the patient’s circumstances, from his environment,

are  of  small  theoretical  interest  but  of  the  greatest  practical

importance.  Psycho-analytic  treatment  may  be  compared  with  a

surgical  operation  and  may  similarly  claim  to  be  carried  out  under

arrangements that will be the most favourable for its success. You

know the precautionary measures adopted by a surgeon: a suitable

room,  good  lighting,  assistants,  exclusion  of  the  patient’s  relatives,

and so on. Ask yourselves now how many of these operations would

turn out successfully if they had to take place in the presence of all the

members of the patient’s family, who would stick their noses into the

field of the operation and exclaim aloud at every incision. In psycho-

analytic treatments the intervention of relatives is a positive danger

and a danger one does not know how to meet. One is armed against

the patient’s internal resistances which one knows are inevitable, but

how  can  one  ward  off  these  external  resistances?  No  kind  of

explanations  make  any  impression  on  the  patient’s  relatives;  they

cannot be induced to keep at a distance from the whole business, and

one cannot make common cause with them because of the risk of

losing  the  confidence  of  the  patient,  who  -  quite  rightly  moreover  -

expects the person in whom he has put his trust to take his side. No

one who has any experience of the rifts which so often divide a family

will, if he is an analyst, be surprised to find that the patient’s closest

relatives sometimes betray less interest in his recovering than in his

remaining  as  he  is.  When,  as  so  often,  the  neurosis  is  related  to

conflicts  between  members  of  a  family,  the  healthy  party  will  not

hesitate long in choosing between his own interest and the sick party’s

recovery. It is not to be wondered at, indeed, if a husband looks with

disfavour  on  a  treatment  in  which,  as  he  may  rightly  suspect,  the

whole catalogue of his sins will be brought to light. Nor do we wonder

at it; but we cannot in that case blame ourselves if our efforts remain

unsuccessful and the treatment is broken off prematurely because the

husband’s resistance is added to that of his sick wife. We had in fact

undertaken  something  which  in  the  prevailing  circumstances  was

unrealizable.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis                                                                                      3499

 

   Instead of reporting a number of cases, I will tell you the story of a

single one, in which, from considerations of medical discretion, I was

condemned  to  play  a  long-suffering  part.  I  undertook  the  analytic

treatment - it was many years ago - of a girl who had for some time

been unable, owing to anxiety, to go out in the street or to stay at

home by herself. The patient slowly brought out an admission that her

imagination  had  been  seized  by  chance  observations  of  the

affectionate relations between her mother and a well-to-do friend of

the family. But she was so clumsy - or so subtle - that she gave her

mother a hint of what was being talked about in the analytic sessions.

She  brought  this  about  by  changing  her  behaviour  towards  her

mother, by insisting on being protected by no one but her mother from

her anxiety at being alone and by barring the door to her in her anxiety

if  she  tried  to  leave  the  house.  Her  mother  had  herself  been  very

neurotic in the past, but had been cured years before in a hydropathic

establishment. Or rather, she had there made the acquaintance of the

man with whom she was able to enter into a relation that was in every

way satisfying to her. The girl’s passionate demands took her aback,

and she suddenly understood the meaning of her daughter’s anxiety:

the girl had made herself ill in order to keep her mother prisoner and

to rob her of the freedom of movement that her relations with her lover

required.  The  mother  quickly  made  up  her  mind  and  brought  the

obnoxious treatment to an end. The girl was taken to a sanatorium for

nervous diseases and was demonstrated for many years as ‘a poor

victim  of  psycho-analysis’.  All  this  time,  too,  I  was  pursued  by  the

calumny of responsibility for the unhappy end of the treatment. I kept

silence, for I thought I was bound by the duty of medical discretion.

Long afterwards I learnt from one of my colleagues, who visited the

sanatorium and had seen the agoraphobic girl there, that the liaison

between  her  mother  and  the  well-to-do  friend  of  the  family  was

common knowledge in the city and that it was probably connived at by

the husband and father. Thus it was to this ‘secret’ that the treatment

had been sacrificed.

                     Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3500

 

      In  the  years  before  the  war,  when  arrivals  from  many  foreign

countries made me independent of the favour or disfavour of my own

city, I followed a rule of not taking on patient for treatment unless he

was sui juris, not dependent on anyone else in the essential relations

of  his  life.  This  is  not  possible,  however,  for  every  psycho-analyst.

Perhaps  you  may  conclude  from  my  warning  against  relatives  that

patients designed for psycho-analysis should be removed from their

families and that this kind of treatment should accordingly be restricted

to inmates of hospitals for nervous diseases. I could not,, however,

follow you in that. It is much more advantageous for patients, ( in so

far as they are not in a phase of severe exhaustion) to remain during

the treatment in the conditions in which they have to struggle with the

tasks that face them. But the patients’ relatives ought not to cancel out

this  advantage  by  their  conduct  and  should  not  offer  any  hostile

opposition to the doctor’s efforts. But how do you propose to influence

in that direction factors like these which are inaccessible to us? And

you will guess, of course, how much the prospects of a treatment are

determined by the patient’s social milieu and the cultural level of his

family.

   This presents a gloomy prospect for the effectiveness of psycho-

analysis as a therapy - does it not? - even though we are able to

explain  the  great  majority  of  our  failures  by  attributing  them  to

interfering  external  factors.  Friends  of  analysis  have  advised  us  to

meet the threatened publication of our failures with statistics of our

successes drawn up by ourselves. I did not agree to this. I pointed out

that statistics are worthless if the items assembled in them are too

heterogeneous; and the cases of neurotic illness which we had taken

into treatment were in fact incomparable in a great variety of respects.

Moreover, the period of time that could be covered was too short to

make  it  possible  to  judge  the  durability  of  the  cures.  And  it  was

altogether impossible to report on many of the cases: they concerned

people who had kept both their illness and its treatment secret, and

their recovery had equally to be kept secret. But the strongest reason

for holding back lay in the realization that in matters of therapy peoplebehave  highly  irrationally,  so  that  one  has  no  prospect  of

accomplishing  anything  with  them  by  rational  means.  A  therapeutic

novelty is either received with delirious enthusiasm - as, for instance,

when Koch introduced his first tuberculin against tuberculosis to the

public - or it is treated with abysmal distrust - like Jenner’s vaccination,

which  was  in  fact  a  blessing  and  which  even  to-day  has  its

irreconcilable  opponents.  There  was  obviously  a  prejudice  against

psycho-analysis.  If  one  had  cured  a  severe  case,  one  might  hear

people say: ‘That proves nothing. He would have recovered on his

own  account  by  this  time.’  And  when  a  woman  patient,  who  had

already passed through four cycles of depression and mania, came to

be treated by me during an interval after an attack of melancholia and

three weeks later started on a phase of mania, all the members of her

family  and  a  high  medical  authority,  too,  who  was  called  in  for

consultation - were convinced that the fresh attack could only be the

result  of  my  attempted  analysis.  Nothing  can  be  done  against

prejudices. You can see it again to-day in the prejudices which each

group of nations at war has developed against the other. The most

sensible thing to do is to wait, and to leave such prejudices to the

eroding effects of time. One day the same people begin to think about

the same things in quite a different way from before; why they did not

think so earlier remains a dark mystery.

 


                    Introductory Lectures On Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3501

 

   It is possible that the prejudice against analytic treatment is already

diminishing. The constant spread of analytic teachings, the increasing

number of doctors practising analysis in a number of countries seems

to vouch for this. When I was a young doctor, I found myself in a

similar storm of indignation on the doctors’ part against treatment by

hypnotic suggestion, which is now held up in contrast to analysis by

people of ‘moderate’ views. Hypnotism, however, has not fulfilled its

original  promise  as  a  therapeutic  agent.  We  psycho-analysts  may

claim  to  be  its  legitimate  heirs  and  we  do  not  forget  how  much

encouragement  and  theoretical  clarification  we  owe  to  it.  Thedamaging  results  attributed  to  psycho-analysis  are  restricted

essentially  to  passing  manifestations  of  increased  conflict  if  an

analysis is clumsily carried out or if it is broken off in the middle. You

have heard an account of what we do with our patients and can form

your own judgement as to whether our efforts are calculated to lead to

any  lasting  damage.  Abuse  of  analysis  is  possible  in  various

directions; in particular, the transference is a dangerous instrument in

the hands of an unconscientious doctor. But no medical instrument or

procedure  is  guaranteed  against  abuse;  if  a  knife  does  not  cut,  it

cannot be used for healing either.

 

      I  have  finished,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  It  is  more  than  a

conventional  form  of  words  if  I  admit  that  I  myself  am  profoundly

aware of the many defects in the lectures I have given you. I regret

above all that I have so often promised to return later to a topic I have

lightly touched on and have then found no opportunity of redeeming

my promise. I undertook to give you an account of a subject which is

still incomplete and in process of development, and my condensed

summary  has  itself  turned  out  to  be  an  incomplete  one.  At  some

points I have set out the material on which to draw a conclusion and

have then myself not drawn it. But I could not pretend to make you

into experts; I have only tried to stimulate and enlighten you.

                                                                                       3502

 

            FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS

                                    (1918 [1914])

 


                                                                                      3503

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3504

 

          FROM THE HISTORY OF AN INFANTILE NEUROSIS ¹

 

                                            I

 

                          INTRODUCTORY REMARKS

 

The case upon which I propose to report in the following pages (once

again only in a fragmentary manner) is characterized by a number of

peculiarities which require to be emphasized before I proceed to a

description of the facts themselves. It is concerned with a young man

whose  health  had  broken  down  in  his  eighteenth  year  after  a

gonorrhoeal  infection,  and  who  was  entirely  incapacitated  and

completely dependent upon other people when he began his psycho-

analytic treatment several years later. He had lived an approximately

normal life during the ten years of his boyhood that preceded the date

of  his  illness,  and  got  through  his  studies  at  his  secondary  school

without  much  trouble.  But  his  earlier  years  were  dominated  by  a

severe  neurotic  disturbance,  which  began  immediately  before  his

fourth  birthday  as  an  anxiety-hysteria  (in  the  shape  of  an  animal

phobia), then changed into an obsessional neurosis with a religious

content, and lasted with its offshoots as far as into his tenth year.

 

   ¹ This case history was written down shortly after the termination of the treatment, in the

winter  of  1914‑15.  At  that  time  I  was  still  freshly  under  the  impression  of  the  twisted  re-interpretations which C. G. Jung and Alfred Adler were endeavouring to give to the findings of
psycho-analysis.  This  paper  is  therefore  connected  with  my  essay  ‘On  the  History  of  the
Psycho-Analytic Movement’ which was published in the Jahrbuch der Psychoanalyse in 1914.
It supplements the polemic contained in that essay, which is in its essence of a personal
character, by an objective estimation of the analytic material. It was originally intended for the
next volume of the Jahrbuch, the appearance of which was, however, postponed indefinitely
owing to the obstacles raised by the Great War. I therefore decided to add it to the present
collection  of  papers  which  was  being  issued  by  a  new  publisher.  Meanwhile  I  had  been
obliged to deal in my Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (which I delivered in 1916 and
1917) with many points which should have been raised for the first time in this paper. No
alterations  of  any  importance  have  been  made  in  the  text  of  the  first  draft;  additions  are
indicated by means of square brackets.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3505

 

   Only this infantile neurosis will be the subject of my communication.

In spite of the patient’s direct request, I have abstained from writing a

complete history of his illness, of his treatment, and of his recovery,

because I recognized that such a task was technically impracticable

and  socially  impermissible.  This  at  the  same  time  removes  the

possibility  of  demonstrating  the  connection  between  his  illness  in

childhood and his later and permanent one. As regards the latter I can

only say that on account of it the patient spent a long time in German

sanatoria, and was at that period classified in the most authoritative

quarters as a case of ‘manic-depressive insanity’. This diagnosis was

certainly applicable to the patient’s father, whose life with its wealth of

activity  and  interests,  was  disturbed  by  repeated  attacks  of  severe

depression. But in the son I was never able, during an observation

which  lasted  several  years,  to  detect  any  changes  of  mood  which

were disproportionate to the manifest psychological situation either in

their  intensity  or  in  the  circumstances  of  their  appearance.  I  have

formed  the  opinion  that  this  case,  like  many  others  which  clinical

psychiatry  has  labelled  with  the  most  multifarious  and  shifting

diagnoses,  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  condition  following  on  an

obsessional neurosis which has come to an end spontaneously, but

has left a defect behind it after recovery.

   My description will therefore deal with an infantile neurosis which

was analysed not while it actually existed, but only fifteen years after

its termination. This state of things has its advantages as well as itsdisadvantages in comparison with the alternative. An analysis which is

conducted upon a neurotic child itself must, as a matter of course,

appear to be more trustworthy, but it cannot be very rich in material;

too many words and thoughts have to be lent to the child, and even so

the deepest strata may turn out to be impenetrable to consciousness.

An analysis of a childhood disorder through the medium of recollection

in an intellectually mature adult is free from these limitations; but it

necessitates our taking into account the distortion and refurbishing to

which a person’s own past is subjected when it is looked back upon

from  a  later  period.  The  first  alternative  perhaps  gives  the  more

convincing results; the second is by far the more instructive.

      In  any  case  it  may  be  maintained  that  analysis  of  children’s

neuroses  can  claim  to  possess  a  specially  high  theoretical  interest

They  afford  us,  roughly  speaking,  as  much  help  towards  a  proper

understanding of the neuroses of adults as do children’s dreams in

respect  to  the  dreams  of  adults.  Not,  indeed,  that  they  are  more

perspicuous or poorer in elements; in fact, the difficulty of feeling one’s

way into the mental life of a child makes them set the physician a

particularly  difficult  task.  But  nevertheless,  so  many  of  the  later

deposits are wanting in them that the essence of the neurosis springs

to the eyes with unmistakable distinctness. In the present phase of the

battle  which  is  raging  round  psycho-analysis  the  resistance  to  its

findings has, as we know, taken on a new form. People were content

formerly  to  dispute  the  reality  of  the  facts  which  are  asserted  by

analysis;  and  for  this  purpose  the  best  technique  seemed  to  be  to

avoid  examining  them.  That  procedure  appears  to  be  slowly

exhausting  itself;  and  people  are  now  adopting  another  plan  of

recognizing  the  facts,  but  of  eliminating,  by  means  of  twisted

interpretations, the consequences that follow from them, so that the

critics  can  still  ward  off  the  objectionable  novelties  as  efficiently  as

ever.  The  study  of  children’s  neuroses  exposes  the  complete

inadequacy  of  these  shallow  or  high-handed  attempts  at  re-

interpretation.  It  shows  the  predominant  part  that  is  played  in  the

formation of neuroses by those libidinal motive forces which are so

eagerly  disavowed,  and  reveals  the  absence  of  any  aspirations

towards remote cultural aims, of which the child still knows nothing,

and which cannot therefore be of any significance for him. 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3506

 

   Another characteristic which makes the present analysis noteworthy

is connected with the severity of the illness and the duration of the

treatment. Analyses which lead to a favourable conclusion in a short

time are of value in ministering to the therapeutist’s self-esteem and

substantiate  the  medical  importance  of  psycho-analysis;  but  they

remain for the most part insignificant as regards the advancement of

scientific knowledge. Nothing new is learnt from them. In fact they only

succeed so quickly because everything that was necessary for their

accomplishment  was  already  known.  Something  new  can  only  be

gained  from  analyses  that  present  special  difficulties,  and  to  the

overcoming of these a great deal of time has to be devoted. Only in

such cases do we succeed in descending into the deepest and most

primitive  strata  of  mental  development  and  in  gaining  from  there

solutions  for  the  problems  of  the  later  formations.  And  we  feel

afterwards  that,  strictly  speaking,  only  an  analysis  which  has

penetrated so far deserves the name. Naturally a single case does not

give us all the information that we should like to have. Or, to put it

more  correctly,  it  might  teach  us  everything,  if  we  were  only  in  a

position to make everything out, and if we were not compelled by the

inexperience of our own perception to content ourselves with a little.

   As regards these fertile difficulties the case I am about to discuss left

nothing  to  be  desired.  The  first  years  of  the  treatment  produced

scarcely  any  change.  Owing  to  a  fortunate  concatenation,  all  the

external circumstances nevertheless combined to make it possible to

proceed with the therapeutic experiment. I can easily believe that in

less favourable circumstances the treatment would have been given

up  after  a  short  time.  Of  the  physician’s  point  of  view  I  can  only

declare that in a case of this kind he must behave as ‘timelessly’ as

the unconscious itself, if he wishes to learn anything or to achieve

anything. And in the end he will succeed in doing so, if he has the

strength to renounce any short-sighted therapeutic ambition. It is not

to be expected that the amount of patience, adaptability, insight, andconfidence  demanded  of  the  patient  and  his  relatives  will  be

forthcoming in many other cases. But the analyst has a right to feel

that the results which he has attained from such lengthy work in one

case will help substantially to reduce the length of the treatment in a

subsequent case of equal severity, and that by submitting on a single

occasion

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3507

 

   The patient with whom I am here concerned remained for a long

time unassailably entrenched behind an attitude of ‘obliging apathy’.

He  listened,  understood,  and  remained  unapproachable.  His

unimpeachable intelligence was, as it were, cut off from the instinctual

forces which governed his behaviour in the few relations of life that

remained to him. It required a long education to induce him to take an

independent share in the work; and when as a result of this exertion

he  began  for  the  first  time  to  feel  relief,  he  immediately  gave  up

working in order to avoid any further changes, and in order to remain

comfortably  in  the  situation  which  had  been  thus  established.  His

shrinking from a self-sufficient existence was so great as to outweigh

all  the  vexations  of  his  illness.  Only  one  way  was  to  be  found  of

overcoming it. I was obliged to wait until his attachment to myself had

become  strong  enough  to  counter-balance  this  shrinking,  and  then

played off this one factor against the other. I determined - but not until

trustworthy signs had led me to judge that the right moment had come

that the treatment must be brought to an end at a particular fixed date,

no matter how far it had advanced. I was resolved to keep to the date;

and eventually the patient came to see that I was in earnest. Under

the inexorable pressure of this fixed limit his resistance and his fixation

to the illness gave may, and now in a disproportionately short time the

analysis produced all the material which made it possible to clear up

his  inhibitions  and  remove  his  symptoms.  All  the  information,  too,

which enabled me to understand his infantile neurosis is derived from

this  last  period  of  the  work,  during  which  resistance  temporarily

disappeared and the patient gave an impression of lucidity which isusually attainable only in hypnosis.

   Thus the course of this treatment illustrates a maxim whose truth

has long been appreciated in the technique of analysis. The length of

the road over which an analysis must travel with the patient, and the

quantity of material which must be mastered on the way, are of no

importance in comparison with the resistance which is met with in the

course of the work, and are only of importance at all in so far as they

are  necessarily  proportional  to  the  resistance.  The  situation  is  the

same as when to-day an enemy army needs weeks and months to

make its way across a stretch of country which in times of peace was

traversed by an express train in a few hours and which only a short

time before had been passed over by the defending army in a few

days.

   A third peculiarity of the analysis which is to be described in these

pages has only increased my difficulty in deciding to make a report

upon  it.  On  the  whole  its  results  have  coincided  in  the  most

satisfactory manner with our previous knowledge, or have been easily

embodied into it. Many details, however, seemed to me myself to be

so extraordinary and incredible that I felt some hesitation in asking

other  people  to  believe  them.  I  requested  the  patient  to  make  the

strictest criticism of his recollections, but he found nothing improbable

in his statements and adhered closely to them. Readers may at all

events rest assured that I myself am only reporting what I came upon

as an independent experience, uninfluenced by my expectation. So

that there was nothing left for me but to remember the wise saying

that there are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamed of in

our  philosophy.  Anyone  who  could  succeed  in  eliminating  his  pre-

existing  convictions  even  more  thoroughly  could  no  doubt  discover

even more such things.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3508

 

                                            II

 

      GENERAL SURVEY OF THE PATIENT’S ENVIRONMENT                  AND OF THE HISTORY OF THE CASE

 

I  am  unable  to  give  either  a  purely  historical  or  a  purely  thematic

account  of  my  patient’s  story;  I  can  write  a  history  neither  of  the

treatment nor of the illness, but I shall find myself obliged to combine

the two methods of presentation. It is well known that no means has

been  found  of  in  any  way  introducing  into  the  reproduction  of  an

analysis the sense of conviction which results from the analysis itself.

Exhaustive verbatim reports of the proceedings during the hours of

analysis  would  certainly  be  of  no  help  at  all;  and  in  any  case  the

technique of the treatment makes it impossible to draw them up. So

analyses such as this are not published in order to produce conviction

in the minds of those whose attitude has hitherto been recusant and

sceptical. The intention is only to bring forward some new facts for

investigators who have already been convinced by their own clinical

experiences.

   I shall begin, then, by giving a picture of the child’s world, and by

telling as much of the story of his childhood as could be learnt without

any  exertion;  it  was  not,  indeed,  for  several  years  that  the  story

became any less incomplete and obscure.

   His parents had been married young, and were still leading a happy

married  life,  upon  which  their  ill-health  was  soon  to  throw  the  first

shadows. His mother began to suffer from abdominal disorders, and

his father from his first attacks of depression, which led to his absence

from home. Naturally the patient only came to understand his father’s

illness very much later on, but he was aware of his mother’s weak

health even in his early childhood. As a consequence of it she had

relatively little to do with the children. One day, certainly before his

fourth year, while his mother was seeing off the doctor to the station

and  he  himself  was  walking  beside  her,  holding  her  hand,  he

overheard  her  lamenting  her  condition.  Her  words  made  a  deep

impression upon him, and later on he applied them to himself. He was

not the only child; he had a sister, about two years his elder, lively,

gifted, and precociously naughty, who was to play an important part in

his life.

                     From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3509

 

   As far back as he could remember he was looked after by a nurse,

an uneducated old woman of peasant birth, with an untiring affection

for him. He served her as a substitute for a son of her own who had

died young. The family lived on a country estate, from which they used

to move to another for the summer. The two estates were not far from

a large town. There was a break in his childhood when his parents

sold the estates and moved into the town. Near relatives used often to

pay them long visits upon one estate or the other - brothers of his

father, sisters of his mother and their children, and his grandparents

on his mother’s side. During the summer his parents used to be away

for a few weeks. In a screen memory he saw himself with his nurse

looking after the carriage which was driving off with his father, mother

and sister, and then going peaceably back into the house. He must

have been very small at that time.¹ Next summer his sister was left at

home,  and  an  English  governess  was  engaged,  who  became

responsible for the supervision of the children.

   In his later years he was told many stories about his childhood.² He

knew a great deal himself, but it was naturally disconnected both as

regards date and subject-matter. One of these traditions, which was

repeated over and over again in his presence on the occasion of his

later illness, introduces us to the problem with whose solution we shall

be occupied. He seems at first to have been a very good-natured,

tractable, and even quiet child, so that they used to say of him that he

ought to have been the girl and his elder sister the boy. But once,

when his parents came back from their summer holiday, they found

him transformed. He had become discontented, irritable and violent,

took offence on every possible occasion, and then flew into a rage and

screamed like a savage; so that, when this state of things continued,

his  parents  expressed  their  misgivings  as  to  whether  it  would  be

possible  to  send  him  to  school  later  on.  This  happened  during  the

summer while the English governess was with them. She turned out to

be  an  eccentric  and  quarrelsome  person,  and,  moreover,  to  be

addicted to drink. The boy’s mother was therefore inclined to ascribe

the alteration in his character to the influence of this Englishwoman,and assumed that she had irritated him by her treatment. His sharp-

sighted grandmother, who had spent the summer with the children,

was  of  opinion  that  the  boy’s  irritability  had  been  provoked  by  the

dissensions  between  the  Englishwoman  and  the  nurse.  The

Englishwoman  had  repeatedly  called  the  nurse  a  witch,  and  had

obliged her to leave the room; the little boy had openly taken the side

of his beloved ‘Nanya’ and let the governess see his hatred. However

it may have been, the Englishwoman was sent away soon after the

parents’  return,  without  there  being  any  consequent  change  in  the

child’s unbearable behaviour.

 

   ¹ Two and a half years old. It was possible later on to determine almost all the dates with

certainty.

   ² Information of this kind may, as a rule, be employed as absolutely authentic material. So it

may seem tempting to take the easy course of filling up the gaps in a patient’s memory by
making  enquiries  from  the  older  members  of  his  family;  but  I  cannot  advise  too  strongly
against such a technique. Any stories that may be told by relatives in reply to enquiries and
requests are at the mercy of every critical misgiving that can come into play. One invariably
regrets having made oneself dependent upon such information; at the same time confidence
in the analysis is shaken and a court of appeal is set up over it. Whatever can be remembered
at all will anyhow come to light in the further course of analysis.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3510

 

      The  patient  had  preserved  his  memory  of  this  naughty  period.

According to his belief he made the first of his scenes one Christmas,

when he was not given a double quantity of presents - which were his

due, because Christmas Day was at the same time his birthday. He

did  not  spare  even  his  beloved  Nanya  with  his  importunity  and

touchiness, and even tormented her more remorselessly perhaps than

anyone. But the phase which brought with it his change in character

was inextricably connected in his memory with many other strange

and  pathological  phenomena  which  he  was  unable  to  arrange  in

chronological  sequence.  He  threw  all  the  incidents  that  I  am  now

about to relate (which cannot possibly have been contemporaneous,

and which are full of internal contradictions) into one and the same

period of time, to which he gave the name ‘still on the first estate’. He

thought they must have left that estate by the time he was five yearsold. Thus he could recollect how he had suffered from a fear, which

his sister exploited for the purpose of tormenting him. There was a

particular  picture-book,  in  which  a  wolf  was  represented,  standing

upright and striding along. Whenever he caught sight of this picture he

began to scream like a lunatic that he was afraid of the wolf coming

and  eating  him  up.  His  sister,  however,  always  succeeded  in

arranging so that he was obliged to see this picture, and was delighted

at his terror. Meanwhile he was also frightened at other animals as

well, big and little. Once he was running after a beautiful big butterfly,

with  striped  yellow  wings  which  ended  in  points,  in  the  hope  of

catching it. (It was no doubt a ‘swallow-tail’) He was suddenly seized

with a terrible fear of the creature, and, screaming, gave up the chase.

He also felt fear and loathing of beetles and caterpillars. Yet he could

also remember that at this very time he used to torment beetles and

cut caterpillars to pieces. Horses, too, gave him an uncanny feeling. If

a horse was beaten he began to scream, and he was once obliged to

leave a circus on that account. On other occasions he himself enjoyed

beating horses. Whether these contradictory sorts of attitudes towards

animals were really in operation simultaneously, or whether they did

not more probably replace one another, but if so in what order and

when - to all these questions his memory could offer no decisive reply.

He was also unable to say whether his naughty period was replaced

by a phase of illness or whether it persisted right through the latter.

But,  in  any  case,  the  statements  of  his  that  follow  justified  the

assumption that during these years of his childhood he went through

an easily recognizable attack of obsessional neurosis. He related how

during a long period he was very pious. Before he went to sleep he

was obliged to pray for a long time and to make an endless series of

signs of the cross. In the evening, too, he used to make the round of

all the holy pictures that hung in the room, taking a chair with him,

upon which he climbed, and used to kiss each one of them devoutly. It

was utterly inconsistent with this pious ceremonial - or, on the other

hand, perhaps it was quite consistent with it - that he should recollect

some blasphemous thoughts which used to come into his head like an

inspiration from the devil. He was obliged to think ‘God-swine’ or ‘God-

shit’. Once while he was on a journey to a health resort in Germany he

was tormented by the obsession of having to think of the Holy Trinitywhenever he saw three heaps of horse-dung or other excrement lying

in  the  road.  At  that  time  he  used  to  carry  out  another  peculiar

ceremonial  when  he  saw  people  that  he  felt  sorry  for,  such  as

beggars, cripples, or very old men. He had to breathe out noisily, so

as not to become like them; and under certain conditions he had to

draw in his breath vigorously. I naturally assumed that these obvious

symptoms of an obsessional neurosis belonged to a somewhat later

time and stage of development than the signs of anxiety and the cruel

treatment of animals.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3511

 

   The patient’s maturer years were marked by a very unsatisfactory

relation to his father, who, after repeated attacks of depression, was

no longer able to conceal the pathological features of his character. In

the earliest years of the patient’s childhood this relation had been a

very affectionate one, and the recollection of it had remained in his

memory. His father was very fond of him, and liked playing with him.

From  an  early  age  he  was  proud  of  his  father,  and  was  always

declaring that he would like to be a gentleman like him. His Nanya told

him that his sister was his mother’s child, but that he was his father’s -

which had very much pleased him. Towards the end of his childhood

there was an estrangement between him and his father. His father had

an  unmistakable  preference  for  his  sister,  and  he  felt  very  much

slighted by this. Later on fear of his father became the dominating

factor.

   All of the phenomena which the patient associated with the phase of

his  life  that  began  with  his  naughtiness  disappeared  in  about  his

eighth  year.  They  did  not  disappear  at  a  single  blow,  and  made

occasional  reappearances,  but  finally  gave  way,  in  the  patient’s

opinion, before the influence of the masters and tutors, who then took

the place of the women who had hitherto looked after him. Here, then,

in the briefest outline, are the riddles for which the analysis had to find

a solution. What was the origin of the sudden change in the boy’s

character?  What  was  the  significance  of  his  phobia  and  of  hisperversities? How did he arrive at his obsessive piety? And how are

all these phenomena interrelated? I will once more recall the fact that

our therapeutic work was concerned with a subsequent and recent

neurotic illness, and that light could only be thrown upon these earlier

problems when the course of the analysis led away for a time from the

present, and forced us to make a détour through the prehistoric period

of childhood.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3512

 

                                            III

 

    THE SEDUCTION AND ITS IMMEDIATE CONSEQUENCES

 

It is easy to understand that the first suspicion fell upon the English

governess, for the change in the boy made its appearance while she

was  there.  Two  screen  memories  had  persisted,  which  were

incomprehensible  in  themselves,  and  which  related  to  her.  On  one

occasion, as she was walking along in front of them, she said: ‘Do

look at my little tail!’ Another time, when they were on a drive, her hat

flew away, to the two children’s great satisfaction. This pointed to the

castration complex, and might permit of a construction being made to

the effect that a threat uttered by her against the boy had been largely

responsible for originating his abnormal conduct. There is no danger

at all in communicating constructions of this kind to the person under

analysis;  they  never  do  any  damage  to  the  analysis  if  they  are

mistaken; but at the same time they are not put forward unless there is

some  prospect  of  reaching  a  nearer  approximation  to  the  truth  by

means of them. The first effect of this supposition was the appearance

of some dreams, which it was not possible to interpret completely, but

all of which seemed to centre around the same material. As far as

they  could  be  understood,  they  were  concerned  with  aggressive

actions on the boy’s part against his sister or against the governess

and with energetic reproofs and punishments of account of them. It

was as though . . . after her bath . . . he had tried . . . to undress hissister . . . to tear off her coverings . . . or veils - and so on. But it was

not  possible  to  get  at  any  firm  content  from  the  interpretation;  and

since these dreams gave an impression of always working over the

same material in various different ways, the correct reading of these

ostensible reminiscences became assured: it could only be a question

of  phantasies,  which  the  dreamer  had  made  on  the  subject  of  his

childhood at some time or other, probably at the age of puberty, and

which had now come to the surface again in this unrecognizable form.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3513

 

   The explanation came at a single blow, when the patient suddenly

called to mind the fact that, when he was still very small, ‘on the first

estate’, his sister had seduced him into sexual practices. First came a

recollection that in the lavatory, which the children used frequently to

visit together, she had made this proposal: ‘Let’s show our bottoms’,

and  had  proceeded  from  words  to  deeds.  Subsequently  the  more

essential part of the seduction came to light, with full particulars as to

time and place. It was in spring, at a time when his father was away;

the children were in one room playing on the floor, while their mother

was working in the next. His sister had taken hold of his penis and

played with it, at the same time telling him incomprehensible stories

about his Nanya, as though by way of explanation. His Nanya, she

said, used to do the same thing with all kinds of people - for instance,

with the gardener: she used to stand him on his head, and then take

hold of his genitals.

   Here, then, was the explanation of the phantasies whose existence

we had already divined. They were meant to efface the memory of an

event which later on seemed offensive to the patient’s masculine self-

esteem,  and  they  reached  this  end  by  putting  an  imaginary  and

desirable converse in the place of the historical truth. According to

these  phantasies  it  was  not  he  who  had  played  the  passive  part

towards his sister; but, on the contrary, he had been aggressive, had

tried to see his sister undressed, had been rejected and punished, and

had for that reason got into the rage which the family tradition talked ofso  much.  It  was  also  appropriate  to  weave  the  governess  into  this

imaginative  composition,  since  the  chief  responsibility  for  his  fits  of

rage had been ascribed to her by his mother and grandmother. These

phantasies, therefore, corresponded exactly to the legends by means

of which a nation that has become great and proud tries to conceal the

insignificance and failure of its beginnings.

   The governess can actually have had only a very remote share in

the seduction and its consequences. The scenes with his sister took

place in the early part of the same year in which, at the height of the

summer, the Englishwoman arrived to take the place of his absent

parents. The boy’s hostility to the governess came about, rather, in

another way. By abusing the nurse and slandering her as a witch, she

was in his eyes following in the footsteps of his sister, who had first

told him such monstrous stories about the nurse; and in this way she

enabled him to express openly against herself the aversion which, as

we shall hear, he had developed against his sister as a result of his

seduction.

   But his seduction by his sister was certainly not a phantasy. Its

credibility was increased by some information which had never been

forgotten and which dated from a later part of his life, when he was

grown up. A cousin who was more than ten years his elder told him in

a conversation about his sister that he very well remembered what a

forward and sensual little thing she had been: once, when she was a

child of four or five, she had sat on his lap and opened his trousers to

take hold of his penis.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3514

 

 

      I  should  like  at  this  point  to  break  off  the  story  of  my  patient’s

childhood and say something of this sister, of her development and

later fortunes, and of the influence she had on him. She was two years

older than he was, and had always remained ahead of him. As a child

she  was  boyish  and  unmanageable,  but  she  then  entered  upon  a

brilliant  intellectual  development  and  distinguished  herself  by  heracute and realistic powers of mind; she inclined in her studies to the

natural sciences, but also produced imaginative writings of which her

father  had  a  high  opinion.  She  was  mentally  far  superior  to  her

numerous early admirers, and used to make jokes at their expense. In

her early twenties, however, she began to be depressed, complained

that she was not good-looking enough, and withdrew from all society.

She was sent to travel in the company of an acquaintance, an elderly

lady, and after her return told a number of most improbable stories of

how she had been ill-treated by her companion, but remained with her

affections obviously fixed upon her alleged tormentor. While she was

on a second journey, soon afterwards, she poisoned herself and died

far away from her home. Her disorder is probably to be regarded as

the beginning of a dementia praecox. She was one of the proofs of the

conspicuously neuropathic heredity in her family, but by no means the

only one. An uncle, her father’s brother, died after long years of life as

an  eccentric,  with  indications  pointing  to  the  presence  of  a  severe

obsessional neurosis; while a good number of collateral relatives were

and are afflicted with less serious nervous complaints.

   Independently of the question of seduction, our patient, while he was

a child, found in his sister an inconvenient competitor for the good

opinion  of  his  parents,  and  he  felt  very  much  oppressed  by  her

merciless display of superiority. Later on he especially envied her the

respect  which  his  father  showed  for  her  mental  capacity  and

intellectual achievements, while he, intellectually inhibited as he was

since  his  obsessional  neurosis,  had  to  be  content  with  a  lower

estimation. From his fourteenth year onwards the relations between

the brother and sister began to improve; a similar disposition of mind

and  a  common  opposition  to  their  parents  brought  them  so  close

together  that  they  got  on  with  each  other  like  the  best  of  friends.

During the tempestuous sexual excitement of his puberty he ventured

upon an attempt at an intimate physical approach. She rejected him

with equal decision and dexterity, and he at once turned away from

her to a little peasant girl who was a servant in the house and had the

same name as his sister. In doing so he was taking a step which had

a determinant influence on his heterosexual choice of object, for all

the  girls  with  whom  he  subsequently  fell  in  love  -  often  with  the

clearest  indications  of  compulsion  -  were  also  servants,  whoseeducation and intelligence were necessarily far inferior to his own. If

all of these objects of his love were substitutes for the figure of the

sister  whom  he  had  to  forgo,  then  it  could  not  be  denied  that  an

intention of debasing his sister and of putting an end to her intellectual

superiority, which he had formerly found so oppressive, had obtained

the decisive control over his object-choice.

      Human  sexual  conduct,  as  well  as  everything  else,  has  been

subordinated by Alfred Adler to motive forces of this kind, which spring

from  the  will  to  power,  from  the  individual’s  self-assertive  instinct.

Without ever denying the importance of these motives of power and

prerogative,  I  have  never  been  convinced  that  they  play  the

dominating and exclusive part that has been ascribed to them. If I had

not  pursued  my  patient’s  analysis  to  the  end,  I  should  have  been

obliged,  on  account  of  my  observation  of  this  case,  to  correct  my

preconceived  opinion  in  a  direction  favourable  to  Adler.  The

conclusion  of  the  analysis  unexpectedly  brought  up  new  material

which, on the contrary, showed that these motives of power (in this

case the intention to debase) had determined the object-choice only in

the sense of serving as a contributory cause and as a rationalization,

whereas the true underlying determination enabled me to maintain my

former convictions.¹

 

   ¹ See below, p. 3575.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3515

 

   When the news of his sister’s death arrived, so the patient told me,

he felt hardly a trace of grief. He had to force himself to show signs of

sorrow, and was able quite coolly to rejoice at having now become the

sole  heir  to  the  property.  He  had  already  been  suffering  from  his

recent illness for several years when this occurred. But I must confess

that this one piece of information made me for a long time uncertain in

my diagnostic judgement of the case. It was to be assumed, no doubt,

that his grief over the loss of the most dearly loved member of his

family would meet with an inhibition in its expression, as a result of the

continued operation of his jealousy of her and of the added presenceof his incestuous love for her which had now become unconscious.

But I could not do without some substitute for the missing outbursts of

grief. And this was at last found in another expression of feeling which

had  remained  inexplicable  to  the  patient.  A  few  months  after  his

sister’s  death  he  himself  made  a  journey  in  the  neighbourhood  in

which she had died. There he sought out the burial-place of a great

poet, who was at that time his ideal, and shed bitter tears upon his

grave. This reaction seemed strange to him himself, for he knew that

more than two generations had passed by since the death of the poet

he  admired.  He  only  understood  it  when  he  remembered  that  his

father had been in the habit of comparing his dead sister’s works with

the great poet’s. He gave me another indication of the correct way of

interpreting the homage which he ostensibly paid to the poet, by a

mistake in his story which I was able to detect at this point. He had

repeatedly specified before that his sister had shot herself; but he was

now obliged to make a correction and say that she had taken poison.

The poet, however, had been shot in a duel.

 

   I now return to the brother’s story, but from this point I must proceed

for a little upon thematic lines. The boy’s age at the time at which his

sister  began  her  seductions  turned  out  to  be  three  and  a  quarter

years. It happened, as has been mentioned, in the spring of the same

year in whose summer the English governess arrived, and in whose

autumn  his  parents,  on  their  return,  found  him  so  fundamentally

altered. It is very natural, then, to connect this transformation with the

awakening of his sexual activity that had meanwhile taken place.

   How did the boy react to the allurements of his elder sister? By a

refusal, is the answer, but by a refusal which applied to the person

and not to the thing. His sister was not agreeable to him as a sexual

object,  probably  because  his  relation  to  her  had  already  been

determined in a hostile direction owing to their rivalry for their parents’

love.  He  held  aloof  from  her,  and,  moreover,  her  solicitations  soon

ceased. But he tried to win, instead of her, another person of whom he

was fonder; and the information which his sister herself had given him,

and in which the had claimed his Nanya as a model, turned his choice

in  that  direction.  He  therefore  began  to  play  with  his  penis  in  his

Nanya’s  presence,  and  this,  like  so  many  other  instances  in  whichchildren do not conceal their masturbation, must be regarded as an

attempt at seduction. His Nanya disillusioned him; she made a serious

face, and explained that that wasn’t good; children who did that, she

added, got a ‘wound’ in the place.

   The effect of this intelligence, which amounted to a threat, is to be

traced  in  various  directions.  His  dependence  upon  his  Nanya  was

diminished in consequence. He might well have been angry with her;

and later on, when his fits of rage set in, it became clear that he really

was embittered against her. But it was characteristic of him that every

position of the libido which he found himself obliged to abandon was

at  first  obstinately  defended  by  him  against  the  new  development.

When the governess came upon the scene and abused his Nanya,

drove her out of the room, and tried to destroy her authority, he, on the

contrary,  exaggerated  his  love  for  the  victim  of  these  attacks  and

assumed  a  brusque  and  defiant  attitude  towards  the  aggressive

governess. Nevertheless, in secret he began to look about for another

sexual object. His seduction had given him the passive sexual aim of

being touched on the genitals; we shall presently hear in connection

with whom it was that he tried to achieve this aim, and what paths led

him to this choice.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3516

 

   It agrees entirely with our anticipations when we learn that, after his

first genital excitations, his sexual researches began, and that he soon

came upon the problem of castration. At this time he succeeded in

observing two girls - his sister and a friend of hers - while they were

micturating. His acumen might well have enabled him to gather the

true facts from this spectacle, but he behaved as we know other male

children behave in these circumstances. He rejected the idea that he

saw before him a confirmation of the wound with which his Nanya had

threatened him, and he explained to himself that this was the girls’

‘front bottom’. The theme of castration was not settled by this decision;

he found new allusions to it in everything that he heard. Once when

the children were given some coloured sugar-sticks, the governess,who was inclined to disordered fancies, pronounced that they were

pieces  of  chopped-up  snakes.  He  remembered  afterwards  that  his

father had once met a snake while he was walking along a footpath,

and had beaten it to pieces with his stick. He heard the story (out of

Reynard the Fox) read aloud, of how the wolf wanted to go fishing in

the winter, and used his tail as a bait, and how in that way his tail was

broken off in the ice. He learned the different names by which horses

are distinguished, according to whether their sexual organs are intact

or not. Thus he was occupied with thoughts about castration, but as

yet he had no belief in it and no dread of it. Other sexual problems

arose for him out of the fairy tales with which he became familiar at

this time. In ‘Little Red Riding-Hood’ and ‘The Seven Little Goats’ the

children  were  taken  out  of  the  wolf’s  body.  Was  the  wolf  a  female

creature, then, or could men have children in their bodies as well? At

this time the question was not yet settled. Moreover, at the time of

these enquiries he had as yet no fear of wolves.

   One of the patient’s pieces of information will make it easier for us to

understand the alteration in his character which appeared during his

parents’  absence  as  a  somewhat  indirect  consequence  of  his

seduction. He said that he gave up masturbating very soon after his

Nanya’s  refusal  and  threat. His  sexual  life,  therefore,  which  was

beginning  to  come  under  the  sway  of  the  genital  zone,  gave  way

before an external obstacle, and was thrown back by its influence into

an  earlier  phase  of  pregenital  organization.  As  a  result  of  the

suppression  of  his  masturbation,  the  boy’s  sexual  life  took  on  a

sadistic-anal  character.  He  became  irritable  and  a  tormentor,  and

gratified himself in this way at the expense of animals and humans.

His  principal  object  was  his  beloved  Nanya,  and  he  knew  how  to

torment her till she burst into tears. In this way he revenged himself on

her for the refusal he had met with, and at the same time gratified his

sexual lust in the form which corresponded to his present regressive

phase. He began to be cruel to small animals, to catch flies and pull

off their wings, to crush beetles underfoot; in his imagination he liked

beating large animals (horses) as well. All of these, then, were active

and sadistic proceedings; we shall discuss his anal impulses at this

period in a later connection.

                     From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3517

 

   It is a most important fact that some contemporary phantasies of

quite  another  kind  came  up  as  well  in  the  patient’s  memory.  The

content  of  these  was  of  boys  being  chastised  and  beaten,  and

especially  being  beaten  on  the  penis.  And  from  other  phantasies,

which represented the heir to the throne being shut up in a narrow

room  and  beaten,  it  was  easy  to  guess  for  whom  it  was  that  the

anonymous figures served as whipping-boys. The heir to the throne

was evidently he himself; his sadism had therefore turned round in

phantasy against himself, and had been converted into masochism.

The detail of the sexual organ itself receiving the beating justified the

conclusion that a sense of guilt, which related to his masturbation, was

already concerned in this transformation.

   No doubt was left in the analysis that these passive trends had

made their appearance at the same time as the active-sadistic ones,

or  very  soon  after  them.¹  This  is  in  accordance  with  the  unusually

clear, intense, and constant ambivalence  of  the  patient,  which  was

shown  here  for  the  first  time  in  the  even  development  of  both

members of the pairs of contrary component instincts. Such behaviour

was also characteristic of his later life, and so was this further trait: no

position  of  the  libido  which  had  once  been  established  was  ever

completely replaced by a later one. It was rather left in existence side

by  side  with  all  the  others,  and  this  allowed  him  to  maintain  an

incessant  vacillation  which  proved  to  be  incompatible  with  the

acquisition of a stable character.

 

   ¹ By passive trends I mean trends that have a passive sexual aim; but in saying this I have

in mind a transformation not of the instinct but only of its aim.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3518

 

   The boy’s masochistic trends lead on to another point, which I have

so  far  avoided  mentioning,  because  it  can  only  be  confirmed  by

means of the analysis of the subsequent phase of his development. Ihave already mentioned that after his refusal by his Nanya his libidinal

expectation  detached  itself  from  her  and  began  to  contemplate

another person as a sexual object. This person was his father, at that

time away from home. He was no doubt led to this choice by a number

of  convergent  factors,  including  such  fortuitous  ones  as  the

recollection of the snake being cut to pieces; but above all he was in

this  way  able  to  renew  his  first  and  most  primitive  object-choice,

which, in conformity with a small child’s narcissism, had taken place

along the path of identification. We have heard already that his father

had been his admired model, and that when he was asked what he

wanted to be he used to reply: a gentleman like his father. This object

of identification of his active current became the sexual object of a

passive current in his present anal-sadistic phase. It looks as though

his seduction by his sister had forced him into a passive role, and had

given him a passive sexual aim. Under the persisting influence of this

experience  he  pursued  a  path  from  his  sister via  his  Nanya  to  his

father - from a passive attitude towards women to the same attitude

towards men - and had, nevertheless, by this means found a link with

his  earlier  and  spontaneous  phase  of  development.  His  father  was

now  his  object  once  more;  in  conformity  with  his  higher  stage  of

development, identification was replaced by object-choice; while the

transformation  of  his  active  attitude  into  a  passive  one  was  the

consequence  and  the  record  of  the  seduction  which  had  occurred

meanwhile. It would naturally not have been so easy to achieve an

active  attitude  in  the  sadistic  phase  towards  his  all-powerful  father.

When  his  father  came  home  in  the  late  summer  or  autumn  the

patient’s fits of rage and scenes of fury were put to a new use. They

had served for active sadistic ends in relation to his Nanya; in relation

to  his  father  their  purpose  was  masochistic.  By  bringing  his

naughtiness forward he was trying to force punishments and beatings

out of his father, and in that way to obtain from him the masochistic

sexual satisfaction that he desired. His screaming fits were therefore

simply  attempts  at  seduction.  In  accordance,  moreover,  with  the

motives  which  underlie  masochism,  this  beating  would  also  have

satisfied his sense of guilt. He had preserved a memory of how, during

one of these scenes of naughtiness, he had redoubled his screams as

soon as his father came towards him. His father did not beat him,however, but tried to pacify him by playing ball in front of him with the

pillows of his cot.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3519

 

      I  do  not  know  how  often  parents  and  educators,  faced  with

inexplicable  naughtiness  on  the  part  of  a  child,  might  not  have

occasion  to  bear  this  typical  state  of  affairs  in  mind.  A  child  who

behaves in this unmanageable way is making a confession and trying

to  provoke  punishment.  He  hopes  for  a  beating  as  a  simultaneous

means  of  setting  his  sense  of  guilt  at  rest  and  of  satisfying  his

masochistic sexual trend.

   We owe the further explanation of the case to a recollection which

emerged with great distinctness. This was to the effect that the signs

of an alteration in the patient’s character were not accompanied by

any  symptoms  of  anxiety  until  after  the  occurrence  of  a  particular

event. Previously, it seems, there was no anxiety, while directly after

the event the anxiety expressed itself in the most tormenting shape.

The date of this transformation can be stated with certainty; it was

immediately before his fourth birthday. Taking this as a fixed point, we

are  able  to  divide  the  period  of  his  childhood  with  which  we  are

concerned  into  two  phases:  a  first  phase  of  naughtiness  and

perversity from his seduction at the age of three and a quarter up to

his fourth birthday, and a longer subsequent phase in which the signs

of  neurosis  predominated.  But  the  event  which  makes  this  division

possible  was  not  an  external  trauma,  but  a  dream,  from  which  he

awoke in a state of anxiety.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3520

 

                                            IV

 

                  THE DREAM AND THE PRIMAL SCENE

    I have already published this dream elsewhere,¹ on account of the

quantity of material in it which is derived from fairy tales; and I will

begin by repeating what I wrote on that occasion:

   ‘"I dreamt that it was night and that I was lying in my bed. (My bed

stood with its foot towards the window; in front of the window there

was a row of old walnut trees. I know it was winter when I had the

dream,  and  night-time.)  Suddenly  the  window  opened  of  its  own

accord, and I was terrified to see that some white wolves were sitting

on the big walnut tree in front of the window. There were six or seven

of them. The wolves were quite white, and looked more like foxes or

sheep-dogs, for they had big tails like foxes and they had their ears

pricked like dogs when they pay attention to something. In great terror,

evidently of being eaten up by the wolves, I screamed and woke up.

My nurse hurried to my bed, to see what had happened to me. It took

quite  a  long  while  before  I  was  convinced  that  it  had  only  been  a

dream;  I  had  had  such  a  clear  and  life-like  picture  of  the  window

opening and the wolves sitting on the tree. At last I grew quieter, felt

as though I had escaped from some danger, and went to sleep again.

      ‘"The  only  piece  of  action  in  the  dream  was  the  opening  of  the

window;  for  the  wolves  sat  quite  still  and  without  making  any

movement  on  the  branches  of  the  tree,  to  the  right  and  left  of  the

trunk, and looked at me. It seemed as though they had riveted their

whole attention upon me. - I think this was my first anxiety-dream. I

was three, four, or at most five years old at the time. From then until

my eleventh or twelfth year I was always afraid of seeing something

terrible in my dreams."

   ‘He added a drawing of the tree with the wolves, which confirmed his

description (Fig. 1). The analysis of the dream brought the following

material to light.

      ‘He  had  always  connected  this  dream  with  the  recollection  that

during these years of his childhood he was most tremendously afraid

of the picture of a wolf in a book of fairy tales. His elder sister, who

was  very  much  his  superior,  used  to  tease  him  by  holding  up  this

particular picture in front of him on some excuse or other, so that he

was  terrified  and  began  to  scream.  In  this  picture  the  wolf  was

standing upright, striding out with one foot, with its claws stretched out

and  its  ears  pricked.  He  thought  this  picture  must  have  been  anillustration to the story of "Little Red Riding-Hood".

 

   ¹ ‘The Occurrence in Dreams of Material from Fairy Tales’ (1913d).

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3521

 



















                                          Fig. 1

 

   ‘Why were the wolves white? This made him think of the sheep,

large flocks of which were kept in the neighbourhood of the estate. His

father occasionally took him with him to visit these flocks, and every

time this happened he felt very proud and blissful. Later on - according

to enquiries that were made it may easily have been shortly before the

time  of  the  dream  -  an  epidemic  broke  out  among  the  sheep.  His

father sent for a follower of Pasteur’s, who inoculated the animals, but

after the inoculation even more of them died than before.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3522

    ‘How did the wolves come to be on the tree? This reminded him of a

story that he had heard his grandfather tell. He could not remember

whether it was before or after the dream, but its subject is a decisive

argument in favour of the former view. The story ran as follows. A

tailor was sitting at work in his room, when the window opened and a

wolf leapt in. The tailor hit after him with his yard - no (he corrected

himself), caught him by his tail and pulled it off, so that the wolf ran

away  in  terror.  Some  time  later  the  tailor  went  into  the  forest,  and

suddenly saw a pack of wolves coming towards him; so he climbed up

a tree to escape from them. At first the wolves were in perplexity; but

the  maimed  one,  which  was  among  them  and  wanted  to  revenge

himself  on  the  tailor,  proposed  that  they  should  climb  one  upon

another  till  the  last  one  could  reach  him.  He  himself  -  he  was  a

vigorous old fellow - would be the base of the pyramid. The wolves did

as he suggested, but the tailor had recognized the visitor whom he

had punished, and suddenly called out as he had before: "Catch the

grey one by his tail!" The tailless wolf, terrified by the recollection, ran

away, and all the others tumbled down.

   ‘In this story the tree appears, upon which the wolves were sitting in

the  dream.  But  it  also  contains  an  unmistakable  allusion  to  the

castration complex. The old wolf was docked of his tail by the tailor.

The fox-tails of the wolves in the dream were probably compensations

for this taillessness.

      ‘Why  were  there  six  or  seven  wolves?  There  seemed  to  be  no

answer to this question, until I raised a doubt whether the picture that

had frightened him could be connected with the story of "Little Red

Riding-Hood".  This  fairy  tale  only  offers  an  opportunity  for  two

illustrations  -  Little  Red  Riding-Hood’s  meeting  with  the  wolf  in  the

wood, and the scene in which the wolf lies in bed in the grandmother’s

night-cap. There must therefore be some other fairy tale behind his

recollection of the picture. He soon discovered that it could only be the

story  of  "The  Wolf  and  the  Seven  Little  Goats".  Here  the  number

seven occurs, and also the number six, for the wolf only ate up six of

the  little  goats,  while  the  seventh  hid  itself  in  the  clock  case.  The

white, too, comes into this story, for the wolf had his paw made white

at the baker’s after the little goats had recognized him on his first visit

by his grey paw. Moreover, the two fairy tales have much in common.In both there is the eating up, the cutting open of the belly, the taking

out  of  the  people  who  have  been  eaten  and  their  replacement  by

heavy stones, and finally in both of them the wicked wolf perishes.

Besides all this, in the story of the little goats the tree appears. The

wolf lay down under a tree after his meal and snored.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3523

 

   ‘I shall have, for a special reason, to deal with this dream again

elsewhere,  and  interpret  it  and  consider  its  significance  in  greater

detail.  For  it  is  the  earliest  anxiety-dream  that  the  dreamer

remembered from his childhood, and its content, taken in connection

with other dreams that followed it soon afterwards and with certain

events  in  his  earliest  years,  is  of  quite  peculiar  interest.  We  must

confine ourselves here to the relation of the dream to the two fairy

tales  which  have  so  much  in  common  with  each  other,  "Little  Red

Riding-Hood" and "The Wolf and the Seven Little Goats". The effect

produced by these stories was shown in the little dreamer by a regular

animal phobia. This phobia was only distinguished from other similar

cases  by  the  fact  that  the  anxiety-animal  was  not  an  object  easily

accessible to observation (such as a horse or a dog), but was known

to him only from stories and picture-books.

   ‘I shall discuss on another occasion the explanation of these animal

phobias and the significance attaching to them. I will only remark in

anticipation  that  this  explanation  is  in  complete  harmony  with  the

principal characteristic shown by the neurosis from which the present

dreamer  suffered  later  in  his  life.  His  fear  of  his  father  was  the

strongest motive for his falling ill, and his ambivalent attitude towards

every father-surrogate was the dominating feature of his life as well as

of his behaviour during the treatment.

   ‘If in my patient’s case the wolf was merely a first father surrogate,

the question arises whether the hidden content in the fairy tales of the

wolf that ate up the little goats and of "Little Red Riding-Hood" may not

simply be infantile fear of the father.¹ Moreover, my patient’s father

had the characteristic, shown by so many people in relation to theirchildren, of indulging in "affectionate abuse"; and it is possible that

during the patient’s earlier years his father (though he grew severe

later on) may more than once, as he caressed the little boy or played

with  him,  have  threatened  in  fun  to  "gobble  him  up".  One  of  my

patients told me that her two children could never get to be fond of

their grandfather, because in the course of his affectionate romping

with them he used to frighten them by saying he would cut open their

tummies.’

 

   ¹ ‘Compare the similarity between these two fairy tales and the myth of Kronos, which has

been pointed out by Rank (1912).’
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3524

 

 

   Leaving on one side everything in this quotation that anticipates the

dream’s  remoter  implications,  let  us  return  to  its  immediate

interpretation.  I  may  remark  that  this  interpretation  was  a  task  that

dragged on over several years. The patient related the dream at a

very  early  stage  of  the  analysis  and  very  soon  came  to  share  my

conviction  that  the  causes  of  his  infantile  neurosis  lay  concealed

behind it. In the course of the treatment we often came back to the

dream, but it was only during the last months of the analysis that it

became possible to understand it completely, and only then thanks to

spontaneous work on the patient’s part. He had always emphasized

the  fact  that  two  factors  in  the  dream  had  made  the  greatest

impression  on  him:  first,  the  perfect  stillness  and  immobility  of  the

wolves, and secondly, the strained attention with which they all looked

at him. The lasting sense of reality, too, which the dream left behind it,

seemed to him to deserve notice.

   Let us take this last remark as a starting-point. We know from our

experience in interpreting dreams that this sense of reality carries a

particular significance along with it. It assures us that some part of the

latent material of the dream is claiming in the dreamer’s memory to

possess  the  quality  of  reality,  that  is,  that  the  dream  relates  to  an

occurrence that really took place and was not merely imagined. It cannaturally only be a question of the reality of something unknown; for

instance, the conviction that his grandfather really told him the story of

the tailor and the wolf, or that the stories of ‘Little Red Riding-Hood’

and of ‘The Seven Little Goats’ were really read aloud to him, would

not be of a nature to be replaced by this sense of reality that outlasted

the dream. The dream seemed to point to an occurrence the reality of

which was very strongly emphasized as being in marked contrast to

the unreality of the fairy tales.

   If it was to be assumed that behind the content of the dream there

lay some such unknown scene - one, that is, which had already been

forgotten at the time of the dream - then it must have taken place very

early. The dreamer, it will be recalled, said: ‘I was three, four, or at

most five years old at the time I had the dream.’ And we can add: ‘And

I was reminded by the dream of something that must have belonged

to an even earlier period.’

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3525

 

      The  parts  of  the  manifest  content  of  the  dream  which  were

emphasized by the dreamer, the factors of attentive looking and of

motionlessness,  must  lead  to  the  content  of  this  scene.  We  must

naturally  expect  to  find  that  this  material  reproduces  the  unknown

material of the scene in some distorted form, perhaps even distorted

into its opposite.

      There  were  several  conclusions,  too,  to  be  drawn  from  the  raw

material which had been produced by the patient’s first analysis of the

dream, and these had to be fitted into the collocation of which we were

in search. Behind the mention of the sheep-breeding, evidence was to

be expected of his sexual researches, his interest in which he was

able to gratify during his visits with his father; but there must also have

been allusions to a fear of death, since the greater part of the sheep

had died of the epidemic. The most obtrusive thing in the dream, the

wolves on the tree, led straight to his grandfather’s story; and what

was fascinating about this story and capable of provoking the dream

can scarcely have been anything but its connection with the theme ofcastration.

   We also concluded from the first incomplete analysis of the dream

that the wolf may have been a father-surrogate; so that, in that case,

this  first  anxiety-dream  would  have  brought  to  light  the  fear  of  his

father  which  from  that  time  forward  was  to  dominate  his  life.  This

conclusion, indeed, was in itself not yet binding. But if we put together

as the result of the provisional analysis what can be derived from the

material  produced  by  the  dreamer,  we  then  find  before  us  for

reconstruction some such fragments as these:

     A  real  occurrence  -  dating  from  a  very  early  period  -  looking  -

immobility  -  sexual  problems  -  castration  -  his  father  -  something

terrible.

   One day the patient began to continue with the interpretation of the

dream. He thought that the part of the dream which said that ‘suddenly

the window opened of its own accord’ was not completely explained

by its connection with the window at which the tailor was sitting and

through which the wolf came into the room. ‘It must mean: "My eyes

suddenly opened." I was asleep, therefore, and suddenly woke up,

and as I woke I saw something: the tree with the wolves.’ No objection

could be made to this; but the point could be developed further. He

had woken up and had seen something. The attentive looking, which

in the dream was ascribed to the wolves, should rather be shifted on

to him. At a decisive point, therefore, a transposition has taken place;

and moreover this is indicated by another transposition in the manifest

content of the dream. For the fact that the wolves were sitting on the

tree  was  also  a  transposition,  since  in  his  grandfather’s  story  they

were underneath, and were unable to climb on to the tree.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3526

 

   What, then, if the other factor emphasized by the dreamer were also

distorted by means of a transposition or reversal? In that case instead

of immobility (the wolves sat there motionless; they looked at him, but

did not move) the meaning would have to be: the most violent motion.

That is to say, he suddenly woke up, and saw in front of him a sceneof violent movement at which he looked with strained attention. In the

one case the distortion would consist in an interchange of subject and

object, of activity and passivity: being looked at instead of looking. In

the other case it would consist in a transformation into the opposite;

rest instead of motion.

   On another occasion an association which suddenly occurred to him

carried us another step forward in our understanding of the dream:

‘The tree was a Christmas-tree.’ He now knew that he had dreamt the

dream  shortly  before  Christmas  and  in  expectation  of  it.  Since

Christmas  Day  was  also  his  birthday,  it  now  became  possible  to

establish with certainty the date of the dream and of the change in him

which proceeded from it. It was immediately before his fourth birthday.

He had gone to sleep, then, in tense expectation of the day which

ought to bring him a double quantity of presents. We know that in such

circumstances  a  child  may  easily  anticipate  the  fulfilment  of  his

wishes. So it was already Christmas in his dream; the content of the

dream showed him his Christmas box, the presents which were to be

his were hanging on the tree. But instead of presents they had turned

into - wolves, and the dream ended by his being overcome by fear of

being  eaten  by  the  wolf  (probably  his  father),  and  by  his  flying  for

refuge to his nurse. Our knowledge of his sexual development before

the dream makes it possible for us to fill in the gaps in the dream and

to  explain  the  transformation  of  his  satisfaction  into  anxiety.  Of  the

wishes concerned in the formation of the dream the most powerful

must have been the wish for the sexual satisfaction which he was at

that time longing to obtain from his father. The strength of this wish

made it possible to revive a long-forgotten trace in his memory of a

scene which was able to show him what sexual satisfaction from his

father was like; and the result was terror, horror of the fulfilment of the

wish,  the  repression  of  the  impulse  which  had  manifested  itself  by

means of the wish, and consequently a flight from his father to his less

dangerous nurse.

   The importance of this date of Christmas Day had been preserved in

his supposed recollection of having had his first fit of rage because he

was  dissatisfied  with  his  Christmas  presents.  The  recollection

combined elements of truth and of falsehood. It could not be entirely

right, since according to the repeated declarations of his parents hisnaughtiness had already begun on their return in the autumn and it

was not a fact that they had not come on till Christmas. But he had

preserved the essential connection between his unsatisfied love, his

rage, and Christmas.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3527

 

   But what picture can the nightly workings of his sexual desire have

conjured  up  that  could  frighten  him  away  so  violently  from  the

fulfilment for which he longed? The material of the analysis shows that

there is one condition which this picture must satisfy. It must have

been calculated to create a conviction of the reality of the existence of

castration. Fear of castration could then become the motive power for

the transformation of the affect.

   I have now reached the point at which I must abandon the support I

have hitherto had from the course of the analysis. I am afraid it will

also be the point at which the reader’s belief will abandon me.

   What sprang into activity that night out of the chaos of the dreamer’s

unconscious memory-traces was the picture of copulation between his

parents,  copulation  in  circumstances  which  were  not  entirely  usual

and were especially favourable for observation. It gradually became

possible to find satisfactory answers to all the questions that arose in

connection with this scene; for in the course of the treatment the first

dream  returned  in  innumerable  variations  and  new  editions,  in

connection with which the analysis produced the information that was

required.  Thus  in  the  first  place  the  child’s  age  at  the  date  of  the

observation was established as being about one and a half years.¹ He

was suffering at the time from malaria, an attack of which used to

come on every day at a particular hour.² From his tenth year onwards

he was from time to time subject to moods of depression, which used

to come on in the afternoon and reached their height at about five

o’clock. This symptom still existed at the time of the analytic treatment.

The recurring fits of depression took the place of the earlier attacks of

fever or languor; five o’clock was either the time of the highest fever or

of the observation of the intercourse, unless the two times coincided.³Probably  for  the  very  reason  of  this  illness,  he  was  in  his  parents’

bedroom. The illness, the occurrence of which is also corroborated by

direct tradition, makes it reasonable to refer the event to the summer,

and, since the child was born on Christmas Day, to assume that his

age was n + 1½ years. He had been sleeping in his cot, then, in his

parents’ bedroom, and woke up, perhaps because of his rising fever,

in  the  afternoon,  possibly  at  five  o’clock,  the  hour  which  was  later

marked out by depression. It harmonizes with our assumption that it

was a hot summer’s day, if we suppose that his parents had retired,

                    4
half  undressed,  for  an  afternoon siesta.  When  he  woke  up,  he

                                                                                      5
witnessed a coitus a tergo [from behind], three times repeated; he

was able to see his mother’s genitals as well as his father’s organ; and

                                                                            6
he  understood  the  process  as  well  as  its  significance.  Lastly  he

interrupted  his  parents’  intercourse  in  a  manner  which  will  be

discussed later.

 

   ¹ The age of six months came under consideration as a far less probable, and indeed

scarcely tenable, alternative.

   ² Compare the subsequent metamorphoses of this factor during the obsessional neurosis.

In the patient’s dreams during the treatment it was replaced by a violent wind. [Added 1924:]
‘Ayia’ equals ‘air’.

   ³ We may remark in this connection that the patient drew only five wolves in his illustration

to the dream, although the text mentioned six or seven.

   In white underclothes: the white wolves.

5
    Why three times? He suddenly one day produced the statement that I had discovered this

detail by interpretation. This was not the case. It was a spontaneous association, exempt from
further criticism; in his usual way he passed it off on to me, and by this projection tried to
make it seem more trustworthy.
6
    I mean that he understood it at the time of the dream where he was four years old, not at

the time of the observation. He received the impressions when he was one and a half; his
understanding of them was deferred, but became possible at the time of the dream owing to
his development, his sexual excitations, and his sexual researches.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3528

 

      There  is  at  bottom  nothing  extraordinary,  nothing  to  give  the

impression of being the product of an extravagant imagination, in the

fact  that  a  young  couple  who  had  only  been  married  a  few  yearsshould have ended a siesta on a hot summer’s afternoon with a love-

scene, and should have disregarded the presence of their little boy of

one  and  a  half,  asleep  in  his  cot.  On  the  contrary,  such  an  event

would,  I  think,  be  something  entirely  commonplace  and banal; and

even the position in which we have inferred that the coitus took place

cannot in the least alter this judgement - especially as the evidence

does  not  require  that  the  intercourse  should  have  been  performed

from behind each time. A single time would have been enough to give

the  spectator  an  opportunity  for  making  observations  which  would

have been rendered difficult or impossible by any other attitude of the

lovers.  The  content  of  the  scene  cannot  therefore  in  itself  be  an

argument against its credibility. Doubts as to its probability will turn

upon three other points: whether a child at the tender age of one and

a  half  could  be  in  a  position  to  take  in  the  perceptions  of  such  a

complicated  process  and  to  preserve  them  so  accurately  in  his

unconscious; secondly, whether it is possible at the age of four for a

deferred  revision  of  the  impressions  so  received  to  penetrate  the

understanding; and finally, whether any procedure could succeed in

bringing into consciousness coherently and convincingly the details of

a scene of this kind which had been experienced and understood in

such circumstances.¹

 

   ¹ The first of these difficulties cannot be reduced by assuming that the child at the time of

his observation was after all probably a year older, that is to say two and a half, an age at
which he may perhaps have been perfectly capable of talking. All the minor details of my
patient’s case almost excluded the possibility of shifting the date in this way. Moreover, the
fact should be taken into account that these scenes of observing parental intercourse are by
no means rarely brought to light in analysis. The condition of their occurrence, however, is
precisely that it should be in the earliest period of childhood. The older the child is, the more
carefully, with parents above a certain social level, will the child be deprived of the opportunity
for this kind of observation.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3529

 

   Later on I shall carefully examine these and other doubts; but I can

assure the reader that I am no less critically inclined than he towards

an acceptance of this observation of the child’s, and I will only ask him

to join me in adopting a provisional belief in the reality of the scene.We  will  first  proceed  with  the  study  of  the  relations  between  this

‘primal scene’ and the patient’s dream, his symptoms, and the history

of his life; and we will trace separately the effects that followed from

the  essential  content  of  the  scene  and  from  one  of  its  visual

impressions.

   By the latter I mean the postures which he saw his parents adopt -

the man upright, and the woman bent down like an animal. We have

already heard that during his anxiety period his sister used to terrify

him with a picture from the fairy-book, in which the wolf was shown

standing upright, with one foot forward, with its claws stretched out

and its ears pricked. He devoted himself with tireless perseverance

during the treatment to the task of hunting in the second-hand book

shops till he had found the illustrated fairy-book of his childhood, and

had recognized his bogy in an illustration to the story of ‘The Wolf and

the Seven Little Goats’. He thought that the posture of the wolf in this

picture  might  have  reminded  him  of  that  of  his  father  during  the

constructed primal scene. At all events the picture became the point of

departure for further manifestations of anxiety. Once when he was in

his seventh or eighth year he was informed that next day a new tutor

was coming for him. That night he dreamt of this tutor in the shape of

a lion that came towards his bed roaring loudly and in the posture of

the wolf in the picture; and once again he awoke in a state of anxiety.

The wolf phobia had been overcome by that time, so he was free to

choose himself a new anxiety-animal, and in this late dream he was

recognizing the tutor as a father-surrogate. In the later years of his

childhood each of his tutors and masters played the part of his father,

and was endowed with his father’s influence both for good and for evil.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3530

 

   While he was at his secondary school the Fates provided him with a

remarkable opportunity of reviving his wolf phobia, and of using the

relation which lay behind it as an occasion for severe inhibitions. The

master who taught his form Latin was called Wolf. From the very first

he felt cowed by him, and he was once taken severely to task by himfor having made a stupid mistake in a piece of Latin translation. From

that time on he could not get free from a paralysing fear of this master,

and it was soon extended to other masters besides. But the occasion

on  which  he  made  his  blunder  in  the  translation  was  also  to  the

purpose. He had to translate the Latin word ‘filius’, and he did it with

the French word ‘fils’ instead of with the corresponding word from his

own language. The wolf, in fact, was still his father.¹

   The first ‘transitory symptom’² which the patient produced during the

treatment went back once more to the wolf phobia and to the fairy tale

of ‘The Seven Little Goats’. In the room in which the first sessions

were held there was a large grandfather clock opposite the patient,

who lay on a sofa facing away from me. I was struck by the fact that

from time to time he turned his face towards me, looked at me in a

very friendly way as though to propitiate me, and then turned his look

away from me to the clock. I thought at the time that he was in this

way  showing  his  eagerness  for  the  end  of  the  hour.  A  long  time

afterwards the patient reminded me of this piece of dumb show, and

gave me an explanation of it; for he recalled that the youngest of the

seven little goats hid himself in the case of the grandfather clock while

his six brothers were eaten up by the wolf. So what he had meant

was: ‘Be kind to me! Must I be frightened of you? Are you going to eat

me  up?  Shall  I  hide  myself  from  you  in  the  clock-case  like  the

youngest little goat?’

 

   ¹ After this reprimand from the schoolmaster-wolf he learnt that it was the general opinion of

his companions that, to be pacified, the master expected money from him. We shall return to
this point later. - I can see that it would greatly facilitate a rationalistic view of such a history of
a child’s development as this if it could be supposed that his whole fear of the wolf had really
originated  from  the  Latin  master  of  that  name,  that  it  had  been  projected  back  into  his
childhood, and, supported by the illustration to the fairy tale, had caused the phantasy of the
primal  scene.  But  this  is  untenable;  the  chronological  priority  of  the  wolf  phobia  and  its
reference to the period of his childhood spent upon the first estate is far too securely attested.
And his dream at the age of four?

   ² Ferenczi (1912).

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3531

 

   The wolf that he was afraid of was undoubtedly his father; but hisfear of the wolf was conditional upon the creature being in an upright

posture. His recollection asserted most definitely that he had not been

terrified by pictures of wolves going on all fours or, as in the story of

‘Little Red Riding-Hood’, lying in bed. The posture which, according to

our construction of the primal scene, he had seen the woman assume,

was of no less significance; though in this case the significance was

limited  to  the  sexual  sphere.  The  most  striking  phenomenon  of  his

erotic life after maturity was his liability to compulsive attacks of falling

physically in love which came on and disappeared again in the most

puzzling succession. These attacks released a tremendous energy in

him even at times when he was otherwise inhibited, and they were

quite  beyond  his  control.  I  must,  for  a  specially  important  reason,

postpone  a  full  consideration  of  this  compulsive  love;  but  I  may

mention  here  that  it  was  subject  to  a  definite  condition,  which  was

concealed from his consciousness and was discovered only during the

treatment. It was necessary that the woman should have assumed the

posture which we have ascribed to his mother in the primal scene.

From his puberty he had felt large and conspicuous buttocks as the

most powerful attraction in a woman; to copulate except from behind

gave him scarcely any enjoyment. At this point a criticism may justly

be raised: it may be objected that a sexual preference of this kind for

the hind parts of the body is a general characteristic of people who are

inclined to an obsessional neurosis, and that its presence does not

justify us in referring it back to a special impression in childhood. It is

part of the fabric of the anal-erotic disposition and is one of the archaic

traits  which  distinguish  that  constitution.  Indeed,  copulation  from

behind - more ferarum [in the fashion of animals] - may, after all, be

regarded as phylogenetically the older form. We shall return to this

point  too  in  a  later  discussion,  when  we  have  brought  forward  the

supplementary material which showed the basis of the unconscious

condition upon which his falling in love depended.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3532

 

   Let us now proceed with our discussion of the relations between hisdream  and  the  primal  scene.  We  should  so  far  have  expected  the

dream  to  present  the  child  (who  was  rejoicing  at  Christmas  in  the

prospect  of  the  fulfilment  of  his  wishes)  with  this  picture  of  sexual

satisfaction afforded through his father’s agency, just as he had seen

it in the primal scene, as a model of the satisfaction that he himself

was longing to obtain from his father. Instead of this picture, however,

there appeared the material of the story which he had been told by his

grandfather shortly before: the tree, the wolves, and the taillessness

(in  the  over-compensated  form  of  the  bushy  tails  of  the  putative

wolves). At this point some connection is missing, some associative

bridge to lead from the content of the primal scene to that of the wolf

story. This connection is provided once again by the postures and only

by them. In his grandfather’s story the tailless wolf asked the others to

climb upon him. It was this detail that called up the recollection of the

picture  of  the  primal  scene;  and  it  was  in  this  way  that  it  became

possible for the material of the primal scene to be represented by that

of  the  wolf  story,  and  at  the  same  time  for  the two  parents  to  be

replaced,  as  was  desirable,  by several  wolves.  The  content  of  the

dream met with a further transformation, and the material of the wolf

story was made to fit in with the content of the fairy tale of ‘The Seven

Little Goats’, by borrowing from it the number seven.¹

   The steps in the transformation of the material, ‘primal scene - wolf

story - fairy tale of "The Seven Little Goats"’, are a reflection of the

progress  of  the  dreamer’s  thoughts  during  the  construction  of  the

dream: ‘longing for sexual satisfaction from his father - realization that

castration is a necessary condition of it - fear of his father’. It is only at

this point, I think, that we can regard the anxiety-dream of this four-

year-old boy as being exhaustively explained.²

 

   ¹ It says ‘six or seven’ in the dream. Six is the number of the children that were eaten; the

seventh escaped into the clock-case. It is always a strict law of dream-interpretation that an
explanation must be found for every detail.

   ² Now that we have succeeded in making a synthesis of the dream, I will try to give a

comprehensive account of the relations between the manifest content of the dream and the
latent dream-thoughts.
   It was night, I was lying in my bed. The latter part of this is the beginning of the reproduction
of the primal scene. ‘It was night’ is a distortion of I had been asleep’. The remark, ‘I know it
was winter when I had the dream, and night-time’, refers to the patient’s recollection of the
dream  and  is  not  part  of  its  content.  It  is  correct,  for  it  was  one  of  the  nights  before  hisbirthday, that is, Christmas Day.
   Suddenly the window opened of its own accord. That is to be translated: ‘Suddenly I woke
up of my own accord’, a recollection of the primal scene. The influence of the wolf story, in
which the wolf leapt in through the window, is making itself felt as a modifying factor, and
transforms a direct expression into a plastic one. At the same time the introduction of the
window serves the purpose of providing a contemporary reference for the subsequent content
of the dream. On Christmas Eve the door opens suddenly and one sees before one the tree
with the presents. Here therefore the influence of the actual expectation of Christmas (which
comprises the wish for sexual satisfaction) is making itself felt.
   The big walnut tree. The representative of the Christmas tree, and therefore belonging to
the current situation. But also the tree out of the wolf story, on which the tailor took refuge
from pursuit, and under which the wolves were on the watch. Moreover, as I have often been
able to satisfy myself, a high tree is a symbol of observing, of scopophilia. A person sitting on
a tree can see everything that is going on below him and cannot himself be seen. Compare
Boccaccio’s well-known story, and similar facetiae.
   The wolves. Their number: six or seven. In the wolf story there was a pack, and no number
was given. The fixing of the number shows the influence of the fairy tale of ‘The Seven Little
Goats’, six of whom were eaten up. The fact that the number two in the primal scene is
replaced by a larger number, which would be absurd in the primal scene, is welcomed by the
resistance as a means of distortion. In the illustration to the dream the dreamer brings forward
the number five, which is probably meant to correct the statement ‘It was night’.
   They were sitting on the tree. In the first place they replace the Christmas presents hanging
on the tree. But they are also transposed on to the tree because that can mean that they are
looking. In his grandfather’s story they were posted underneath the tree. Their relation to the
tree has therefore been reversed in the dream; and from this it may be concluded that there
are further reversals of the latent material to be found in the content of the dream.
   They were looking at him with strained attention. This feature comes entirely from the primal
scene, and has got into the dream at the price of being turned completely round.
   They were quite white. This feature is unessential in itself, but is strongly emphasized in the
dreamer’s narrative. It owes its intensity to a copious fusion of elements from all the strata of
the material, and it combines unimportant details from the other sources of the dream with a
fragment of the primal scene which is more significant. This last part of its determination goes
back to the white of his parents’ bedclothes and underclothes, and to this is added the white
of the flocks of sheep, and of the sheep-dogs, as an allusion to his sexual researches among
animals, and the white in the fairy tale of ‘The Seven Little Goats’, in which the mother is
recognized by the white of her hand. Later on we shall see that the white clothes are also an
allusion to death.
   They sat there motionless. This contradicts the most striking feature of the observed scene,
namely, its agitated movement, which, in virtue of the postures to which it led, constitutes the
connection between the primal scene and the wolf story.
   They had tails like foxes. This must be the contradiction of a conclusion which was derived
from the action of the primal scene on the wolf story, and which must be recognized as the
most important result of the dreamer’s sexual researches: ‘So there really is such a thing as
castration.’ The terror with which this conclusion was received finally broke out in the dream
and brought it to an end.
   The fear of being eaten up by the wolves. It seemed to the dreamer as though the motive
force of this fear was not derived from the content of the dream. He said he need not have
been afraid, for the wolves looked more like foxes or dogs, and they did not rush at him as
though to bite him, but were very still and not at all terrible. We observe that the dream-work
tries  for  some  time  to  make  the  distressing  content  harmless  by  transforming  it  into  itsopposite. (‘They aren’t moving, and, only look, they have the loveliest tails!’) Until at last this
expedient fails, and the fear breaks out. It expresses itself by the help of the fairy tale, in
which the goat-children are eaten up by the wolf-father. This part of the fairy tale may perhaps
have acted as a reminder of threats made by the child’s father in fun when he was playing
with him; so that the fear of being eaten up by the wolf may be a reminiscence as well as a
substitute by displacement.
      The  wishes  which  act  as  motive  forces  in  this  dream  are  obvious.  First  there  are  the
superficial wishes of the day, that Christmas with its presents may already be here (a dream
of impatience) and accompanying these is the deeper wish, now permanently present, for
sexual satisfaction from the dreamer’s father. This is immediately replaced by the wish to see
once  more  what  was  then  so  fascinating.  The  mental  process  then  proceeds  on  its  way.
Starting from the fulfilment of this last wish with the conjuring up of the primal scene, it passes
on to what has now become inevitable - the repudiation of that wish and its repression.
   The diffuseness and elaboration of this commentary have been forced on me by the effort to
present  the  reader  with  some  sort  of  equivalent  for  the  convincing  power  of  an  analysis
carried through by oneself; perhaps they may also serve to discourage him from asking for the
publication of analyses which have stretched over several years.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3533

 

   After what has already been said I need only deal shortly with the

pathogenic  effect  of  the  primal  scene  and  the  alteration  which  its

revival produced in his sexual development. We will only trace that

one of its effects to which the dream gave expression. Later on we

shall have to make it clear that it was not only a single sexual current

that started from the primal scene but a whole set of them, that his

sexual life was positively splintered up by it. We shall further bear in

mind  that  the  activation  of  this  scene  (I  purposely  avoid  the  word

‘recollection’)  had  the  same  effect  as  though  it  were  a  recent

experience. The effects of the scene were deferred, but meanwhile it

had lost none of its freshness in the interval between the ages of one

and  a  half  and  four  years.  We  shall  perhaps  find  in  what  follows

reason to suppose that it produced certain effects even at the time of

its perception, that is, from the age of one and a half onwards.

   When the patient entered more deeply into the situation of the primal

scene, he brought to light the following pieces of self-observation. He

assumed  to  begin  with,  he  said,  that  the  event  of  which  he  was  a

witness was an act of violence, but the expression of enjoyment which

he saw on his mother’s face did not fit in with this; he was obliged to

recognize  that  the  experience  was  one  of  gratification.¹  What  wasessentially new for him in his observation of his parents’ intercourse

was the conviction of the reality of castration - a possibility with which

his thoughts had already been occupied previously. (The sight of the

two girls micturating, his Nanya’s threat, the governess’ interpretation

of  the  sugar-sticks,  the  recollection  of  his  father  having  beaten  a

snake to pieces.) For now he saw with his own eyes the wound of

which his Nanya had spoken, and understood that its presence was a

necessary condition of intercourse with his father. He could no longer

confuse it with the bottom, as he had in his observation of the little

girls.²

 

   ¹ We might perhaps best do justice to this statement of the patient’s by supposing that the

object of his observation was in the first instance a coitus in the normal position, which cannot
fail to produce the impression of being a sadistic act, and that only after this was the position
altered, so that he had an opportunity for making other observations and judgements. This
hypothesis, however, was not confirmed with certainty, and moreover does not seem to me
indispensable.  We  must  not  forget  the  actual  situation  which  lies  behind  the  abbreviated
description given in the text: the patient under analysis, at an age of over twenty-five years,
was putting the impressions and impulses of his fourth year into words which he would never
have found at that time. If we fail to notice this, it may easily seem comic and incredible that a
child of four should be capable of such technical judgements and learned notions. This is
simply another instance of deferred action. At the age of one and a half the child receives an
impression to which he is unable to react adequately; he is only able to understand it and to
be moved by it when the impression is revived in him at the age of four; and only twenty years
later, during the analysis, is he able to grasp with his conscious mental processes what was
then going on in him. The patient justifiably disregards the three periods of time, and puts his
present ego into the situation which is so long past. And in this we follow him, since with
correct self-observation and interpretation the effect must be the same as though the distance
between the second and third periods of time could be neglected. Moreover, we have no other
means of describing the events of the second period.

   ² We shall learn later on, when we come to trace out his anal erotism, how he further dealt

with this portion of the problem.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3534

 

      The  dream  ended  in  a  state  of  anxiety,  from  which  he  did  not

recover until he had his Nanya with him. He fled, therefore, from his

father  to  her.  His  anxiety  was  a  repudiation  of  the  wish  for  sexual

satisfaction from his father - the trend which had put the dream into his

head. The form taken by the anxiety, the fear of ‘being eaten by the

wolf’, was only the (as we shall hear, regressive) transposition of thewish to be copulated with by his father, that is, to be given sexual

satisfaction in the same way as his mother. His last sexual aim, the

passive attitude towards his father, succumbed to repression, and fear

of his father appeared in its place in the shape of the wolf phobia.

   And the driving force of this repression? The circumstances of the

case  show  that  it  can  only  have  been  his  narcissistic  genital  libido

which, in the form of concern for his male organ, was fighting against

a satisfaction whose attainment seemed to involve the renunciation of

that organ. And it was from his threatened narcissism that he derived

the masculinity with which he defended himself against his passive

attitude towards his father.

   We now observe that at this point in our narrative we must make an

alteration in our terminology. During the dream he had reached a new

phase in his sexual organization. Up to then the sexual opposites had

been for him active and passive. Since his seduction his sexual aim

had been a passive one, of being touched on the genitals; it was then

transformed,  by  regression  to  the  earlier  stage  of  the  sadistic-anal

organization, into the masochistic aim of being beaten or punished. It

was a matter of indifference to him whether he reached this aim with a

man  or  with  a  woman.  He  had  travelled,  without  considering  the

difference of sex, from his Nanya to his father; he had longed to have

his penis touched by his Nanya, and had tried to provoke a beating

from his father. Here his genitals were left out of account; though the

connection with them which had been concealed by the regression

was still expressed in his phantasy of being beaten on the penis. The

activation of the primal scene in the dream now brought him back to

the genital organization. He discovered the vagina and the biological

significance of masculine and feminine. He understood now that active

was the same as masculine, while passive was the same as feminine.

His  passive  sexual  aim  should  now  have  been  transformed  into  a

feminine one, and have expressed itself as ‘being copulated with by

his father’ instead of ‘being beaten by him on the genitals or on the

bottom’. This feminine aim, however, underwent repression and was

obliged to let itself be replaced by fear of the wolf.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis                                                                                      3535

 

   We must here break off the discussion of his sexual development

until new light is thrown from the later stages of his history upon these

earlier ones. For the proper appreciation of the wolf phobia we will

only add that both his father and mother became wolves. His mother

took the part of the castrated wolf, which let the others climb upon it;

his father took the part of the wolf that climbed. But his fear, as we

have heard him assure us, related only to the standing wolf, that is, to

his father. It must further strike us that the fear with which the dream

ended had a model in his grandfather’s story. For in this the castrated

wolf, which had let the others climb upon it, was seized with fear as

soon  as  it  was  reminded  of  the  fact  of  its  taillessness.  It  seems,

therefore,  as  though  he  had  identified  himself  with  his  castrated

mother during the dream, and was now fighting against that fact. ‘If

you  want  to  be  sexually  satisfied  by  Father’,  we  may  perhaps

represent  him  as  saying  to  himself,  ‘you  must  allow  yourself  to  be

castrated like Mother; but I won’t have that.’ In short, a clear protest on

the part of his masculinity! Let us, however, plainly understand that the

sexual  development  of  the  case  that  we  are  now  examining  has  a

great disadvantage from the point of view of research, for it was by no

means undisturbed. It was first decisively influenced by the seduction,

and was then diverted by the scene of observation of the coitus, which

in its deferred action operated like a second seduction.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3536

 

                                            V

 

                            A FEW DISCUSSIONS

 

The whale and the polar bear, it has been said, cannot wage war on

each other, for since each is confined to his own element they cannot

meet. It is just as impossible for me to argue with workers in the field

of psychology or of the neuroses who do not recognize the postulates

of psycho-analysis and who look on its results as artefacts. But duringthe last few years there has grown up another kind of opposition as

well, among people who, in their own opinion at all events, take their

stand upon the ground of analysis, who do not dispute its technique or

results,  but  who  merely  think  themselves  justified  in  drawing  other

conclusions  from  the  same  material  and  in  submitting  it  to  other

interpretations.

   As a rule, however, theoretical controversy is unfruitful. No sooner

has one begun to depart from the material on which one ought to be

relying, than one runs the risk of becoming intoxicated with one’s own

assertions  and,  in  the  end,  of  supporting  opinions  which  any

observation would have contradicted. For this reason it seems to me

to be incomparably more useful to combat dissentient interpretations

by testing them upon particular cases and problems.

      I  have  remarked  above  (see p.  3528)  that  it  will  certainly  be

considered improbable, firstly, that ‘a child at the tender age of one

and a half could be in a position to take in the perceptions of such a

complicated  process  and  to  preserve  them  so  accurately  in  his

unconscious;  secondly,  that  it  is  possible  at  the  age  of  four  for  a

deferred revision of this material to penetrate the understanding; and

finally,  that  any  procedure  could  succeed  in  bringing  into

consciousness coherently and convincingly the details of a scene of

this  kind  which  had  been  experienced  and  understood  in  such

circumstances’.

   The last question is purely one of fact. Anyone who will take the

trouble  of  pursuing  an  analysis  into  these  depths  by  means  of  the

prescribed technique will convince himself that it is decidedly possible.

Anyone who neglects this, and breaks off the analysis in some higher

stratum, has waived his right of forming a judgement on the matter.

But  the  interpretation  of  what  is  arrived  at  in  depth-analysis  is  not

decided by this.

   The two other doubts are based on a low estimate of the importance

of  early  infantile  impressions  and  an  unwillingness  to  ascribe  such

enduring  effects  to  them.  The  supporters  of  this  view  look  for  the

causes of neuroses almost exclusively in the grave conflicts of later

life;  they  assume  that  the  importance  of  childhood  is  only  held  up

before our eyes in analysis on account of the inclination of neurotics

for expressing their present interests in reminiscences and symbolsfrom  the  remote  past.  Such  an  estimate  of  the  importance  of  the

infantile  factor  would  involve  the  disappearance  of  much  that  has

formed part of the most intimate characteristics of analysis, though

also, no doubt, of much that raises resistance to it and alienates the

confidence of the outsider.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3537

 

   The view, then, that we are putting up for discussion is as follows. It

maintains that scenes from early infancy, such as are brought up by

an exhaustive analysis of neuroses (as, for instance, in the present

case), are not reproductions of real occurrences, to which it is possible

to ascribe an influence over the course of the patient’s later life and

over  the  formation  of  his  symptoms.  It  considers  them  rather  as

products of the imagination, which find their instigation in mature life,

which are intended to serve as some kind of symbolic representation

of real wishes and interests, and which owe their origin to a regressive

tendency, to a turning-away from the tasks of the present. If that is so,

we can of course spare ourselves the necessity of attributing such a

surprising  amount  to  the  mental  life  and  intellectual  capacity  of

children of the tenderest age.

   Besides the desire which we all share for the rationalization and

simplification of our difficult problem, there are all sorts of facts that

speak in favour of this view. It is also possible to eliminate beforehand

one  objection  to  it  which  may  arise,  particularly  in  the  mind  of  a

practising analyst. It must be admitted that, if this view of these scenes

from infancy were the right one, the carrying-out of analysis would not

in the first instance be altered in any respect. If neurotics are endowed

with the evil characteristic of diverting their interest from the present

and of attaching it to these regressive substitutes, the products of their

imagination, then there is absolutely nothing for it but to follow upon

their  tracks  and  bring  these  unconscious  productions  into

consciousness; for, leaving on one side their lack of value from the

point of view of reality, they are of the utmost value from our point of

view, since they are for the moment the bearers and possessors of theinterest which we want to set free so as to be able to direct it on to the

tasks  of  the  present.  The  analysis  would  have  to  run  precisely  the

same  course  as  one  which  had  a naïf  faith  in  the  truth  of  the

phantasies. The difference would only come at the end of the analysis,

after the phantasies had been laid bare. We should then say to the

patient: ‘Very well, then; your neurosis proceeded as though you had

received these impressions and spun them out in your childhood. You

will see, of course, that that is out of the question. They were products

of your imagination which were intended to divert you from the real

tasks that lay before you. Let us now enquire what these tasks were,

and  what  lines  of  communication  ran  between  them  and  your

phantasies.’ After the infantile phantasies had been disposed of in this

way, it would be possible to begin a second portion of the treatment,

which would be concerned with the patient’s real life.

   Any shortening of this course, any alteration, that is, in psycho-

analytic  treatment,  as  it  has  hitherto  been  practised,  would  be

technically inadmissible. Unless these phantasies are made conscious

to the patient to their fullest extent, he cannot obtain command of the

interest  which  is  attached  to  them.  If  his  attention  is  diverted  from

them as soon as their existence and their general outlines are divined,

support  is  simply  being  given  to  the  work  of  repression,  thanks  to

which they have been put beyond the patient’s reach in spite of all his

pains. If he is given a premature sense of their unimportance, by being

informed, for instance, that it will only be a question of phantasies,

which, of course, have no real significance, his co-operation will never

be secured for the task of bringing them into consciousness. A correct

procedure,  therefore,  would  make  no  alteration  in  the  technique  of

analysis,  whatever  estimate  might  be  formed  of  these  scenes  from

infancy.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3538

 

   I have already mentioned that there are a number of facts which can

be brought up in support of the view of these scenes being regressive

phantasies. And above all there is this one: so far as my experiencehitherto goes, these scenes from infancy are not reproduced during

the treatment as recollections, they are the products of construction.

Many people will certainly think that this single admission decides the

whole dispute.

   I am anxious not to be misunderstood. Every analyst knows - and he

has  met  with  the  experience  on  countless  occasions  -  that  in  the

course of a successful treatment the patient brings up a large number

of spontaneous recollections from his childhood, for the appearance of

which (a first appearance, perhaps) the physician feels himself entirely

blameless, since he has not made any attempt at a construction which

could have put any material of the sort into the patient’s head. It does

not necessarily follow that these previously unconscious recollections

are always true. They may be; but they are often distorted from the

truth, and interspersed with imaginary elements, just like the so-called

screen memories which are preserved spontaneously. All that I mean

to say is this: scenes, like this one in my present patient’s case, which

date  from  such  an  early  period  and  exhibit  a  similar  content,  and

which further lay claim to such an extraordinary significance for the

history of the case, are as a rule not reproduced as recollections, but

have to be divined - constructed - gradually and laboriously from an

aggregate  of  indications.  Moreover,  it  would  be  sufficient  for  the

purposes of the argument if my admission that scenes of this kind do

not become conscious in the shape of recollections applied only to

cases of obsessional neurosis, or even if I were to limit my assertion

to the case which we are studying here.

   I am not of opinion, however, that such scenes must necessarily be

phantasies  because  they  do  not  reappear  in  the  shape  of

recollections. It seems to me absolutely equivalent to a recollection, if

the memories are replaced (as in the present case) by dreams the

analysis of which invariably leads back to the same scene and which

reproduce every portion of its content in an inexhaustible variety of

new  shapes.  Indeed,  dreaming  is  another  kind  of  remembering,

though one that is subject to the conditions that rule at night and to the

laws of dream-formation. It is this recurrence in dreams that I regard

as the explanation of the fact that the patients themselves gradually

acquire a profound conviction of the reality of these primal scenes, a

conviction which is in no respect inferior to one based on recollection.¹ 

   ¹ A passage in the first edition of my Interpretation of Dreams (1900a) will show at what an

early stage I was occupied with this problem. On p. 670 of that work there is an analysis of a
remark occurring in a dream: ‘That’s not obtainable any longer.’ It is explained that the phrase
originated from myself. ‘A few days earlier I had explained to the patient that the earliest
experiences  of  childhood  were  "not  obtainable  any  longer  as  such"  but  were  replaced  in
analysis by "transferences" and dreams.’
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3539

 

   There is naturally no need for those who take the opposite view to

abandon  as  hopeless  their  fight  against  such  arguments.  It  is  well

known that dreams can be guided.¹ And the sense of conviction felt by

the person analysed may be the result of suggestion, which is always

having  new  parts  assigned  to  it  in  the  play  of  forces  involved  in

analytic  treatment.  The  old-fashioned  psychotherapist,  it  might  be

maintained, used to suggest to his patient that he was cured, that he

had overcome his inhibitions, and so on; while the psycho-analyst, on

this view, suggests to him that when he was a child he had some

experience or other, which he must now recollect in order to be cured.

This would be the difference between the two.

   Let it be clearly understood that this last attempt at an explanation

on the part of those who take the view opposed to mine results in the

scenes from infancy being disposed of far more fundamentally than

was announced to begin with. What was argued at first was that they

were not realities but phantasies. But what is argued now is evidently

that they are phantasies not of the patient but of the analyst himself,

who forces them upon the person under analysis on account of some

complexes of his own. An analyst, indeed, who hears this reproach,

will comfort himself by recalling how gradually the construction of this

phantasy which he is supposed to have originated came about, and,

when  all  is  said  and  done,  how  independently  of  the  physician’s

incentive  many  points  in  its  development  proceeded;  how,  after  a

certain phase of the treatment, everything seemed to converge upon

it, and how later, in the synthesis, the most various and remarkable

results radiated out from it; how not only the large problems but the

smallest peculiarities in the history of the case were cleared up by thissingle assumption. And he will disclaim the possession of the amount

of ingenuity necessary for the concoction of an occurrence which can

fulfil all these demands. But even this plea will be without an effect on

an adversary who has not experienced the analysis himself. On the

one side there will be a charge of subtle self-deception, and on the

other of obtuseness of judgement; it will be impossible to arrive at a

decision.

 

   ¹ The mechanism of dreaming cannot be influenced; but dream material is to some extent

subject to orders.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3540

 

   Let us turn to another factor which supports this opposing view of

these constructed scenes from infancy. It is as follows: There can be

no doubt of the real existence of all the processes which have been

brought  forward  in  order  to  explain  these  doubtful  structures  as

phantasies, and their importance must be recognized. The diversion of

interest from the tasks of real life,¹ the existence of phantasies in the

capacity  of  substitutes  for  unperformed  actions,  the  regressive

tendency which is expressed in these productions - regressive in more

than  one  sense,  in  so  far  as  there  is  involved  simultaneously  a

shrinking-back  from  life  and  a  harking-back  to  the  past  -  all  these

things hold good, and are regularly confirmed by analysis. One might

think  that  they  would  also  suffice  to  explain  the  supposed

reminiscences from early infancy which are under discussion; and in

accordance  with  the  principle  of  economy  in  science  such  an

explanation would have the advantage over one which is inadequate

without the support of new and surprising assumptions.

   I may here venture to point out that the antagonistic views which are

to  be  found  in  the  psycho-analytic  literature  of  to-day  are  usually

arrived at on the principle of pars pro toto. From a highly composite

combination  one  part  of  the  operative  factors  is  singled  out  and

proclaimed as the truth; and in its favour the other part, together with

the whole combination, is then contradicted. If we look a little closer, to

see which group of factors it is that has been given the preference, weshall find that it is the one that contains material already known from

other  sources  or  what  can  be  most  easily  related  to  that  material.

Thus,  Jung  picks  out  actuality  and  regression,  and  Adler,  egoistic

motives. What is left over, however, and rejected as false, is precisely

what is new in psycho-analysis and peculiar to it. This is the easiest

method of repelling the revolutionary and inconvenient advances of

psycho-analysis.

 

   ¹ I have good reasons for preferring to say ‘the diversion of libido from current conflicts’.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3541

 

      It  is  worth  while  remarking  that  none  of  the  factors  which  are

adduced by the opposing view in order to explain these scenes from

infancy had to wait for recognition until Jung brought them forward as

novelties.  The  notion  of  a  current  conflict,  of  a  turning  away  from

reality,  of  a  substitutive  satisfaction  obtained  in  phantasy,  of  a

regression to material from the past - all of this (employed, moreover,

in  the  same  context,  though  perhaps  with  a  slightly  different

terminology) had for years formed an integral part of my own theory. It

was not the whole of it, however. It was only one part of the causes

leading to the formation of neuroses - that part which, starting from

reality, operates in a regressive direction. Side by side with this I left

room  for  another  influence  which,  starting  from  the  impressions  of

childhood, operates in a forward direction, which points a path for the

libido that is shrinking away from life, and which makes it possible to

understand the otherwise inexplicable regression to childhood. Thus

on my view the two factors co-operate in the formation of symptoms.

But an earlier co-operation seems to me to be of equal importance. I

am of opinion that the influence of childhood makes itself felt already

in the situation at the beginning of the formation of a neurosis, since it

plays a decisive part in determining whether and at what point the

individual shall fail to master the real problems of life.

      What  is  in  dispute,  therefore,  is  the  significance  of  the  infantile

factor.  The  problem  is  to  find  a  case  which  can  establish  that

significance beyond any doubt. Such, however, is the case which isbeing  dealt  with  so  exhaustively  in  these  pages  and  which  is

distinguished by the characteristic that the neurosis in later life was

preceded by a neurosis in early childhood. It is for that very reason,

indeed,  that  I  have  chosen  it  to  report  upon.  Should  any  one  feel

inclined  to  reject  it  because  the  animal  phobia  strikes  him  as  not

sufficiently  serious  to  be  recognized  as  an  independent  neurosis,  I

may mention that the phobia was succeeded without any interval by

an  obsessional  ceremonial,  and  by  obsessional  acts  and  thoughts,

which will be discussed in the following sections of this paper.

   The occurrence of a neurotic disorder in the fourth and fifth years of

childhood proves, first and foremost, that infantile experiences are by

themselves in a position to produce a neurosis, without there being

any need for the addition of a flight from some task which has to be

faced in real life. It may be objected that even a child is constantly

being confronted with tasks which it would perhaps be glad to evade.

That is so; but the life of a child under school age is easily observable,

and we can examine it to see whether any ‘tasks’ are to be found in it

capable of determining the causation of a neurosis. But we discover

nothing  but  instinctual  impulses  which  the  child  cannot  satisfy  and

which it is not old enough to master, and the sources from which these

impulses arise.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3542

 

   As was to be expected, the enormous shortening of the interval

between the outbreak of the neurosis and the date of the childhood

experiences  which  are  under  discussion  reduces  to  the  narrowest

limits the regressive part of the causation, while it brings into full view

the portion of it which operates in a forward direction, the influence of

earlier impressions. The present case history will, I hope, give a clear

picture  of  this  position  of  things.  But  there  are  other  reasons  why

neuroses of childhood give a decisive answer to the question of the

nature of primal scenes - the earliest experiences of childhood that are

brought to light in analysis.

   Let us assume as an uncontradicted premise that a primal scene ofthis kind has been correctly educed technically, that it is indispensable

to a comprehensive solution of all the conundrums that are set us by

the  symptoms  of  the  infantile  disorder,  that  all  the  consequences

radiate out from it, just as all the threads of the analysis have led up to

it. Then, in view of its content, it is impossible that it can be anything

else than the reproduction of a reality experienced by the child. For a

child, like an adult, can produce phantasies only from material which

has  been  acquired  from  some  source  or  other;  and  with  children,

some of the means of acquiring it (by reading, for instance) are cut off,

while the space of time at their disposal for acquiring it is short and

can  easily  be  searched  with  a  view  to  the  discovery  of  any  such

sources.

   In the present case the content of the primal scene is a picture of

sexual intercourse between the boy’s parents in a posture especially

favourable  for  certain  observations.  Now  it  would  be  no  evidence

whatever of the reality of such a scene if we were to find it in a patient

whose symptoms (the effects of the scene, that is) had appeared at

some time or other in the later part of his life. A person such as this

might have acquired the impressions, the ideas, and the knowledge

on a great number of different occasions in the course of the long

interval;  he  might  then  have  transformed  them  into  an  imaginary

picture,  have  projected  them  back  into  his  childhood,  and  have

attached them to his parents. If, however, the effects of a scene of this

sort  appear  in  the  child’s  fourth  or  fifth  year,  then  he  must  have

witnessed the scene at an age even earlier than that. But in that case

we are still faced with all the disconcerting consequences which have

arisen from the analysis of this infantile neurosis. The only way out

would be to assume that the patient not only unconsciously imagined

the primal scene, but also concocted the alteration in his character, his

fear of the wolf, and his religious obsession; but such an expedient

would be contradicted by his otherwise sober nature and by the direct

tradition in his family. It must therefore be left at this (I can see no

other  possibility):  either  the  analysis  based  on  the  neurosis  in  his

childhood is all a piece of nonsense from start to finish, or everything

took place just as I have described it above.

   At an earlier stage in the discussion we were brought up against an

ambiguity in regard to the patient’s predilection for female nates andfor  sexual  intercourse  in  the  posture  in  which  they  are  especially

prominent. It seemed necessary to trace this predilection back to the

intercourse which he had observed between his parents, while at the

same  time  a  preference  of  this  kind  is  a  general  characteristic  of

archaic  constitutions  which  are  predisposed  to  an  obsessional

neurosis. But the contradiction is easily resolved if we regard it as a

case  of  overdetermination.  The  person  who  was  the  subject  of  his

observation of this posture during intercourse was, after all, his father

in the flesh, and it may also have been from him that he had inherited

this constitutional predilection. Neither his father’s subsequent illness

nor his family history contradicts this; as has been mentioned already,

a brother of his father’s died in a condition which must be regarded as

the outcome of a severe obsessional disorder.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3543

 

   In this connection we may recall that, at the time of his seduction as

a  boy  of  three  and  a  quarter,  his  sister  had  uttered  a  remarkable

calumny against his good old nurse, to the effect that she stood all

kinds of people on their heads and then took hold of them by their

genitals.  We  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  by  the  idea  that  perhaps  the

sister, at a similar tender age, also witnessed the same scene as was

observed  by  her  brother  later  on,  and  that  it  was  this  that  had

suggested to her her notion about ‘standing people on their heads’

during the sexual act. This hypothesis would also give us a hint of the

reason for her own sexual precocity.

 

   [Originally ¹ I had no intention of pursuing the discussion of the

reality of ‘primal scenes’ any further in this place. Since, however, I

have meanwhile had occasion in my Introductory Lectures on Psycho-

Analysis  to  treat  the  subject  on  more  general  lines  and  with  no

controversial aim in view, it would be misleading if I omitted to apply

the  considerations  which  determined  my  other  discussion  of  the

matter to the case that is now before us. I therefore proceed as follows

by way of supplement and rectification. - There remains the possibilityof taking yet another view of the primal scene underlying the dream - a

view, moreover, which obviates to a large extent the conclusion that

has been arrived at above and relieves us of many of our difficulties.

But the theory which seeks to reduce scenes from infancy to the level

of regressive symbols will gain nothing even by this modification; and

indeed that theory seems to me to be finally disposed of by this (as it

would be by any other) analysis of an infantile neurosis.

   This other view which I have in mind is that the state of affairs can

be  explained  in  the  following  manner.  It  is  true  that  we  cannot

dispense with the assumption that the child observed a copulation, the

sight of which gave him a conviction that castration might be more

than  an  empty  threat.  Moreover,  the  significance  which  he

subsequently came to attach to the postures of men and women, in

connection with the development of anxiety on the one hand, and as a

condition upon which his falling in love depended on the other hand,

leaves us no choice but to conclude that it must have been a coitus a

tergo, more  ferarum.  But  there  is  another  factor  which  is  not  so

irreplaceable  and  which  may  be  dropped.  Perhaps  what  the  child

observed  was  not  copulation  between  his  parents  but  copulation

between  animals,  which  he  then  displaced  on  to  his  parents,  as

though he had inferred that his parents did things in the same way.

 

   ¹ [Freud’s square brackets]

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3544

 

   Colour is lent to this view above all by the fact that the wolves in the

dream were actually sheep-dogs and, moreover, appear as such in

the drawing. Shortly before the dream the boy was repeatedly taken to

visit the flocks of sheep, and there he might see just such large white

dogs and probably also observe them copulating. I should also like to

bring  into  this  connection  the  number  three,  which  the  dreamer

introduced without adducing any further motive, and I would suggest

that he had kept in his memory the fact that he had made three such

observations  with  the  sheep-dogs.  What  supervened  during  the

expectant excitement of the night of his dream was the transferenceon to his parents of his recently acquired memory-picture, with all its

details, and it was only thus that the powerful emotional effects which

followed  were  made  possible.  He  now  arrived  at  a  deferred

understanding of the impressions which he may have received a few

weeks or months earlier - a process such as all of us perhaps have

been  through  in  our  own  experiences.  The  transference  from  the

copulating dogs on to his parents was accomplished not by means of

his making an inference accompanied by words but by his searching

out in his memory a real scene in which his parents had been together

and which could be coalesced with the situation of the copulation. All

the details of the scene which were established in the analysis of the

dream  may  have  been  accurately  reproduced.  It  was  really  on  a

summer’s  afternoon  while  the  child  was  suffering  from  malaria,  the

parents were both present, dressed in white, when the child woke up

from  his  sleep,  but  -  the  scene  was  innocent.  The  rest  had  been

added  by  the  inquisitive  child’s  subsequent  wish,  based  on  his

experiences with the dogs, to witness his parents too in their love-

making; and the scene which was thus imagined now produced all the

effects that we have catalogued, just as though it had been entirely

real and not fused together out of two components, the one earlier and

indifferent, the other later and profoundly impressive.

   It is at once obvious how greatly the demands on our credulity are

reduced. We need no longer suppose that the parents copulated in

the presence of their child (a very young one, it is true) - which was a

disagreeable idea for many of us. The period of time during which the

effects were deferred is very greatly diminished; it now covers only a

few months of the child’s fourth year and does not stretch back at all

into the first dark years of childhood. There remains scarcely anything

strange  in  the  child’s  conduct  in  making  the  transference  from  the

dogs on to his parents and in being afraid of the wolf instead of his

father.  He  was  in  that  phase  of  the  development  of  his  attitude

towards the world which I have described in Totem and Taboo as the

return of totemism. The theory which endeavours to explain the primal

scenes found in neuroses as retrospective phantasies of a later date

seems  to  obtain  powerful  support  from  the  present  observation,  in

spite  of  our  patient  being  of  the  tender  age  of  four  years.  Young

though he was, he was yet able to succeed in replacing an impressionof his fourth year by an imaginary trauma at the age of one and a half.

This regression, however, seems neither mysterious nor tendentious.

The scene which was to be made up had to fulfil certain conditions

which,  in  consequence  of  the  circumstances  of  the  dreamer’s  life,

could only be found in precisely this early period; such, for instance,

was the condition that he should be in bed in his parents’ bedroom.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3545

 

   But something that I am able to adduce from the analytic findings in

other  cases  will  seem  to  most  readers  to  be  the  decisive  factor  in

favour  of  the  correctness  of  the  view  here  proposed.  Scenes  of

observing  sexual  intercourse  between  parents  at  a  very  early  age

(whether they be real memories or phantasies) are as a matter of fact

by no means rarities in the analyses of neurotic mortals. Possibly they

are no less frequent among those who are not neurotics. Possibly they

are  part  of  the  regular  store  in  the  -  conscious  or  unconscious  -

treasury of their memories. But as often as I have been able by means

of analysis to bring out a scene of this sort, it has shown the same

peculiarity which startled us with our present patient too: it has related

to coitus  a  tergo,  which  alone  offers  the  spectator  a  possibility  of

inspecting the genitals. There is surely no need any longer to doubt

that what we are dealing with is only a phantasy, which is invariably

aroused,  perhaps,  by  an  observation  of  the  sexual  intercourse  of

animals. And yet more: I have hinted that my description of the ‘primal

scene’ has remained incomplete because I have reserved for a later

moment  my  account  of  the  way  in  which  the  child  interrupted  his

parents’ intercourse. I must now add that this method of interruption is

also the same in every case.

      I  can  well  believe  that  I  have  now  laid  myself  open  to  grave

aspersions  on  the  part  of  the  readers  of  this  case  history.  If  these

arguments in favour of such a view of the ‘primal scene’ were at my

disposal, how could I possibly have taken it on myself to begin by

advocating one which seemed so absurd? Or have I made these new

observations, which have obliged me to alter my original view, in theinterval between the first draft of the case history and this addition,

and am I for some reason or other unwilling to admit the fact? I will

admit something else instead: I intend on this occasion to close the

discussion of the reality of the primal scene with a non liquet. This

case history is not yet at an end; in its further course a factor will

emerge which will shake the certainty which we seem at present to

enjoy. Nothing, I think, will then be left but to refer my readers to the

passages  in  my Introductory  Lectures  in  which  I  have  treated  the

problem of primal phantasies or primal scenes.]

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3546

 

                                            VI

 

                      THE OBSESSIONAL NEUROSIS

 

Now for the third time the patient came under a new influence that

gave a decisive turn to his development. When he was four and a half

years old, and as his state of irritability and apprehensiveness had still

not improved, his mother determined to make him acquainted with the

Bible story in the hope of distracting and elevating him. Moreover, she

succeeded; his initiation into religion brought the previous phase to an

end,  but  at  the  same  time  it  led  to  the  anxiety  symptoms  being

replaced by obsessional symptoms. Up to then he had not been able

to  get  to  sleep  easily  because  he  had  been  afraid  of  having  bad

dreams like the one he had had that night before Christmas; now he

was obliged before he went to bed to kiss all the holy pictures in the

room, to recite prayers, and to make innumerable signs of the cross

upon himself and upon his bed.

   His childhood now falls clearly into the following epochs: first, the

earliest period up to the seduction when he was three and a quarter

years  old,  during  which  the  primal  scene  took  place;  secondly,  the

period of the alteration in his character up to the anxiety dream (four

years old); thirdly, the period of the animal phobia up to his initiation

into religion (four and a half years old); and from then onwards theperiod of the obsessional neurosis up to a time later than his tenth

year.  That  there  should  be  an  instantaneous  and  clear-cut

displacement of one phase by the next was not in the nature of things

or of our patient; on the contrary, the preservation of all that had gone

before  and  the  co-existence  of  the  most  different  sorts  of  currents

were characteristic of him. His naughtiness did not disappear when

the anxiety set in, and persisted with slowly diminishing force during

the period of piety. But there was no longer any question of a wolf

phobia during this last phase. The obsessional neurosis ran its course

discontinuously; the first attack was the longest and most intense, and

others came on when he was eight and ten, following each time upon

exciting causes which stood in a clear relationship to the content of

the neurosis.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3547

 

   His mother told him the sacred story herself, and also made his

Nanya  read  aloud  to  him  about  it  out  of  a  book  adorned  with

illustrations.  The  chief  emphasis  in  the  narrative  was  naturally  laid

upon the story of the passion. His Nanya, who was very pious and

superstitious, added her own commentary on it, but was also obliged

to  listen  to  all  the  little  critic’s  objections  and  doubts.  If  the  battles

which now began to convulse his mind finally ended in a victory for

faith, his Nanya’s influence was not without its share in this result.

   What he related to me as his recollection of his reactions to this

initiation  was  met  by  me  at  first  with  complete  disbelief.  It  was

impossible, I thought, that these could have been the thoughts of a

child of four and a half or five; he had probably referred back to this

remote past the thoughts which had arisen from the reflections of a

grown man of thirty.¹ But the patient would not hear of this correction; I

could not succeed, as in so many other differences of opinion between

us, in convincing him; and in the end the correspondence between the

thoughts  which  he  had  recollected  and  the  symptoms  of  which  he

gave particulars, as well as the way in which the thoughts fitted into

his  sexual  development,  compelled  me  on  the  contrary  to  come  tobelieve  him.  And  I  then  reflected  that  this  very  criticism  of  the

doctrines of religion, which I was unwilling to ascribe to the child, was

only achieved by an infinitesimal minority of adults.

   I shall now bring forward the material of his recollections, and not

until afterwards try to find some path that may lead to an explanation

of them.

   The impression which he received from the sacred story was, to

begin with, as he reported, by no means an agreeable one. He set his

face, in the first place, against the feature of suffering in the figure of

Christ, and then against his story as a whole. He turned his critical

dissatisfaction against God the Father. If he were almighty, then it was

his fault that men were wicked and tormented others and were sent to

Hell for it. He ought to have made them good; he was responsible

himself for all wickedness and all torments. The patient took objection

to the command that we should turn the other cheek if our right cheek

is smitten, and to the fact that Christ had wished on the Cross that the

cup  might  be  taken  away  from  him,  as  well  as  to  the  fact  that  no

miracle had taken place to prove that he was the Son of God. Thus his

acuteness  was  on  the  alert,  and  was  able  to  search  out  with

remorseless severity the weak points of the sacred narrative.

 

   ¹ I also repeatedly attempted to throw the patient’s whole story forward by one year at all

events, and in that way to refer the seduction to an age of four and a quarter, the dream to his
fifth birthday, etc. As regards the intervals between the events there was no possibility of
gaining any time. But the patient remained obdurate on the point, though he did not succeed
entirely in removing my doubts. A postponement like this for one year would obviously be of
no importance as regards the impression made by his story and as regards the discussion
and implications attached to it.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3548

 

      But  to  this  rationalistic  criticism  there  were  very  soon  added

ruminations and doubts, which betray to us that hidden impulses were

also at work. One of the first questions which he addressed to his

Nanya was whether Christ had had a behind too. His Nanya informed

him that he had been a god and also a man. As a man he had had

and done all the same things as other men. This did not satisfy him atall, but he succeeded in finding consolation of his own by saying to

himself that the behind is really only a continuation of the legs. But

hardly  had  he  pacified  his  dread  of  having  to  humiliate  the  sacred

figure, when it flared up again as the further question arose whether

Christ used to shit too. He did not venture to put this question to his

pious Nanya, but he himself found a way out, and she could not have

shown him a better. Since Christ had made wine out of nothing, he

could also have made food into nothing and in this way have avoided

defaecating.

   We shall be in a better position to understand these ruminations if

we return to a piece of his sexual development which we have already

mentioned.  We  know  that,  after  the  rebuff  from  his  Nanya  and  the

consequent  suppression  of  the  beginnings  of  genital  activity,  his

sexual life developed in the direction of sadism and masochism. He

tormented  and  ill-treated  small  animals,  imagined  himself  beating

horses, and on the other hand imagined the heir to the throne being

beaten.¹ In his sadism he maintained his ancient identification with his

father; but in his masochism he chose him as a sexual object. He was

deep in a phase of the pregenital organization which I regard as the

predisposition to obsessional neurosis. The operation of the dream,

which brought him under the influence of the primal scene, could have

led  him  to  make  the  advance  to  the  genital  organization,  and  to

transform his masochism towards his father into a feminine attitude

towards him - into homosexuality. But the dream did not bring about

this advance; it ended in a state of anxiety. His relation to his father

might have been expected to proceed from the sexual aim of being

beaten by him to the next aim, namely, that of being copulated with by

him  like  a  woman;  but  in  fact,  owing  to  the  opposition  of  his

narcissistic masculinity, this relation was thrown back to an even more

primitive stage. It was displaced on to a father-surrogate, and at the

same time split off in the shape of a fear of being eaten by the wolf.

But this by no means disposed of it. On the contrary, we can only do

justice to the apparent complexity of the state of affairs by bearing

firmly in mind the co-existence of the three sexual trends which were

directed by the boy towards his father. From the time of the dream

onwards, in his unconscious he was homosexual, and in his neurosis

he  was  at  the  level  of  cannibalism;  while  the  earlier  masochisticattitude remained the dominant one. All three currents had passive

sexual  aims;  there  was  the  same  object,  and  the  same  sexual

impulse, but that impulse had become split up along three different

levels.

 

 

   ¹ Especially on the penis (see p. 3517).

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3549

 

      His  knowledge  of  the  sacred  story  now  gave  him  a  chance  of

sublimating his predominant masochistic attitude towards his father.

He  became  Christ  -  which  was  made  specially  easy  for  him  on

account of their having the same birthday. Thus he became something

great and also (a fact upon which enough stress was not laid for the

moment) a man. We catch a glimpse of his repressed homosexual

attitude in his doubting whether Christ could have a behind, for these

ruminations can have had no other meaning but the question whether

he himself could be used by his father like a woman - like his mother

in  the  primal  scene.  When  we  come  to  the  solution  of  the  other

obsessional  ideas,  we  shall  find  this  interpretation  confirmed.  His

reflection that it was insulting to bring the sacred figure into relation

with such insinuations corresponded to the repression of his passive

homosexuality. It will be noticed that he was endeavouring to keep his

new sublimation free from the admixture which it derived from sources

in the repressed. But he was unsuccessful.

      We  do  not  as  yet  understand  why  he  also  rebelled  against  the

passive character of Christ and against his ill-treatment by his Father,

and in this way began also to renounce his previous masochistic ideal,

even in its sublimation. We may assume that this second conflict was

especially favourable to the emergence of the humiliating obsessional

thoughts from the first conflict (between the dominant masochistic and

the  repressed  homosexual  currents),  for  it  is  only  natural  that  in  a

mental  conflict  all  the  currents  upon  one  side  or  the  other  should

combine with one another, even though they have the most diverse

origins. Some fresh information teaches us the motive of this rebellingand at the same time of the criticisms which he levelled at religion.

   His sexual researches, too, gained something from what he was told

about the sacred story. So far he had had no reason for supposing

that children only came from women. On the contrary, his Nanya had

given him to believe that he was his father’s child, while his sister was

his mother’s; and this closer connection with his father had been very

precious to him. He now heard that Mary was called the Mother of

God. So all children came from women, and what his Nanya had said

to him was no longer tenable. Moreover, as a result of what he was

told, he was bewildered as to who Christ’s father really was. He was

inclined  to  think  it  we  Joseph,  as  he  heard  that  he  and  Mary  had

always lived together, but his Nanya said that Joseph was only ‘like’

his father and that his real father was God. He could make nothing of

that. He only understood this much: if the question was one that could

be argued about at all, then the relation between father and son could

not be such an intimate one as he had always imagined it to be.

   The boy had some kind of inkling of the ambivalent feelings towards

the father which are an underlying factor in all religions, and attacked

his  religion  on  account  of  the  slackening  which  it  implied  in  this

relation between son and father. Naturally his opposition soon ceased

to  take  the  form  of  doubting  the  truth  of  the  doctrine,  and  turned

instead directly against the figure of God. God had treated his son

harshly  and  cruelly,  but  he  was  no  better  towards  men;  he  had

sacrificed his own son and had ordered Abraham to do the same. He

began to fear God.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3550

 

   If he was Christ, then his father was God. But the God which religion

forced upon him was not a true substitute for the father whom he had

loved and whom he did not want to have stolen from him. His love for

this father of his gave him his critical acuteness. He resisted God in

order to be able to cling to his father; and in doing this he was really

upholding the old father against the new. He was faced by a trying

part of the process of detaching himself from his father.   His old love for his father, which had been manifest in his earliest

period, was therefore the source of his energy in struggling against

God and of his acuteness in criticizing religion. But on the other hand

this hostility to the new God was not an original reaction either; it had

its prototype in a hostile impulse against his father, which had come

into existence under the influence of the anxiety-dream, and it was at

bottom only a revival of that impulse. The two opposing currents of

feeling, which were to rule the whole of his later life, met here in the

ambivalent  struggle  over  the  question  of  religion.  It  followed,

moreover, that what this struggle produced in the shape of symptoms

(the  blasphemous  ideas,  the  compulsion  which  came  over  him  of

thinking ‘God-shit’, ‘God-swine’) were genuine compromise-products,

as we shall see from the analysis of these ideas in connection with his

anal erotism.

   Some other obsessional symptoms of a less typical sort pointed with

equal  certainty  to  his  father,  while  at  the  same  time  showing  the

connection  between  the  obsessional  neurosis  and  the  earlier

occurrences.

   A part of the pious ritual by means of which he eventually atoned for

his  blasphemies  was  the  command  to  breathe  in  a  ceremonious

manner under certain conditions. Each time he made the sign of the

cross he was obliged to breathe in deeply or to exhale forcibly. In his

native tongue ‘breath’ is the same word as ‘spirit’, so that here the

Holy Ghost came in. He was obliged to breathe in the Holy Spirit, or to

breathe out the evil spirits which he had heard and read about.¹ He

ascribed too to these evil spirits the blasphemous thoughts for which

he had to inflict such heavy penance upon himself. He was, however,

also obliged to exhale when he saw beggars, or cripples, or ugly, old,

or wretched-looking people; but he could think of no way of connecting

this  obsession  with  the  spirits.  The  only  account  he  could  give  to

himself was that he did it so as not to become like such people.

   Eventually, in connection with a dream, the analysis elicited the

information that the breathing out at the sight of pitiable-looking people

had begun only after his sixth year and was related to his father. He

had not seen his father for many months, when one day his mother

said she was going to take the children with her to the town and show

them something that would very much please them. She then tookthem to a sanatorium, where they saw their father again; he looked ill,

and the boy felt very sorry for him. His father was thus the prototype of

all the cripples, beggars, and poor people in whose presence he was

obliged to breathe out; just as a father is the prototype of the bogies

that people see in anxiety states, and of the caricatures that are drawn

to bring derision upon some one. We shall learn elsewhere that this

attitude  of  compassion  was  derived  from  a  particular  detail  of  the

primal scene, a detail which only became operative in the obsessional

neurosis at this late moment.

   Thus his determination not to become like cripples (which was the

motive of his breathing out in their presence) was his old identification

with his father transformed into the negative. But in so doing he was

also copying his father in the positive sense, for the heavy breathing

was an imitation of the noise which he had heard coming from his

father during the intercourse.² He had derived the Holy Ghost from this

manifestation of male sensual excitement. Repression had turned this

breathing  into  an  evil  spirit,  which  had  another  genealogy  as  well:

namely, the malaria from which he had been suffering at the time of

the primal scene.

 

   ¹ This symptom, as we shall hear, had developed after his sixth year and when he could

already read.

   ² Assuming the reality of the primal scene.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3551

 

   His repudiation of these evil spirits corresponded to an unmistakable

strain  of  asceticism  in  him  which  also  found  expression  in  other

reactions.  When  he  heard  that  Christ  had  once  cast  out  some  evil

spirits into a herd of swine which then rushed down a precipice, he

thought of how his sister in the earliest years of her childhood, before

he could remember, had rolled down on to the beach from the cliff-

path above the harbour. She too was an evil spirit and a swine. It was

a short road from here to ‘God-swine’. His father himself had shown

that he was no less of a slave to sensuality. When he was told the

story of the first of mankind he was struck by the similarity of his lot toAdam’s.  In  conversation  with  his  Nanya  he  professed  hypocritical

surprise that Adam should have allowed himself to be dragged into

misfortune by a woman, and promised her that he would never marry.

A hostility towards women, due to his seduction by his sister, found

strong expression at this time. And it was destined to disturb him often

enough in his later erotic life. His sister came to be the permanent

embodiment  for  him  of  temptation  and  sin.  After  he  had  been  to

confession he seemed to himself pure and free from sin. But then it

appeared to him as though his sister were lying in wait to drag him

again into sin, and in a moment he had provoked a quarrel with her

which made him sinful once more. Thus he was obliged to keep on

reproducing the event of his seduction over and over again. Moreover,

he had never given away his blasphemous thoughts at confession, in

spite of their being such a weight on his mind.

   We have been led unawares into a consideration of the symptoms of

the  later  years  of  the  obsessional  neurosis;  and  we  shall  therefore

pass over the occurrences of the intervening period and shall proceed

to  describe  its  termination.  We  already  know  that,  apart  from  its

permanent strength, it underwent occasional intensifications: once -

though the episode must for the present remain obscure to us - at the

time of the death of a boy living in the same street, with whom he was

able to identify himself. When he was ten years old he had a German

tutor, who very soon obtained a great influence over him. It is most

instructive to observe that the whole of his strict piety dwindled away,

never  to  be  revived,  after  he  had  noticed  and  had  learnt  from

enlightening  conversations  with  his  tutor  that  this  father  surrogate

attached  no  importance  to  piety  and  set  no  store  by  the  truth  of

religion.  His  piety  sank  away  along  with  his  dependence  upon  his

father, who was now replaced by a new and more sociable father.

This  did  not  take  place,  however,  without  one  last  flicker  of  the

obsessional neurosis; and from this he particularly remembered the

obsession of having to think of the Holy Trinity whenever he saw three

heaps of dung lying together in the road. In fact he never gave way to

fresh ideas without making one last attempt at clinging to what had

lost  its  values  for  him.  When  his  tutor  discouraged  him  from  his

cruelties to small animals he did indeed put an end to those misdeeds,

but  not  until  he  had  again  cut  up  caterpillars  for  a  last  time  to  histhorough satisfaction. He still behaved in just the same way during the

analytic  treatment,  for  he  showed  a  habit  of  producing  transitory

‘negative  reactions’;  every  time  something  had  been  conclusively

cleared up, he attempted to contradict the effect for a short while by

an aggravation of the symptom which had been cleared up. It is quite

the rule, as we know, for children to treat prohibitions in the same kind

of way. When they have been rebuked for something (for instance,

because they are making an unbearable din), they repeat it once more

after the prohibition before stopping it. In this way they gain the point

of  apparently  stopping  of  their  own  accord  and  of  disobeying  the

prohibition.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3552

 

   Under the German tutor’s influence there arose a new and better

sublimation  of  the  patient’s  sadism  which,  with  the  approach  of

puberty,  had  then  gained  the  upper  hand  over  his  masochism.  He

developed an enthusiasm for military affairs, for uniforms, weapons

and horses, and used them as food for continual day-dreams. Thus,

under a man’s influence, he had got free from his passive attitudes,

and found himself for the time being on fairly normal lines. It was as

an  after-effect  of  his  affection  for  the  tutor,  who  left  him  soon

afterwards, that in his later life he preferred German things (as, for

instance,  physicians,  sanatoria,  women)  to  those  belonging  to  his

native country (representing his father) - a fact which was incidentally

of great advantage to the transference during the treatment.

   There was another dream, which belongs to the period before his

emancipation  by  the  tutor,  and  which  I  mention  because  it  was

forgotten until its appearance during the treatment. He saw himself

riding on a horse and pursued by a gigantic caterpillar. He recognized

in this dream an allusion to an earlier one from the period before the

tutor, which we had interpreted long before. In this earlier dream he

saw the Devil dressed in black and in the upright posture with which

the wolf and the lion had terrified him so much in their day. He was

pointing with his out-stretched finger at a gigantic snail. The patienthad soon guessed that this Devil was the Demon out of a well-known

poem, and that the dream itself was a version of a very popular picture

representing the Demon in a love-scene with a girl. The snail was in

the woman’s place, as being a perfect female sexual symbol. Guided

by the Demon’s pointing gesture, we were soon able to give as the

dream’s  meaning  that  the  patient  was  longing  for  some  one  who

should give him the last pieces of information that were still missing

upon the riddle of sexual intercourse, just as his father had given him

the first in the primal scene long before.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3553

 

   In connection with the later dream, in which the female symbol was

replaced by the male one, he remembered a particular event which

had occurred a short time before the dream. Riding on the estate one

day,  he  passed  a  peasant  who  was  lying  asleep  with  his  little  boy

beside  him.  The  latter  woke  his  father  and  said  something  to  him,

whereupon the father began to abuse the rider and to pursue him till

he rode off hastily. There was also a second recollection, that on the

same estate there were trees that were quite white, spun all over by

caterpillars. We can see that he took flight from the realization of the

phantasy of the son lying with his father, and that he brought in the

white trees in order to make an allusion to the anxiety dream of the

white wolves on the walnut tree. It was thus a direct outbreak of dread

of  the  feminine  attitude  towards  men  against  which  he  had  at  first

protected himself by his religious sublimation and was soon to protect

himself still more effectively by the military one.

   It would, however, be a great mistake to suppose that after the

removal  of  the  obsessional  symptoms  no  permanent  effects  of  the

obsessional  neurosis  remained  behind.  The  process  had  led  to  a

victory for the faith of piety over the rebelliousness of critical research,

and  had  had  the  repression  of  the  homosexual  attitude  as  its

necessary condition. Lasting disadvantages resulted from both these

factors. His intellectual activity remained seriously impaired after this

first great defeat. He developed no zeal for learning, he showed nomore of the acuteness with which at the tender age of five he had

criticized and dissected the doctrines of religion. The repression of his

over-powerful  homosexuality,  which  was  accomplished  during  the

anxiety-dream, reserved that important impulse for the unconscious,

kept it directed towards its original aim, and withdrew it from all the

sublimations to which it is susceptible in other circumstances. For this

reason the patient was without all those social interests which give a

content  to  life.  It  was  only  when,  during  the  analytic  treatment,  it

became possible to liberate his shackled homosexuality that this state

of  affairs  showed  any  improvement;  and  it  was  a  most  remarkable

experience to see how (without any direct advice from the physician)

each piece of homosexual libido which was set free sought out some

application in life and some attachment to the great common concerns

of mankind.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3554

 

                                          VII

 

          ANAL EROTISM AND THE CASTRATION COMPLEX

 

I must beg the reader to bear in mind that I obtained this history of an

infantile neurosis as a by-product, so to speak, during the analysis of

an  illness  in  mature  years.  I  have  therefore  been  obliged  to  put  it

together  from  even  smaller  fragments  than  are  usually  at  one’s

disposal for purposes of synthesis. This task, which is not difficult in

other respects, finds a natural limit when it is a question of forcing a

structure which is itself in many dimensions on to the two-dimensional

descriptive  plane.  I  must  therefore  content  myself  with  bringing

forward fragmentary portions, which the reader can then put together

into a living whole. The obsessional neurosis that has been described

grew  up,  as  has  been  repeatedly  emphasized,  on  the  basis  of  a

sadistic-anal constitution. But we have hitherto discussed only one of

the two chief factors - the patient’s sadism and its transformations.

Everything that concerns his anal erotism has intentionally been lefton one side so that it might be brought together and discussed at this

later stage.

      Analysts  have  long  been  agreed  that  the  multifarious  instinctual

impulses which are comprised under the name of anal erotism play an

extraordinarily important part, which it would be quite impossible to

over-estimate, in building up sexual life and mental activity in general.

It is equally agreed that one of the most important manifestations of

the transformed erotism derived from this source is to be found in the

treatment  of  money,  for  in  the  course  of  life  this  precious  material

attracts on to itself the psychical interest which was originally proper to

faeces,  the  product  of  the  anal  zone.  We  are  accustomed  to  trace

back interest in money, in so far as it is of a libidinal and not of a

rational  character,  to  excretory  pleasure,  and  we  expect  normal

people  to  keep  their  relations  to  money  entirely  free  from  libidinal

influences and regulate them according to the demands of reality.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3555

 

   In our patient, at the time of his later illness, these relations were

disturbed to a particularly severe degree, and this fact was not the

least  considerable  element  in  his  lack  of  independence  and  his

incapacity  for  dealing  with  life.  He  had  become  very  rich  through

legacies from his father and uncle; it was obvious that he attached

great importance to being taken for rich, and he was liable to feel very

much hurt if he was undervalued in this respect. But he had no idea

how much he possessed, what his expenditure was, or what balance

was left over. It was hard to say whether he ought to be called a miser

or a spendthrift. He behaved now in this way and now in that, but

never in a way that seemed to show any consistent intention. Some

striking traits, which I shall further discuss below, might have led one

to regard him as a hardened plutocrat, who considered his wealth as

his greatest personal advantage, and who would never for a moment

allow emotional interests to weigh against pecuniary ones. Yet he did

not value other people by their wealth, and, on the contrary, showed

himself  on  many  occasions  unassuming,  helpful,  and  charitable.Money, in fact, had been withdrawn from his conscious control, and

meant for him something quite different.

   I have already mentioned that I viewed with grave suspicion the way

in  which  he  consoled  himself  for  the  loss  of  his  sister,  who  had

become  his  closest  companion  during  her  latter  years,  with  the

reflection that now he would not have to share his parents’ inheritance

with her. But what was perhaps even more striking was the calmness

with  which  he  was  able  to  relate  this,  as  though  he  had  no

comprehension  of  the  coarseness  of  feeling  to  which  he  was  thus

confessing. It is true that analysis rehabilitated him by showing that his

grief for his sister had merely undergone a displacement; but it then

became  quite  inexplicable  why  he  should  have  tried  to  find  a

substitute for his sister in an increase of wealth.

   He himself was puzzled by his behaviour in another connection.

After his father’s death the property that was left was divided between

him and his mother. His mother administered it, and, as he himself

admitted, met his pecuniary claims irreproachably and liberally. Yet

every discussion of money matters that took place between them used

to end with the most violent reproaches on his side, to the effect that

she did not love him, that she was trying to economize at his expense,

and that she would probably rather see him dead to as so have sole

control  over  the  money.  His  mother  used  then  to  protect  her

disinterestedness with tears, and he would thereupon grow ashamed

of himself and declare with justice that he thought nothing of the sort

of  her.  But  he  was  sure  to  repeat  the  same  scene  at  the  first

opportunity.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3556

 

   Many incidents, of which I will relate two, show that, for a long time

before the analysis, faeces had had this significance of money for him.

At a time when his bowel as yet played no part in his complaint, he

once paid a visit to a poor cousin of his in a large town. As he left him

he reproached himself for not giving this relative financial support, and

immediately afterwards had what was ‘perhaps the most urgent needfor relieving his bowels that he had experienced in his life’. Two years

later he did in fact settle an annuity upon this cousin. Here is the other

case. At the age of eighteen, while he was preparing for his leaving-

examination at school, he visited a friend and came to an agreement

with him on a plan which seemed advisable on account of the dread

which they shared of failing in the examination.¹ It had been decided

to bribe the school servant, and the patient’s share of the sum to be

provided  was  naturally  the  larger.  On  the  way  home  he  thought  to

himself  that  he  should  be  glad  to  give  even  more  if  only  he  could

succeed in getting through, if only he could be sure that nothing would

happen to him in the examination - and an accident of another sort

really did happen to him ² before he reached his own front door.

   We shall be prepared to hear that during his later illness he suffered

from disturbances of his intestinal function which were very obstinate,

though various circumstances caused them to fluctuate in intensity.

When he came under my treatment he had become accustomed to

enemas,  which  were  given  him  by  an  attendant;  spontaneous

evacuations  did  not  occur  for  months  at  a  time,  unless  a  sudden

excitement from some particular direction intervened, as a result of

which normal activity of the bowels might set in for a few days. His

principal subject of complaint was that for him the world was hidden in

a veil, or that he was cut off from the world by a veil. This veil was torn

only at one moment - when, after an enema, the contents of the bowel

left the intestinal canal; and he then felt well and normal again.³

 

   ¹ The patient informed me that his native tongue has no parallel to the familiar German use

of ‘Durchfall’ as a description for disturbance of the bowels.

   ² This expression has the same meaning in the patient’s native tongue as in German.

   ³ The effect was the same whether he had the enema given him by some one else or

whether he managed it himself.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3557

 

   The colleague to whom I referred the patient for a report upon his

intestinal condition was perspicacious enough to explain it as being a

functional one, or even psychically determined, and to abstain fromany active medicinal treatment. Moreover, neither this nor dieting were

of  any  use.  During  the  years  of  analytic  treatment  there  was  no

spontaneous  motion  apart  from  the  sudden  influences  that  I  have

mentioned.  The  patient  allowed  himself  to  be  convinced  that  if  the

intractable organ received more intensive treatment things would only

be made worse, and contented himself with bringing on an evacuation

once or twice a week by means of an enema or a purgative.

   In discussing these intestinal troubles I have given more space to

the  patient’s  later  illness  than  has  been  my  plan  elsewhere  in  this

work, which is concerned with his infantile neurosis. I have done so for

two reasons: first, because the intestinal symptoms were in point of

fact carried forward from the infantile neurosis into the later one with

little alteration, and secondly, because they played a principal part in

the conclusion of the treatment.

   We know how important doubt is to the physician who is analysing

an  obsessional  neurosis.  It  is  the  patient’s  strongest  weapon,  the

favourite expedient of his resistance. This same doubt enabled our

patient to lie entrenched behind a respectful indifference and to allow

the efforts of the treatment to slip past him for years together. Nothing

changed, and there was no way of convincing him. At last I recognized

the importance of the intestinal trouble for my purposes; it represented

the small trait of hysteria which is regularly to be found at the root of

an obsessional neurosis. I promised the patient a complete recovery

of  his  intestinal  activity,  and  by  means  of  this  promise  made  his

incredulity manifest. I then had the satisfaction of seeing his doubt

dwindle away, as in the course of the work his bowel began, like a

hysterically affected organ, to ‘join in the conversation’, and in a few

week’s time recovered its normal functions after their long impairment.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3558

 

   I now turn back to the patient’s childhood - to a time at which it was

impossible that faeces could have had the significance of money for

him.

   Intestinal disorders set in very early with him, and especially in theform which is the most frequent and, among children, the most normal

-  namely,  incontinence.  We  shall  certainly  be  right,  however,  in

rejecting a pathological explanation of these earliest occurrences, and

in regarding them only as evidence of the patient’s intention not to let

himself  be  disturbed  or  checked  in  the  pleasure  attached  to  the

function of evacuation. He found a great deal of enjoyment (such as

would tally with the natural coarseness of many classes of society,

though not of his) in anal jokes and exhibitions, and this enjoyment

had been retained by him until after the beginning of his later illness.

   During the time of the English governess it repeatedly happened

that he and his Nanya had to share that obnoxious lady’s bedroom.

His Nanya noticed with comprehension the fact that precisely on those

nights he made a mess in his bed, though otherwise this had ceased

to happen a long time before. He was not in the least ashamed of it; it

was an expression of defiance against the governess.

   A year later (when he was four and a half), during the anxiety period,

he happened to make a mess in his knickerbockers in the day-time.

He was terribly ashamed of himself, and as he was being cleaned he

moaned  that  he  could  not  go  on  living  like  that.  So  that  in  the

meantime something had changed; and by following up his lament we

came upon the traces of this something. It turned out that the words

‘he could not go on living like that’ were repeated from some one else.

His mother had once ¹ taken him with her when she was walking down

to the station with the doctor who had come to visit her. During this

walk she had lamented over her pains and haemorrhages and had

broken out in the same words, ‘ I cannot go on living like this’, without

imagining that the child whose hand she was holding would keep them

in his memory. Thus his lament (which, moreover, he was to repeat on

innumerable occasions during his later illness) had the significance of

an identification with his mother.

 

   ¹ When this happened was not exactly fixed; but in any case before the anxiety-dream

when he was four, and probably before his parents’ absence from home.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3559

       There  soon  appeared  in  his  recollection  what  was  evidently,  in

respect both of its date and of its content, a missing intermediate link

between these two events. It once happened at the beginning of his

anxiety  period  that  his  apprehensive  mother  gave  orders  that

precautions were to be taken to protect the children from dysentery,

which had made its appearance in the neighbourhood of the estate.

He made enquiries as to what that might be; and after hearing that

when you have dysentery you find blood in your stool he became very

nervous and declared that there was blood in his own stool; he was

afraid he would die of dysentery, but allowed himself to be convinced

by an examination that he had made a mistake and had no need to be

frightened. We can see that in this dread he was trying to put into

effect an identification with his mother, whose haemorrhages he had

heard about in the conversation with her doctor. In his later attempt at

identification  (when  he  was  four  and  a  half)  he  had  dropped  any

mention  of  the  blood;  he  no  longer  understood  himself,  for  he

imagined that he was ashamed of himself and was not aware that he

was being shaken by a dread of death, though this was unmistakably

revealed in his lament.

   At that time his mother, suffering as she was from an abdominal

affection, was in general nervous, both about herself and the children;

it  is  most  probable  that  his  own  nervousness,  besides  its  other

motives, was based on an identification with his mother.

   Now what can have been the meaning of this identification with his

mother?

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3560

 

   Between the impudent use he made of his incontinence when he

was three and a half, and the horror with which he viewed it when he

was four and a half, there lies the dream with which his anxiety period

began - the dream which gave him a deferred comprehension of the

scene he had experienced when he was one and a half (p. 3533), and

an explanation of the part played by women in the sexual act. It is only

another step to connect the change in his attitude towards defaecationwith this same great revulsion. Dysentery was evidently his name for

the illness which he had heard his mother lamenting about, and which

it was impossible to go on living with; he did not regard his mother’s

disease  as  being  abdominal  but  as  being  intestinal.  Under  the

influence  of  the  primal  scene  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  his

mother had been made ill by what his father had done to her;¹ and his

dread of having blood in his stool, of being as ill as his mother, was his

repudiation of being identified with her in this sexual scene - the same

repudiation with which he awoke from the dream. But the dread was

also a proof that in his later elaboration of the primal scene he had put

himself in his mother’s place and had envied her this relation with his

father. The organ by which his identification with women, his passive

homosexual attitude to men, was able to express itself was the anal

zone.  The  disorders  in  the  function  of  this  zone  had  acquired  the

significance of feminine impulses of tenderness, and they retained it

during the later illness as well.

   At this point we must consider an objection, the discussion of which

may contribute much to the elucidation of the apparent confusion of

the circumstances. We have been driven to assume that during the

process of the dream he understood that women are castrated, that

instead of a male organ they have a wound which serves for sexual

intercourse,  and  that  castration  is  the  necessary  condition  of

femininity; we have been driven to assume that the threat of this loss

induced him to repress his feminine attitude towards men, and that he

awoke from his homosexual enthusiasm in anxiety. Now how can this

comprehension of sexual intercourse, this recognition of the vagina,

be  brought  into  harmony  with  the  selection  of  the  bowel  for  the

purpose of identification with women? Are not the intestinal symptoms

based on what is probably an older notion, and one which in any case

completely contradicts the dread of castration - the notion, namely,

that sexual intercourse takes place at the anus?

   To be sure, this contradiction is present; and the two views are

entirely  inconsistent  with  each  other.  The  only  question  is  whether

they need be consistent. Our bewilderment arises only because we

are  always  inclined  to  treat  unconscious  mental  processes  like

conscious ones and to forget the profound differences between the

two psychical systems. 

   ¹ A conclusion which was probably not far from the truth.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3561

 

   When his Christmas dream, with its excitement and expectancy,

conjured up before him the picture of the sexual intercourse of his

parents as it had once been observed (or construed) by him, there can

be  no  doubt  that  the  first  view  of  it  to  come  up  was  the  old  one,

according to which the part of the female body which received the

male  organ  was  the  anus.  And,  indeed,  what  else  could  he  have

supposed when at the age of one and a half he was a spectator of the

scene?¹ But now came the new event that occurred when he was four

years old. What he had learnt in the meantime, the allusions which he

had  heard  to  castration,  awoke  and  cast  a  doubt  on  the  ‘cloacal

theory’; they brought to his notice the difference between the sexes

and the sexual part played by women. In this contingency he behaved

as children in general behave when they are given an unwished for

piece of information - whether sexual or of any other kind. He rejected

what was new (in our case from motives connected with his fear of

castration) and clung fast to what was old. He decided in favour of the

intestine and against the vagina, just as, for similar motives, he later

on took his father’s side against God. He rejected the new information

and clung to the old theory. The latter must have provided the material

for his identification with women, which made its appearance later as

a  dread  of  death  in  connection  with  the  bowels,  and  for  his  first

religious scruples, about whether Christ had had a behind, and so on.

It is not that his new insight remained without any effect; quite the

reverse. It developed an extraordinarily powerful effect, for it became

a motive for keeping the whole process of the dream under repression

and for excluding it from being worked over later in consciousness.

But with that its effect was exhausted; it had no influence in deciding

the sexual problem. That it should have been possible from that time

onwards  for  a  fear  of  castration  to  exist  side  by  side  with  an

identification with women by means of the bowel admittedly involved a

contradiction.  But  it  was  only  a  logical  contradiction  -  which  is  notsaying much. On the contrary, the whole process is characteristic of

the way in which the unconscious works. A repression is something

very different from a condemning judgement.

 

   ¹ Or so long as he did not grasp the sense of the copulation between the dogs.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3562

 

   When we were studying the genesis of the wolf phobia, we followed

the effect of his new insight into the sexual act; but now that we are

investigating  the  disturbances  of  the  intestinal  function,  we  find

ourselves  working  on  the  basis  of  the  old  cloacal  theory.  The  two

points  of  view  remained  separated  from  each  other  by  a  stage  of

repression.  His  feminine  attitude  towards  men,  which  had  been

repudiated by the act of repression, drew back, as it were, into the

intestinal symptoms, and expressed itself in the attacks of diarrhoea,

constipation, and intestinal pain, which were so frequent during the

patient’s childhood. His later sexual phantasies, which were based on

a correct sexual knowledge, were thus able to express themselves

regressively  as  intestinal  troubles.  But  we  cannot  understand  them

until  we  have  explained  the  modifications  which  take  place  in  the

significance of faeces from the first years of childhood onward.¹

   I have already hinted at an earlier point in my story that one portion

of the content of the primal scene has been kept back. I am now in a

position to produce this missing portion. The child finally interrupted

his parents’ intercourse by passing a stool, which gave him an excuse

for  screaming.  All  the  considerations  which  I  have  raised  above  in

discussing the rest of the content of the same scene apply equally to

the  criticism  of  this  additional  piece.  The  patient  accepted  this

concluding act when I had constructed it, and appeared to confirm it

by producing ‘transitory symptoms’. A further additional piece which I

had  proposed,  to  the  effect  that  his  father  was  annoyed  at  the

interruption and gave vent to his ill-humour by scolding him, had to be

dropped. The material of the analysis did not react to it.

   The additional detail which I have now brought forward cannot of

course be put on a level with the rest of the content of the scene. Hereit  is  not  a  question  of  an  impression  from  outside,  which  must  be

expected  to  re-emerge  in  a  number  of  later  indications,  but  of  a

reaction on the part of the child himself. It would make no difference to

the story as a whole if this demonstration had not occurred, or if it had

been  taken  from  a  later  period  and  inserted  into  the  course  of  the

scene. But there can be no question of how we are to regard it. It is a

sign of a state of excitement of the anal zone (in the widest sense). In

other similar cases an observation like this of sexual intercourse has

ended  with  a  discharge  of  urine;  a  grown-up  man  in  the  same

circumstances  would  feel  an  erection.  The  fact  that  our  little  boy

passed a stool as a sign of his sexual excitement is to be regarded as

a  characteristic  of  his  congenital  sexual  constitution.  He  at  once

assumed a passive attitude, and showed more inclination towards a

subsequent identification with women than with men.

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘On Transformations of Instinct as Exemplified in Anal Erotism’ (1917c).

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3563

 

   At the same time, like every other child, he was making use of the

content  of  the  intestines  in  one  of  its  earliest  and  most  primitive

meanings. Faeces are the child’s first gift, the first sacrifice on behalf

of his affection, a portion of his own body which he is ready to part

with, but only for the sake of some one he loves.¹ To use faeces as an

expression of defiance, as our patient did against the governess when

he was three and a half, is merely to turn this earlier ‘gift’ meaning into

the negative. The ‘grumus merdae’  [heap  of  faeces]  left  behind  by

criminals upon the scene of their misdeeds seems to have both these

meanings:  contumely,  and  a  regressive  expression  of  making

amends. It is always possible, when a higher stage has been reached,

for use still to be made of the lower one in its negative and debased

sense. The contrariety is a manifestation of repression.²

 

   ¹ I believe these can be no difficulty in substantiating the statement that infants only soil

with their excrement people whom they know and are fond of; they do not consider strangers
worthy of this distinction. In my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d) I mentionedthe very first purpose to which faeces are put - namely, the auto-erotic stimulation of the
intestinal mucous membrane. We now reach a further stage, at which a decisive part in the
process of defaecation is played by the child’s attitude to some object to whom he thus shows
himself obedient or agreeable. This relation is one that persists; for even older children will
only  allow  themselves  to  be  assisted  in  defaecating  and  urinating  by  particular  privileged
persons, though in this connection the prospect of other forms of satisfaction is also involved.

   ² In the unconscious, as we are aware, ‘No’ does not exist, and there is no distinction

between contraries. Negation is only introduced by the process of repression.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3564

 

   At a later stage of sexual development faeces take on the meaning

of a baby. For babies, like faeces, are born through the anus. The ‘gift’

meaning  of  faeces  readily  admits  of  this  transformation.  It  is  a

common  usage  to  speak  of  a  baby  as  a  ‘gift’.  The  more  frequent

expression is that the woman has ‘given’ the man a baby; but in the

usage of the unconscious equal attention is justly paid to the other

aspect  of  the  relation,  namely,  to  the  woman  having  ‘received’  the

baby as a gift from the man.

      The  meaning  of  faeces  as money  branches  off  from  the  ‘gift’

meaning in another direction.

   The deeper significance of our patient’s early screen memory, to the

effect that he had his first fit of rage because he was not given enough

presents one Christmas, is now revealed to us. What he was feeling

the want of was sexual satisfaction, which he had taken as being anal.

His  sexual  researches  came  during  the  course  of  the  dream  to

understand what they had been prepared for finding before the dream,

namely, that the sexual act solved the problem of the origin of babies.

Even before the dream he had disliked babies. Once, when he had

come upon a small unfledged bird that had fallen out of its nest, he

had taken it for a human baby and been horrified at it. The analysis

showed that all small animals, such as caterpillars and insects, that he

had been so enraged with, had had the meaning of babies to him.¹ His

position in regard to his elder sister had given him every opportunity

for reflecting upon the relation between elder and younger children.

His  Nanya  had  once  told  him  that  his  mother  was  so  fond  of  him

because he was the youngest, and this gave him good grounds forwishing that no younger child might come after him. His dread of this

youngest child was revived under the influence of the dream which

brought up before him his parents’ intercourse.

      To  the  sexual  currents  that  are  already  known  to  us  we  must

therefore  add  a  further  one,  which,  like  the  rest,  started  from  the

primal scene reproduced in the dream. In his identification with women

(that is, with his mother) he was ready to give his father a baby, and

was  jealous  of  his  mother,  who  had  already  done  so  and  would

perhaps do so again.

 

   ¹ Just as vermin often stands for babies in dreams and phobias.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3565

 

   In a roundabout way, since both ‘money’ and ‘baby’ have the sense

of  ‘gift’,  money  can  take  over  the  meaning  of  baby  and  can  thus

become the means of expressing feminine (homosexual) satisfaction.

This was what occurred with our patient when - he and his sister were

staying at a German sanatorium at the time - he saw his father give

his  sister  two  large  bank  notes.  In  imagination  he  had  always  had

suspicions  of  his  father’s  relations  with  his  sister;  and  at  this  his

jealousy awoke. He rushed at his sister as soon as they were alone,

and demanded a share of the money with so much vehemence and

such reproaches that his sister, in tears, threw him the whole of it.

What had excited him was not merely the actual money, but rather the

‘baby’ - anal sexual satisfaction from his father. And he was able to

console himself with this when, in his father’s lifetime, his sister died.

The revolting thought which occurred to him when he heard the news

of her death in fact meant no more than this: ‘Now I am the only child.

Now Father will have to love me only.’ But though his reflection was in

itself  perfectly  capable  of  becoming  conscious,  yet  its  homosexual

background was so intolerable that it was possible for its disguise in

the shape of the most sordid avarice to come as a great relief.

      Similarly,  too,  when  after  his  father’s  death  he  reproached  his

mother so unjustifiably with wanting to cheat him out of the money and

with being fonder of the money than of him. His old jealousy of her forhaving loved another child besides him, the possibility of her having

wanted another child after him, drove him into making charges which

he himself knew were unwarranted.

      This  analysis  of  the  meaning  of  faeces  makes  it  clear  that  the

obsessive thoughts which obliged him to connect God with faeces had

a further significance beyond the disparagement which he saw in them

himself. They were in fact true compromise-products, in which a part

was played no less by an affectionate current of devotion than by a

hostile current of abuse. ‘God-shit’ was probably an abbreviation for

an offering that one occasionally hears mentioned in its unabbreviated

form. ‘Shitting on God’ [‘auf Gott scheissen’] or ‘shitting something for

God’ [‘Gott etwas scheissen’] also means giving him a baby or getting

him  to  give  one  a  baby.  The  old  ‘gift’  meaning  in  its  negative  and

debased form and the ‘baby’ meaning that was later developed from it

are combined with each other in the obsessional phrase. In the latter

of  these  meanings  a  feminine  tenderness  finds  expression:  a

readiness to give up one’s masculinity if in exchange for it one can be

loved like a woman. Here, then, we have precisely the same impulse

towards  God  which  was  expressed  in  unambiguous  words  in  the

delusional system of the paranoic Senatspräsident Schreber.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3566

 

      When  later  on  I  come  to  describing  the  final  clearing  up  of  my

patient’s symptoms, the way in which the intestinal disorder had put

itself  at  the  service  of  the  homosexual  current  and  had  given

expression to his feminine attitude towards his father will once again

become  evident.  Meanwhile  we  shall  mention  a  further  meaning  of

faeces, which will lead us on to a discussion of the castration complex.

      Since  the  column  of  faeces  stimulates  the  erotogenic  mucous

membrane of the bowel, it plays the part of an active organ in regard

to  it;  it  behaves  just  as  the  penis  does  to  the  vaginal  mucous

membrane, and acts as it were as its forerunner during the cloacal

epoch. The handing over of faeces for the sake of (out of love for)

some  one  else  becomes  a  prototype  of  castration;  it  is  the  firstoccasion upon which an individual parts with a piece of his own body ¹

in order to gain the favour of some other person whom he loves. So

that  a  person’s  love  of  his  own  penis,  which  is  in  other  respects

narcissistic, is not without an element of anal erotism. ‘Faeces’, ‘baby’

and ‘penis’ thus form a unity, an unconscious concept (sit venia verbo)

- the concept, namely, of ‘a little one’ that can become separated from

one’s body. Along these paths of association the libidinal cathexis may

become  displaced  or  intensified  in  ways  which  are  pathologically

important and which are revealed by analysis.

   We are already acquainted with the attitude which our patient first

adopted to the problem of castration. He rejected castration, and held

to his theory of intercourse by the anus. When I speak of his having

rejected  it,  the  first  meaning  of  the  phrase  is  that  he  would  have

nothing to do with it, in the sense of having repressed it. This really

involved no judgement upon the question of its existence, but it was

the same as if it did not exist. Such an attitude, however, could not

have been his final one, even at the time of his infantile neurosis. We

find good subsequent evidence of his having recognized castration as

a  fact.  In  this  connection,  once  again,  he  behaved  in  the  manner

which was so characteristic of him, but which makes it so difficult to

give a clear account of his mental processes or to feel one’s way into

them. First he resisted and then he yielded; but the second reaction

did not do away with the first. In the end there were to be found in him

two contrary currents side by side, of which one abominated the idea

of castration, while the other was prepared to accept it and console

itself with femininity as a compensation. But beyond any doubt a third

current, the oldest and deepest, which did not as yet even raise the

question of the reality of castration, was still capable of coming into

activity. I have elsewhere ² reported a hallucination which this same

patient had at the age of five and upon which I need only add a brief

commentary here.

 

   ¹ It is as such that faeces are invariably treated by children.

   ² ‘Fausse Reconnaissance ("Déjà Raconté") in Psycho-Analytic Treatment’ (1914a).

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3567 

   ‘"When I was five years old, I was playing in the garden near my

nurse, and was carving with my pocket-knife in the bark of one of the

walnut-trees  that  come  into  my  dream  as  well.¹  Suddenly,  to  my

unspeakable terror, I noticed that I had cut through the little finger of

my (right or left?) hand, so that it was only hanging on by its skin. I felt

no pain, but great fear. I did not venture to say anything to my nurse,

who was only a few paces distant, but I sank down on the nearest

seat and sat there incapable of casting another glance at my finger. At

last  I  calmed  down,  took  a  look  at  the  finger,  and  saw  that  it  was

entirely uninjured."’

   After he had received his instruction in the Bible story at the age of

four and a half he began, as we know, to make the intense effort of

thought  which  ended  in  his  obsessional  piety.  We  may  therefore

assume  that  this  hallucination  belongs  to  the  period  in  which  he

brought himself to recognize the reality of castration and it is perhaps

to be regarded as actually marking this step. Even the small correction

made by the patient is not without interest. If he had a hallucination of

the  same  dreadful  experience  which  Tasso,  in  his Gerusaleme

Liberata, tells of his hero Tancred, we shall perhaps be justified in

reaching the interpretation that the tree meant a woman to my little

patient as well. Here, then, he was playing the part of his father, and

was connecting his mother’s familiar haemorrhages with the castration

of women, which he now recognized, - with the ‘wound’.

 

   ¹ ‘Cf. "The Occurrence in Dreams of Material from Fairy Tales". In telling the story again on

a later occasion he made the following correction: "I don’t believe I was cutting the tree. That
was a confusion with another recollection, which must also have been hallucinatorily falsified,

of having made a cut in a tree with my knife and of blood having come out of the tree."’

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3568

 

   His hallucination of the severed finger was instigated, as he reported

later on, by the story that a female relation of his had been born with

six  toes  and  that  the  extra  one  had  immediately  afterwards  been

chopped off with an axe. Women, then, had no penis because it wastaken away from them at birth. In this manner he came, at the period

of the obsessional neurosis, to accept what he had already learned

during the dream but had at the time rejected by repression. He must

also have become acquainted, during the readings and discussions of

the sacred story, with the ritual circumcision of Christ and of the Jews

in general.

   There is no doubt whatever that at this time his father was turning

into the terrifying figure that threatened him with castration. The cruel

God with whom he was then struggling - who made men sinful, only to

punish them afterwards, who sacrificed his own son and the sons of

men - this God threw back his character on to the patient’s father,

though, on the other hand, the boy was at the same time trying to

defend his father against the God. At this point the boy had to fit into a

phylogenetic  pattern,  and  he  did  so,  although  his  personal

experiences may not have agreed with it. Although the threats or hints

of castration which had come his way had emanated from women, ¹

this could not hold up the final result for long. In spite of everything it

was his father from whom in the end he came to fear castration. In this

respect  heredity  triumphed  over  accidental  experience;  in  man’s

prehistory it was unquestionably the father who practised castration as

a punishment and who later softened it down into circumcision. The

further the patient went in repressing sensuality during the course of

the development of the obsessional neurosis,² the more natural it must

have become to him to attribute these evil intentions to his father, who

was the true representative of sensual activity.

 

   ¹ We already know this as regards his Nanya; and we shall hear of it again in connection

with another woman.

   ² For evidence of this see p. 3551.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3569

 

   His identification of his father with the castrator ¹ became important

as being the source of an intense unconscious hostility towards him

(which reached the pitch of a death-wish) and of a sense of guilt which

reacted  against  it.  Up  to  this  point,  however,  he  was  behavingnormally - that is to say, like every neurotic who is possessed by a

positive  Oedipus  complex.  But  the  astonishing  thing  was  that  even

against this there was a counter-current working in him, which, on the

contrary, regarded his father as the one who had been castrated and

as calling, therefore, for his sympathy.

   When I analysed his ceremonial of breathing out whenever he saw

cripples,  beggars,  and  such  people,  I  was  able  to  show  that  that

symptom could also be traced back to his father, whom he had felt

sorry  for  when  he  visited  him  as  a  patient  in  the  sanatorium.  The

analysis made it possible to follow this thread even further back. At a

very early period, probably before his seduction (at the age of three

and  a  quarter),  there  had  been  on  the  estate  an  old  day-Iabourer

whose business it was to carry the water into the house. He could not

speak,  ostensibly  because  his  tongue  had  been  cut  out.  (He  was

probably a deaf mute.) The little boy was very fond of him and pitied

him deeply. When he died, he looked for him in the sky.² Here, then,

was the first of the cripples for whom he had felt sympathy, and, as

was shown by the context and the point at which the episode came

out in the analysis, an undoubted father-surrogate.

 

   ¹ Among the most tormenting, though at the same time the most grotesque, symptoms of

his later illness was his relation to every tailor from whom he ordered a suit of clothes: his
deference and timidity in the presence of this high functionary, his attempts to get into his
good  books  by  giving  him  extravagant  tips,  and  his  despair  over  the  results  of  the  work
however it might in fact have turned out.

   ² In this connection I may mention some dreams which he had, later than the anxiety-

dream, but while he was still on the first estate. These dreams represented the scene of
coition as an event taking place between heavenly bodies.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3570
 

   In the analysis this man was associated with the recollection of other

servants whom the patient had liked and about whom he emphasized

the  fact  that  they  had  been  either  sickly  or  Jews  (which  implied

circumcision). The footman, too, who had helped to clean him after his

accident at four and a half, had been a Jew and a consumptive and

had been an object of his compassion. All of these figures belong tothe  period  before  his  visit  to  his  father  at  the  sanatorium,  that  is,

before the formation of the symptom; the latter must therefore rather

have been intended to ward off (by means of the breathing out) any

identification with the object of the patient’s pity. Then suddenly, in

connection  with  a  dream,  the  analysis  plunged  back  into  the

prehistoric period, and led him to assert that during the copulation in

the primal scene he had observed the penis disappear, that he had

felt compassion for his father on that account, and had rejoiced at the

reappearance of what he thought had been lost. So here was a fresh

emotional  impulse,  starting  once  again  from  the  primal  scene.

Moreover, the narcissistic origin of compassion (which is confirmed by

the word itself) is here quite unmistakably revealed.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3571

 

                                          VIII

 

  FRESH MATERIAL FROM THE PRIMAL PERIOD - SOLUTION

 

It happens in many analyses that as one approaches their end new

recollections  emerge  which  have  hitherto  been  kept  carefully

concealed.  Or  it  may  be  that  on  one  occasion  some  unpretentious

remark is thrown out in an indifferent tone of voice as though it were

superfluous;  that  then,  on  another  occasion,  something  further  is

added, which begins to make the physician prick his ears; and that at

last he comes to recognize this despised fragment of a memory as the

key to the weightiest secrets that the patient’s neurosis has veiled.

   Early in the analysis my patient had told me of a memory of the

period  in  which  his  naughtiness  had  been  in  the  habit  of  suddenly

turning  into  anxiety.  He  was  chasing  a  beautiful  big  butterfly  with

yellow stripes and large wings which ended in pointed projections - a

swallow-tail,  in  fact.  Suddenly,  when  the  butterfly  had  settled  on  a

flower, he was seized with a dreadful fear of the creature, and ran

away screaming.

   This memory recurred occasionally during the analysis, and calledfor  an  explanation;  but  for  a  long  time  none  was  to  be  found.

Nevertheless it was to be assumed as a matter of course that a detail

like this had not kept its place in his recollection on its own account,

but  that  it  was  a  screen-memory,  representing  something  of  more

importance with which it was in some way connected. One day he told

me that in his language a butterfly was called ‘babushka’, ‘granny’. He

added that in general butterflies had seemed to him like women and

girls, and beetles and caterpillars like boys. So there could be little

doubt that in this anxiety scene a recollection of some female person

had been aroused. I will not hide the fact that at that time I put forward

the possibility that the yellow stripes on the butterfly had reminded him

of similar stripes on a piece of clothing worn by some woman. I only

mention this as an illustration to show how inadequate the physician’s

constructive  efforts  usually  are  for  clearing  up  questions  that  arise,

and how unjust it is to attribute the results of analysis to the physician

imagination and suggestion.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3572

 

      Many  months  later,  in  quite  another  connection,  the  patient

remarked that the opening and shutting of the butterfly’s wings while it

was settled on the flower had given him an uncanny feeling. It had

looked, so he said, like a woman opening her legs, and the legs then

made the shape of a Roman V, which, as we know, was the hour at

which, in his boyhood, and even up to the time of the treatment, he

used to fall into a depressed state of mind.

   This was an association which I could never have arrived at myself,

and which gained importance from a consideration of the thoroughly

infantile  nature  of  the  train  of  association  which  it  revealed.  The

attention  of  children,  as  I  have  often  noticed,  is  attracted  far  more

readily by movements than by forms at rest; and they frequently base

associations  upon  a  similarity  of  movement  which  is  overlooked  or

neglected by adults.

   After this the little problem was once more left untouched for a long

time; but I may mention the facile suspicion that the points or stick-likeprojections  of  the  butterfly’s  wings  might  have  had  the  meaning  of

genital symbols.

      One  day  there  emerged,  timidly  and  indistinctly,  a  kind  of

recollection that at a very early age, even before the time of the nurse,

he  must  have  had  a  nursery-maid  who  was  very  fond  of  him.  Her

name had been the same as his mother’s. He had no doubt returned

her affection. It was, in fact, a first love that had faded into oblivion.

But we agreed that something must have occurred at that time that

became of importance later on.

   Then on another occasion he emended this recollection. She could

not have had the same name as his mother; that had been a mistake

on his part, and it showed, of course, that in his memory she had

become  fused  with  his  mother.  Her  real  name,  he  went  on,  had

occurred to him in a roundabout way. He had suddenly thought of a

store-room, on the first estate, in which fruit was kept after it had been

picked, and of a particular sort of pear with a most delicious taste - a

big  pear  with  yellow  stripes  on  its  skin.  The  word  for  ‘pear’  in  his

language  was  ‘grusha’,  and  that  had  also  been  the  name  of  the

nursery-maid.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3573

 

   It thus became clear that behind the screen memory of the hunted

butterfly the memory of the nursery-maid lay concealed. But the yellow

stripes were not on her dress, but on the pear whose name was the

same as hers. What, however, was the origin of the anxiety which had

arisen  when  the  memory  of  her  had  been  activated?  The  obvious

answer to this might have been the crude hypothesis that it had been

this girl whom, when he was a small child, he had first seen making

the movements with her legs which he had fixed in his mind with the

Roman V - movements which allow access to the genitals. We spared

ourselves such theorizing as this and waited for more material.

      Very  soon  after  this  there  came  the  recollection  of  a  scene,

incomplete,  but,  so  far  as  it  was  preserved,  definite.  Grusha  was

kneeling on the floor, and beside her a pail and a short broom made ofa bundle of twigs; he was also there, and she was teasing him or

scolding him.

   The missing elements could easily be supplied from other directions.

During the first months of the treatment he had told me of how he had

suddenly fallen in love in a compulsive manner with a peasant girl

from whom, in his eighteenth year, he had contracted the precipitating

cause of his later illness. When he told me this he had displayed a

most extraordinary unwillingness to give me the girl’s name. It was an

entirely isolated instance of resistance, for apart from it he obeyed the

fundamental rule of analysis unreservedly. He asserted, however, that

the reason for his being so much ashamed of mentioning the name

was that it was a purely peasant name and that no girl of gentle birth

could  possibly  be  called  by  it.  When  eventually  the  name  was

produced, it turned out to be Matrona, which has a motherly ring about

it. The shame was evidently displaced. He was not ashamed of the

fact that these love-affairs were invariably concerned with girls of the

humblest origin; he was ashamed only of the name. If it should turn

out that the affair with Matrona had something in common with the

Grusha scene, then the shame would have to be transferred back to

that early episode.

   He had told me another time that when he heard the story of John

Huss he had been greatly moved, and that his attention had been held

by the bundles of firewood that were dragged up when he was burnt at

the  stake.  Now  his  sympathy  for  Huss  created  a  perfectly  definite

suspicion in my mind, for I have often come upon this sympathy in

youthful patients and I have always been able to explain it in the same

way. One such patient even went so far as to produce a dramatized

version of Huss’s career; he began to write his play on the day on

which  he  lost  the  object  with  whom  he  was  secretly  in  love.  Huss

perished by fire, and (like others who possess the same qualification)

he becomes the hero of people who have at one time suffered from

enuresis. My patient himself connected the bundles of firewood used

for the execution of Huss with the nursery-maid’s broom or bundle of

twigs.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis                                                                                      3574

 

   This material fitted together spontaneously and served to fill in the

gaps in the patient’s memory of the scene with Grusha. When he saw

the girl scrubbing the floor he had micturated in the room and she had

rejoined, no doubt jokingly, with a threat of castration.¹

   I do not know if my readers will have already guessed why it is that I

have given such a detailed account of this episode from the patient’s

early  childhood.²  It  provides  an  important  link  between  the  primal

scene  and  the  later  compulsive  love  which  came  to  be  of  such

decisive significance in his subsequent career, and it further shows us

a  condition  upon  which  his  falling  in  love  depended  and  which

elucidates that compulsion.

   When he saw the girl on the floor engaged in scrubbing it, and

kneeling down, with her buttocks projecting and her back horizontal,

he  was  faced  once  again  with  the  posture  which  his  mother  had

assumed in the copulation scene. She became his mother to him; he

was  seized  with  sexual  excitement  owing  to  the  activation  of  this

picture;³ and, like his father (whose action he can only have regarded

at the time as micturition), he behaved in a masculine way towards

her.  His  micturition  on  the  floor  was  in  reality  an  attempt  at  a

seduction, and the girl replied to it with a threat of castration, just as

though she had understood what he meant.

 

   ¹ It is very remarkable that the reaction of shame should be so intimately connected with

involuntary emptying of the bladder (whether in the day-time or at night) and not equally so, as
one would have expected, with incontinence of the bowels. Experience leaves no room for
doubt upon the point. The regular relation that is found to exist between incontinence of the
bladder and fire also provides matter for reflection. It is possible that these reactions and
relations represent precipitates from the history of human civilization derived from a lower
stratum than anything that is preserved for us in the traces surviving in myths or folklore.

   ² It may be assigned to a time at which he was about two and a half: between his supposed

observation of intercourse and his seduction.

   ³ This was before the dream.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3575

 

      The  compulsion  which  proceeded  from  the  primal  scene  wastransferred on to this scene with Grusha and was carried forward by it.

But the condition upon which his falling in love depended underwent a

change  which  showed  the  influence  of  the  second  scene:  it  was

transferred from the woman’s posture to the occupation on which she

was engaged while in that posture. This was clear, for instance, in the

episode of Matrona. He was walking through the village which formed

part of their (later) estate, when he saw a peasant girl kneeling by the

pond and employed in washing clothes in it. He fell in love with the girl

instantly and with irresistible violence, although he had not yet been

able to get even a glimpse of her face. By her posture and occupation

she had taken the place of Grusha for him. We can now see now it

was that the shame which properly related to the content of the scene

with Grusha could become attached to the name of Matrona.

   Another attack of falling in love, dating from a few years earlier,

shows  even  more  clearly  the  compelling  influence  of  the  Grusha

scene. A young peasant girl, who was a servant in the house, had

long  attracted  him,  but  he  succeeded  in  keeping  himself  from

approaching  her.  One  day,  when  he  came  upon  her  in  a  room  by

herself, he was overwhelmed by his love. He found her kneeling on

the floor and engaged in scrubbing it, with a pail and a broom beside

her - in fact, exactly as he had seen the girl in his childhood.

   Even his final choice of object, which played such an important part

in  his  life,  is  shown  by  its  details  (though  they  cannot  be  adduced

here) to have been dependent upon the same condition and to have

been  an  offshoot  of  the  compulsion  which,  starting  from  the  primal

scene  and  going  on  to  the  scene  with  Grusha,  had  dominated  his

love-choice. I have remarked on an earlier page that I recognize in the

patient  an  endeavour  to  debase  his  love-object.  This  is  to  be

explained as a reaction against pressure from the sister who was so

much his superior. But I promised at the same time (see p. 3515) to

show that this self-assertive motive was not the only determinant, but

that  it  concealed  another  and  deeper  one  based  on  purely  erotic

motives. These were brought to light by the patient’s memory of the

nursery-maid scrubbing the floor - physically debased too, by the by.

All  his  later  love-objects  were  surrogates  for  this  one  person,  who

through  the  accident  of  her  attitude  had  herself  become  his  first

mother-surrogate. The patient’s first association in connection with theproblem  of  his  fear  of  the  butterfly  can  now  easily  be  explained

retrospectively as a distant allusion to the primal scene (the hour of

five). He confirmed the connection between the Grusha scene and the

threat of castration by a particularly ingenious dream, which he himself

succeeded in deciphering. ‘I had a dream,’ he said, ‘of a man tearing

off the wings of an Espe.’ ‘Espe?’  I  asked;  ‘what  do  you  mean  by

that?’  ‘You  know;  that  insect  with  yellow  stripes  on  its  body,  that

stings.’  I  could  now  put  him  right:  ‘So  what  you  mean  is  a Wespe

[wasp].’ ‘Is it called a Wespe? I really thought it was called an Espe.’

(Like  so  many  other  people,  he  used  his  difficulties  with  a  foreign

language as a screen for symptomatic acts.) ‘But Espe, why, that’s

myself:  S.  P.’  (which  were  his  initials).  The Espe  was  of  course  a

mutilated Wespe.  The  dream  said  clearly  that  he  was  avenging

himself on Grusha for her threat of castration.

      The  action  of  the  two-and-a-half-year-old  boy  in  the  scene  with

Grusha is the earliest effect of the primal scene which has come to our

knowledge. It represents him as copying his father, and shows us a

tendency  towards  development  in  a  direction  which  would  later

deserve the name of masculine. His seduction drove him into passivity

- for which, in any case, the way was prepared by his behaviour when

he was a witness of his parents’ intercourse.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3576

 

   I must here turn for a moment to the history of the treatment. When

once the Grusha scene had been assimilated - the first experience

that he could really remember, and one which he had remembered

without any conjectures or intervention on my part - the problem of the

treatment  had  every  appearance  of  having  been  solved.  From  that

time forward there were no more resistances; all that remained to be

done was to collect and to co-ordinate. The old trauma theory of the

neuroses, which was after all built up upon impressions gained from

psycho-analytic practice, had suddenly come to the front once more.

Out  of  critical  interest  I  made  one  more  attempt  to  force  upon  the

patient another view of his story, which might commend itself more tosober common sense. It was true that there could be no doubt about

the scene with Grusha, but, I suggested, in itself that scene meant

nothing; it had been emphasized ex post facto by a regression from

the  circumstances  of  his  object  choice,  which,  as  a  result  of  his

intention to debase, had been diverted from his sister on to servant

girls. On the other hand, his observation of intercourse, I argued, was

a phantasy of his later years; its historical nucleus may perhaps have

been  an  observation  or  an  experience  by  the  patient  of  the

administration  of  an  innocent  enema.  Some  of  my  readers  will

possibly be inclined to think that with such hypotheses as these I was

for the first time beginning to approach an understanding of the case;

but  the  patient  looked  at  me  uncomprehendingly  and  a  little

contemptuously when I put this view before him, and he never reacted

to it again. I have already stated my own arguments against any such

rationalization at their proper point in the discussion.

 

   [Thus ¹ the Grusha scene, by explaining the conditions governing

the  patient’s  object-choice  -  conditions  which  were  of  decisive

importance in his life - prevents our over-estimating the significance of

his intention to debase women. But it does more than this. It affords

me a justification for having refused on an earlier page (see p. 3545)

to adopt unhesitatingly, as the only tenable explanation, the view that

the primal scene was derived from an observation made upon animals

shortly before the dream. The Grusha scene emerged in the patient’s

memory spontaneously and through no effort of mine. His fear of the

yellow-striped butterfly, which went back to that scene, proved that the

scene had had a significant content, or that he had been able to attach

this  significance  to  its  content  subsequently.  By  means  of  the

accompanying  associations  and  the  inferences  that  followed  from

them, it was possible with certainty to supply this significant element

which was lacking in the patient’s memory. It then appeared that his

fear of the butterfly was in every respect analogous to his fear of the

wolf; in both cases it was a fear of castration, which was, to begin

with,  referred  to  the  person  who  had  first  uttered  the  threat  of

castration, but was then transposed on to another person to whom it

was  bound  to  become  attached  in  accordance  with  phylogenetic

precedent. The scene with Grusha had occurred when the patient wastwo and a half, but the anxiety-episode with the yellow butterfly was

certainly subsequent to the anxiety-dream. It was easy to understand

how the patient’s later comprehension of the possibility of castration

had retrospectively brought out the anxiety in the scene with Grusha.

But that scene in itself contained nothing objectionable or improbable;

on  the  contrary,  it  consisted  entirely  of  commonplace  details  which

gave no grounds for scepticism. There was nothing in it which could

lead  one  to  attribute  its  origin  to  the  child’s  imagination;  such  a

supposition, indeed, seemed scarcely possible.

 

   ¹ [Freud’s square brackets.]

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3577

 

   The question now arises whether we are justified in regarding the

fact that the boy micturated, while he stood looking at the girl on her

knees scrubbing the floor, as a proof of sexual excitement on his part.

If so, the excitement would be evidence of the influence of an earlier

impression, which might equally have been the actual occurrence of

the primal scene or an observation made upon animals before the age

of two and a half. Or are we to conclude that the situation as regards

Grusha  was  entirely  innocent,  that  the  child’s  emptying  his  bladder

was purely accidental, and that it was not until later that the whole

scene  became  sexualized  in  his  memory,  after  he  had  come  to

recognize the importance of similar situations?

   On these issues I can venture upon no decision. I must confess,

however, that I regard it as greatly to the credit of psycho-analysis that

it should even have reached the stage of raising such questions as

these. Nevertheless, I cannot deny that the scene with Grusha, the

part it played in the analysis, and the effects that followed from it in the

patient’s  life  can  be  most  naturally  and  completely  explained  if  we

consider  that  the  primal  scene,  which  may  in  other  cases  be  a

phantasy, was a reality in the present one. After all, there is nothing

impossible  about  it;  and  the  hypothesis  of  its  reality  is  entirely

compatible with the inciting action of the observations upon animals

which are indicated by the sheep-dogs in the dream-picture.   I will now turn from this unsatisfactory conclusion to a consideration

of the problem which I have attempted in my Introductory Lectures on

Psycho-Analysis. I should myself be glad to know whether the primal

scene  in  my  present  patient’s  case  was  a  phantasy  or  a  real

experience; but, taking other similar cases into account, I must admit

that the answer to this question is not in fact a matter of very great

importance. These scenes of observing parental intercourse, of being

seduced  in  childhood,  and  of  being  threatened  with  castration  are

unquestionably an inherited endowment, a phylogenetic heritage, but

they may just as easily be acquired by personal experience. With my

patient, his seduction by his elder sister was an indisputable reality;

why should not the same have been true of his observation of his

parents’ intercourse?

   All that we find in the prehistory of neuroses is that a child catches

hold of this phylogenetic experience where his own experience fails

him. He fills in the gaps in individual truth with prehistoric truth; he

replaces occurrences in his own life by occurrences in the life of his

ancestors. I fully agree with Jung ¹ in recognizing the existence of this

phylogenetic  heritage;  but  I  regard  it  as  a  methodological  error  to

seize  on  a  phylogenetic  explanation  before  the  ontogenetic

possibilities  have  been  exhausted.  I  cannot  see  any  reason  for

obstinately disputing the importance of infantile prehistory while at the

same  time  freely  acknowledging  the  importance  of  ancestral

prehistory. Nor can I overlook the fact that phylogenetic motives and

productions themselves stand in need of elucidation, and that in quite

a number of instances this is afforded by factors in the childhood of

the  individual.  And,  finally,  I  cannot  feel  surprised  that  what  was

originally produced by certain circumstances in prehistoric times and

was  then  transmitted  in  the  shape  of  a  predisposition  to  its  re-

acquirement should, since the same circumstances persist, emerge

once more as a concrete event in the experience of the individual.]

 

   ¹ Die Psychologie der unbewussten Prozesse, 1917. This was published too late for it to

have influenced my Introductory Lectures.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3578 

 

   Room must also be found in the interval between the primal scene

and the seduction (from the age of one and a half to the age of three

and a quarter) for the dumb water-carrier. He served the patient as a

father-surrogate just as Grusha served him as a mother-surrogate. I

do not think there is any justification for regarding this as an example

of the intention to debase, even though it is true that both parents

have come to be represented by servants. A child pays no regard to

social distinctions, which have little meaning for him as yet; and he

classes people of inferior rank with his parents if such people love him

as his parents do. Nor is the intention to debase any more responsible

for the substitution of animals for a child’s parents, for children are

very far indeed from taking a disparaging view of animals. Uncles and

aunts  are  used  as  parent-surrogates  without  any  regard  to  the

question of debasing, and this was in fact done by our present patient,

as many of his recollections showed.

   There also belongs in this period a phase, which was obscurely

remembered, in which he would not eat anything except sweet things,

until alarm was felt on the score of his health. He was told about one

of his uncles who had refused to eat in the same way and had wasted

away to death while he was still young. He was also informed that

when he himself was three months old he had been so seriously ill

(with pneumonia?) that his winding-sheet had been got ready for him.

In this way they succeeded in alarming him, so that he began eating

again;  and  in  the  later  years  of  his  childhood  he  used  actually  to

overdo  this  duty,  as  though  to  guard  himself  against  the  threat  of

death The fear of death, which was evoked at that time for his own

protection, made its reappearance later when his mother warned him

of the danger of dysentery. Later still, it brought on an attack of his

obsessional neurosis (see p. 3551). We shall try below to go into its

origins and meanings.

   I am inclined to the opinion that this disturbance of appetite should

be regarded as the very first of the patient’s neurotic illnesses. If so,

the disturbance of appetite, the wolf phobia, and the obsessional piety

would constitute the complete series of infantile disorders which laid

down  the  predisposition  for  his  neurotic  break-down  after  he  hadpassed the age of puberty. It will be objected that few children escape

such disorders as a temporary loss of appetite or an animal phobia.

But  this  argument  is  exactly  what  I  should  wish  for.  I  am  ready  to

assert that every neurosis in an adult is built upon a neurosis which

has  occurred  in  his  childhood  but  has  not  invariably  been  severe

enough to strike the eye and be recognized as such. This objection

only serves to emphasize the theoretical importance of the part which

infantile neuroses must play in our view of those later disorders which

we treat as neuroses and endeavour to attribute entirely to the effects

of adult life. If our present patient had not suffered from obsessional

piety in addition to his disturbance of appetite and his animal phobia,

his story would not have been noticeably different from that of other

children, and we should have been the poorer by the loss of precious

material which may guard us against certain plausible errors.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3579

 

   The analysis would be unsatisfactory if it failed to explain the phrase

used  by  the  patient  for  summing  up  the  troubles  of  which  he

complained. The world, he said, was hidden from him by a veil; and

our  psycho-analytic  training  forbids  our  assuming  that  these  words

can  have  been  without  significance  or  have  been  chosen  at

haphazard. The veil was torn, strange to say, in one situation only;

and that was at the moment when, as a result of an enema, he passed

a motion through his anus. He then felt well again, and for a very short

while  he  saw  the  world  clearly.  The  interpretation  of  this  ‘veil’

progressed with as much difficulty as we met with in clearing up his

fear of the butterfly. Nor did he keep to the veil. It became still more

elusive,  as  a  feeling  of  twilight,  ‘ténèbres’,  and  of  other  impalpable

things,

   It was not until just before taking leave of the treatment that he

remembered having been told that he was born with a caul. He had for

that  reason  always  looked  on  himself  as  a  special  child  of  fortune

whom no ill could befall. He did not lose that conviction until he was

forced to realize that his gonorrhoeal infection constituted a seriousinjury to his body. The blow to his narcissism was too much for him

and  he  went  to  pieces.  It  may  be  said  that  in  so  doing  he  was

repeating a mechanism that he had already brought into play once

before. For his wolf phobia had broken out when he found himself

faced by the fact that such a thing as castration was possible; and he

clearly classed his gonorrhoea as castration.

   Thus the caul was the veil which hid him from the world and hid the

world from him. The complaint that he made was in reality a fulfilled

wishful phantasy: it exhibited him as back once more in the womb,

and was, in fact, a wishful phantasy of flight from the world. It can be

translated as follows: ‘Life makes me so unhappy! I must get back into

the womb!’

   But what can have been the meaning of the fact that this veil, which

was now symbolic but had once been real, was torn at the moment at

which he evacuated his bowels after an enema, and that under this

condition his illness left him? The context enables us to reply. If this

birth-veil was torn, then he saw the world and was re-born. The stool

was the child, as which he was born a second time, to a happier life.

Here,  then,  we  have  the  phantasy  of  re-birth,  to  which  Jung  has

recently  drawn  attention  and  to  which  he  has  assigned  such  a

dominating position in the imaginative life of neurotics.

   This would be all very well, if it were the whole story. But certain

details of the situation, and a due regard for the connection between it

and  this  particular  patient’s  life-history,  compel  us  to  pursue  the

interpretation further. The necessary condition of his re-birth was that

he should have an enema administered to him by a man. (It was not

until later on that he was driven by necessity to take this man’s place

himself.) This can, only have meant that he had identified himself with

his mother, that the man was acting as his father, and that the enema

was  repeating  the  act  of  copulation,  as  the  fruit  of  which  the

excrement-baby (which was once again himself) would be born. The

phantasy  of  re-birth  was  therefore  bound  up  closely  with  the

necessary  condition  of  sexual  satisfaction  from  a  man.  So  that  the

translation now runs to this effect: only on condition that he took the

woman’s place and substituted himself for his mother, and thus let

himself be sexually satisfied by his father and bore him a child - only

on  that  condition  would  his  illness  leave  him.  Here,  therefore,  thephantasy of re-birth was simply a mutilated and censored version of

the homosexual wishful phantasy.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3580

 

   If we look into the matter more closely we cannot help remarking

that in this condition which he laid down for his recovery the patient

was  simply  repeating  the  state  of  affairs  at  the  time  of  the  ‘primal

scene’. At that moment he had wanted to substitute himself for his

mother; and, as we assumed long ago, it was he himself who, in the

scene  in  question,  had  produced  the  excrement-baby.  He  still

remained fixated, as though by a spell, to the scene which had such a

decisive effect on his sexual life, and the return of which during the

night of the dream brought the onset of his illness. The tearing of the

veil was analogous to the opening of his eyes and to the opening of

the  window.  The  primal  scene  had  become  transformed  into  the

necessary condition for his recovery.

   It is easy to make a unified statement of what was expressed on the

one hand by the complaint he made and on the other hand by the

single exceptional condition under which the complaint no longer held

good, and thus to make clear the whole meaning that underlay the two

factors: he wished he could be back in the womb, not simply in order

that he might then be re-born, but in order that he might be copulated

with there by his father, might obtain sexual satisfaction from him, and

might bear him a child.

   The wish to be born of his father (as he had at first believed was the

case), the wish to be sexually satisfied by him, the wish to present him

with a child - and all of this at the price of his own masculinity, and

expressed in the language of anal erotism - these wishes complete

the circle of his fixation upon his father. In them homosexuality has

found its furthest and most intimate expression.¹

   This instance, I think, throws light on the meaning and origin of the

womb-phantasy  as  well  as  that  of  re-birth.  The  former,  the  womb-

phantasy, is frequently derived (as it was in the present case) from an

attachment to the father. There is a wish to be inside the mother’swomb in order to replace her during intercourse - in order to take her

place in regard to the father. The phantasy of re-birth, on the other

hand, is in all probability regularly a softened substitute (a euphemism,

one  might  say)  for  the  phantasy  of  incestuous  intercourse  with  the

mother;  to  make  use  of  Silberer’s  expression,  it  is  an anagogic

abbreviation of it. There is a wish to be back in a situation in which

one was in the mother’s genitals; and in this connection the man is

identifying  himself  with  his  own  penis  and  is  using  it  to  represent

himself.  Thus  the  two  phantasies  are  revealed  as  each  other’s

counterparts: they give expression, according as the subject’s attitude

is feminine or masculine, to his wish for sexual intercourse with his

father or with his mother. We cannot dismiss the possibility that in the

complaint made by our present patient and in the necessary condition

laid down for his recovery the two phantasies, that is to say the two

incestuous wishes, were united.

 

   ¹ A possible subsidiary explanation, namely that the veil represented the hymen which is

torn  at  the  moment  of  intercourse  with  a  man,  does  not  harmonize  completely  with  the
necessary condition for his recovery. Moreover it has no bearing on the life of the patient, for
whom virginity carried no significance.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3581

 

   I will make a final attempt at re-interpreting the last findings of this

analysis in accordance with the scheme of my opponents. The patient

lamented  his  flight  from  the  world  in  a  typical  womb-phantasy  and

viewed his recovery as a typically conceived re-birth. In accordance

with the predominant side of his disposition, he expressed the latter in

anal symptoms. He next concocted, on the model of his anal phantasy

of re-birth, a childhood scene which repeated his wishes in an archaic

symbolic  medium  of  expression.  His  symptoms  were  then  strung

together as though they had been derived from a primal scene of that

kind. He was driven to embark on this long backward course either

because he had come up against some task in life which he was too

lazy to perform, or because he had every reason to be aware of his

own inferiority and thought he could best protect himself from beingslighted by elaborating such contrivances as these.

   All this would be very nice, if only the unlucky wretch had not had a

dream when he was no more than four years old, which signalized the

beginning of his neurosis, which was instigated by his grandfather’s

story  of  the  tailor  and  the  wolf,  and  the  interpretation  of  which

necessitates the assumption of this primal scene. All the alleviations

which the theories of Jung and Adler seek to afford us come to grief,

alas, upon such paltry but unimpeachable facts as these. As things

stand, it seems to me more probable that the phantasy of re-birth was

a  derivative  of  the  primal  scene  than  that,  conversely,  the  primal

scene  was  a  reflection  of  the  phantasy  of  re-birth.  And  we  may

perhaps suppose, too, that the patient, at a time only four years after

his birth, may after all have been too young to be already wishing to

be born again. But no, I must take this last argument back; for my own

observations show that we have rated the powers of children too low

and that there is no knowing what they cannot be given credit for.¹

 

   ¹ I admit that this is the most delicate question in the whole domain of psycho-analysis. I did

not require the contributions of Adler or Jung to induce me to consider the matter with a
critical  eye,  and  to  bear  in  mind  the  possibility  that  what  analysis  puts  forward  as  being
forgotten  experiences  of  childhood  (and  of  an  improbably  early  childhood)  may  on  the
contrary be based upon phantasies created on occasions occurring late in life. According to
this view, wherever we seemed in analyses to see traces of the after-effects of an infantile
impression of the kind in question, we should rather have to assume that we were faced by
the  manifestation  of  some  constitutional  factor  or  of  some  disposition  that  had  been
phylogenetically  maintained.  On  the  contrary,  no  doubt  has  troubled  me  more;  no  other
uncertainty has been more decisive in holding me back from publishing my conclusions. I was
the first - a point to which none of my opponents have referred - to recognize both the part
played by phantasies in symptom-formation and also the ‘retrospective phantasying’ of late
impressions into childhood and their sexualization after the event. (See my Interpretation of
Dreams (1900a), First Edition, p. 559, and ‘Notes upon a Case of Obsessional Neurosis’,
(1909d).) If, in spite of this, I have held to the more difficult and more improbable view, it has
been as a result of arguments such as are forced upon the investigator by the case described
in these pages or by any other infantile neurosis - arguments which I once again lay before
my readers for their decision.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3582

 

                                            IX

                     RECAPITULATIONS AND PROBLEMS

 

I  do  not  know  if  the  reader  of  this  report  of  an  analysis  will  have

succeeded in forming a clear picture of the origin and development of

the patient’s illness. I fear that, on the contrary, this will not have been

the  case.  But  though  on  other  occasions  I  have  said  very  little  on

behalf of my powers in the art of exposition, I should like in the present

instance to plead mitigating circumstances. The description of such

early phases and of such deep strata of mental life has been a task

which has never before been attacked; and it is better to perform that

task  badly  than  to  take  flight  before  it  -  a  proceeding  which  would

moreover (or so we are told) involve the coward in risks of a certain

kind. I prefer, therefore, to put a bold face on it and show that I have

not allowed myself to be held back by a sense of my own inferiority.

   The case itself was not a particularly favourable one. The advantage

of  having  a  wealth  of  information  about  the  patient’s  childhood  (an

advantage which was made possible by the fact that the child could be

studied through the medium of the adult) had to be purchased at the

expense  of  the  analysis  being  most  terribly  disjointed  and  of  the

exposition showing corresponding gaps. Personal peculiarities in the

patient and a national character that was foreign to ours made the

task of feeling one’s way into his mind a laborious one. The contrast

between  the  patient’s  agreeable  and  affable  personality,  his  acute

intelligence  and  his  nice-mindedness  on  the  one  hand,  and  his

completely  unbridled  instinctual  life  on  the  other,  necessitated  an

excessively long process of preparatory education, and this made a

general  perspective  more  difficult.  But  the  patient  himself  has  no

responsibility  for  that  feature  of  the  case  which  put  the  severest

obstacles  in  the  way  of  any  description  of  it.  In  the  psychology  of

adults we have fortunately reached the point of being able to divide

mental processes into conscious and unconscious and of being able

to  give  a  clearly-worded  description  of  both.  With  children  this

distinction  leaves  us  almost  completely  in  the  lurch.  It  is  often

embarrassing to decide what one would choose to call conscious and

what unconscious. Processes which have become the dominant ones,

and  which  from  their  subsequent  behaviour  must  be  equated  with

conscious ones, have nevertheless not been conscious in the child. Itis  easy  to  understand  why.  In  children  the  conscious  has  not  yet

acquired all its characteristics; it is still in process of development, and

it does not as yet fully possess the capacity for transposing itself into

verbal  images.  We  are  constantly  guilty  of  making  a  confusion

between  the  phenomenon  of  emergence  as  a  perception  in

consciousness and the fact of belonging to a hypothetical psychical

system  to  which  we  ought  to  assign  some  conventional  name,  but

which  we  in  fact  also  call  ‘consciousness’  (the  system Cs.).  This

confusion  does  no  harm  when  we  are  giving  a  psychological

description of an adult, but it is misleading when we are dealing with

that  of  a  young  child.  Nor  should  we  be  much  assisted  here  if  we

introduced the ‘preconscious’; for a child’s preconscious may, in just

the same way, fail to coincide with an adult’s. We must be content,

therefore, with having clearly recognized the obscurity.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3583

 

   It is obvious that a case such as that which is described in these

pages  might  be  made  an  excuse  for  dragging  into  the  discussion

every one of the findings and problems of psycho-analysis. But this

would be an endless and unjustifiable labour. It must be recognized

that everything cannot be learnt from a single case and that everything

cannot be decided by it; we must content ourselves with exploiting

whatever it may happen to show most clearly. There are in any case

narrow limits to what a psycho-analysis is called upon to explain. For,

while it is its business to explain the striking symptoms by revealing

their genesis, it is not its business to explain but merely to describe

the psychical mechanisms and instinctual processes to which one is

led by that means. In order to derive fresh generalizations from what

has  thus  been  established  with  regard  to  the  mechanisms  and

instincts, it would be essential to have at one’s disposal numerous

cases as thoroughly and deeply analysed as the present one. But they

are  not  easily  to  be  had,  and  each  one  of  them  requires  years  of

labour.  So  that  advances  in  these  spheres  of  knowledge  must

necessarily be slow. There is no doubt a great temptation to contentoneself with ‘scratching’ the mental surface of a number of people and

of replacing what is left undone by speculation - the latter being put

under the patronage of some school or other of philosophy. Practical

requirements may also be adduced in favour of this procedure; but no

substitute can satisfy the requirements of science.

 

   I shall now attempt to sketch out a synthetic survey of my patient’s

sexual development, beginning from its earliest indications. The first

that we hear of it is in the disturbance of his appetite; for, taking other

observations into account, I am inclined, though with due reservations,

to regard that as a result of some process in the sphere of sexuality. I

have  been  driven  to  regard  as  the  earliest  recognizable  sexual

organization the so-called ‘cannibalistic’ or ‘oral’ phase, during which

the original attachment of sexual excitation to the nutritional instinct

still dominates the scene. It is not to be expected that we should come

upon direct manifestations of this phase, but only upon indications of it

where disturbances have been set up. Impairment of the nutritional

instinct  (though  this  can  of  course  have  other  causes)  draws  our

attention to a failure on the part of the organism to master its sexual

excitation. In this phase the sexual aim could only be cannibalism -

devouring; it makes its appearance with our present patient through

regression from a higher stage, in the form of fear of ‘being eaten by

the wolf’. We were, indeed, obliged to translate this into a fear of being

copulated with by his father. It is well known that there is a neurosis in

girls which occurs at a much later age, at the time of puberty or soon

afterwards, and which expresses aversion to sexuality by means of

anorexia. This neurosis will have to be brought into relation with the

oral phase of sexual life. The erotic aim of the oral organization further

makes its appearance at the height of a lover’s paroxysm (in such

phrases as ‘I could eat you up with love’) and in affectionate relations

with children, when the grown-up person is pretending to be a child

himself. I have elsewhere given voice to a suspicion that the father of

our present patient used himself to indulge in ‘affectionate abuse’, and

may have played at wolf or dog with the little boy and have threatened

as  a  joke  to  gobble  him  up  (p.  3524).  The  patient  confirmed  this

suspicion by his curious behaviour in the transference. Whenever he

shrank  back  on  to  the  transference  from  the  difficulties  of  thetreatment, he used to threaten me with eating me up and later with all

kinds of other ill-treatment - all of which was merely an expression of

affection.

   Permanent marks have been left by this oral phase of sexuality upon

the usages of language. People commonly speak for instance, of an

‘appetizing’  love-object,  and  describe  persons  they  are  fond  of  as

‘sweet’. It will be remembered, too, that our little patient would only eat

sweet things. In dreams sweet things and sweetmeats stand regularly

for caresses or sexual gratifications.

      It  appears,  moreover,  that  there  is  an  anxiety  belonging  to  this

phase  (only,  of  course,  where  some  disturbance  has  arisen)  which

manifests itself as a fear of death and may be attached to anything

that is pointed out to the child as being suitable for the purpose. With

our patient it was employed to induce him to overcome his loss of

appetite and indeed to overcompensate for it. A possible origin of this

disturbance of his appetite will be found, if we bear in mind (basing

ourselves on the hypothesis that we have so often discussed) that his

observation of copulation at the age of one and a half, which produced

so many deferred effects, certainly occurred before the time of these

difficulties  in  his  eating.  So  we  may  perhaps  suppose  that  it

accelerated the processes of sexual maturing and consequently did in

fact also produce immediate effects, though these were insignificant in

appearance.

   I am of course aware that it is possible to explain the symptoms of

this period (the wolf anxiety and the disturbance of appetite) in another

and  simpler  manner,  without  any  reference  to  sexuality  or  to  a

pregenital  stage  of  its  organization.  Those  who  like  to  neglect  the

indications of neurosis and the interconnections between events will

prefer this other explanation, and I shall not be able to prevent their

doing so. It is hard to discover any cogent evidence in regard to these

beginnings of sexual life except by such roundabout paths as I have

indicated.

   In the scene with Grusha (at the age of two and a half) we see the

little boy at the beginning of a development which, except perhaps for

its prematureness, deserves to be considered normal; thus we find in

it  identification  with  his  father,  and  urethral  erotism  representing

masculinity.  It  was  also  completely  under  the  sway  of  the  primalscene. We have hitherto regarded his identification with his father as

being narcissistic; but if we take the content of the primal scene into

account  we  cannot  deny  that  it  had  already  reached  the  stage  of

genital organization. His male genital organ had begun to play its part

and it continued to do so under the influence of his seduction by his

sister.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3584

 

      But  his  seduction  gives  the  impression  not  merely  of  having

encouraged his sexual development but of having, to an even greater

extent, disturbed and diverted it. It offered him a passive sexual aim,

which was ultimately incompatible with the action of his male genital

organ. At the first external obstacle, the threat of castration from his

Nanya, his genital organization, half-hearted as it still was, broke down

(at the age of three and a half) and regressed to the stage which had

preceded it, namely to that of the sadistic-anal organization, which he

might  otherwise  have  passed  through,  perhaps,  with  as  slight

indications as other children.

      The  sadistic-anal  organization  can  easily  be  regarded  as  a

continuation and development of the oral one. The violent muscular

activity, directed upon the object, by which it is characterized, is to be

explained as an action preparatory to eating. The eating then ceases

to be a sexual aim, and the preparatory action becomes a sufficient

aim  in  itself.  The  essential  novelty,  as  compared  with  the  previous

stage, is that the receptive passive function becomes disengaged from

the oral zone and attached to the anal zone. In this connection we can

hardly  fail  to  think  of  biological  parallels  or  of  the  theory  that  the

pregenital  organizations  in  man  should  be  regarded  as  vestiges  of

conditions which have been permanently retained in several classes

of  animals.  The  building  up  of  the  instinct  for  research  out  of  its

various components is another characteristic feature of this stage of

development.

   The boy’s anal erotism was not particularly noticeable. Under the

influence of his sadism the affectionate significance of faeces gaveplace to an aggressive one. A part was played in the transformation of

his sadism into masochism by a sense of guilt, the presence of which

points to developmental processes in spheres other than the sexual

one.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3585

 

   His seduction continued to make its influence felt, by maintaining the

passivity of his sexual aim. It transformed his sadism to a great extent

into  the  masochism  which  was  its  passive  counterpart.  But  it  is

questionable whether the seduction can be made entirely responsible

for  this  characteristic  of  passivity,  for  the  child’s  reaction  to  his

observation of intercourse at the age of one and a half was already

preponderantly  a  passive  one.  His  sympathetic  sexual  excitement

expressed itself by his passing a stool, though it is true that in this

behaviour an active element is also to be distinguished. Side by side

with the masochism which dominated his sexual impulsions and also

found expression in phantasies, his sadism, too, persisted and was

directed against small animals. His sexual researches had set in from

the time of the seduction and had been concerned, in essence, with

two problems: the origin of children and the possibility of losing the

genitals. These researches wove themselves into the manifestations

of his instinctual impulses, and directed his sadistic propensities on to

small animals as being representatives of small children.

   We have now carried our account down to about the time of the

boy’s fourth birthday, and it was at that point that the dream brought

into deferred operation his observation of intercourse at the age of one

and a half. It is not possible for us completely to grasp or adequately

to describe what now ensued. The activation of the picture, which,

thanks to the advance in his intellectual development, he was now

able to understand, operated not only like a fresh event, but like a new

trauma, like an interference from outside analogous to the seduction.

The  genital  organization  which  had  been  broken  off  was  re-

established at a single blow; but the advance that was achieved in the

dream could not be maintained. On the contrary, there came about, bymeans of a process that can only be equated with a repression, a

repudiation of the new element and its replacement by a phobia.

   Thus the sadistic-anal organization continued to exist during the

phase  of  the  animal  phobia  which  now  set  in,  only  it  suffered  an

admixture of anxiety-phenomena. The child persisted in his sadistic as

well as in his masochistic activities, but he reacted with anxiety to a

portion of them; the conversion of his sadism into its opposite probably

made further progress.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3586

 

   The analysis of the anxiety-dream shows us that the repression was

connected with his recognition of the existence of castration. The new

element was rejected because its acceptance would have cost him his

penis. Closer consideration leads us to some such conclusion as the

following.  What  was  repressed  was  the  homosexual  attitude

understood in the genital sense, an attitude which had been formed

under the influence of this recognition of castration. But that attitude

was retained as regards the unconscious and set up as a dissociated

and deeper stratum. The motive force of the repression seems to have

been the narcissistic masculinity which attached to the boy’s genitals,

and which had come into a long-prepared conflict with the passivity of

his homosexual sexual aim. The repression was thus a result of his

masculinity.

   One might be tempted at this point to introduce a slight alteration

into psycho-analytic theory. It would seem palpably obvious that the

repression and the formation of the neurosis must have originated out

of the conflict between masculine and feminine tendencies, that is out

of bisexuality. This view of the situation, however is incomplete. Of the

two conflicting sexual impulses one was ego-syntonic, while the other

offended the boy’s narcissistic interest; it was on that account that the

latter underwent repression. So that in this case, too, it was the ego

that put the repression into operation, for the benefit of one of the

sexual tendencies. In other cases there is no such conflict between

masculinity  and  femininity;  there  is  only  a  single  sexual  tendencypresent,  which  seeks  for  acceptance,  but  offends  against  certain

forces  of  the  ego  and  is  consequently  repelled.  Indeed,  conflicts

between sexuality and the moral ego trends are far more common

than such as take place within the sphere of sexuality; but a moral

conflict  of  this  kind  is  lacking  in  our  present  case.  To  insist  that

bisexuality  is  the  motive  force  leading  to  repression  is  to  take  too

narrow a view; whereas if we assert the same of the conflict between

the ego and the sexual tendencies (that is, the libido) we shall have

covered all possible cases.

   The theory of the ‘masculine protest’, as it has been developed by

Adler, is faced by the difficulty that repression by no means always

takes the side of masculinity against femininity; there are quite large

classes  of  cases  in  which  it  is  masculinity  that  has  to  submit  to

repression by the ego.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3587

 

   Moreover, a juster appreciation of the process of repression in our

present case would lead us to deny that narcissistic masculinity was

the sole motive force. The homosexual attitude which came into being

during  the  dream  was  of  such  overwhelming  intensity  that  the  little

boy’s ego found itself unable to cope with it and so defended itself

against it by the process of repression. The narcissistic masculinity

which  attached  to  his  genitals,  being  opposed  to  the  homosexual

attitude, was drawn in, in order to assist the ego in carrying out the

task. Merely to avoid misunderstandings, I will add that all narcissistic

impulses operate from the ego and have their permanent seat in the

ego,  and  that  repressions  are  directed  against  libidinal  object

cathexes.

      Let  us  now  leave  the  process  of  repression,  though  we  have

perhaps not succeeded in dealing with it exhaustively, and let us turn

to the boy’s state when he awoke from the dream. If it had really been

his  masculinity  that  had  triumphed  over  his  homosexuality  (or

femininity) during the dream-process, then we should necessarily find

that  the  dominant  trend  was  an  active  sexual  trend  of  a  characteralready explicitly masculine. But there is no question of this having

happened.  The  essentials  of  the  sexual  organization  had  not  been

changed;  the  sadistic-anal  phase  persisted,  and  remained  the

dominant one. The triumph of his masculinity was shown only in this:

that thenceforward he reacted with anxiety to the passive sexual aims

of the dominant organization - aims which were masochistic but not

feminine.  We  are  not  confronted  by  a  triumphant  masculine  sexual

trend, but only by a passive one and a struggle against it.

   I can well imagine the difficulties that the reader must find in the

sharp  distinction  (unfamiliar  but  essential)  which  I  have  drawn

between ‘active’ and ‘masculine’ and between ‘passive’ and ‘feminine’.

I  shall  therefore  not  hesitate  to  repeat  myself.  The  state  of  affairs,

then, after the dream, may be described as follows. The sexual trends

had  been  split  up;  in  the  unconscious  the  stage  of  the  genital

organization had been reached, and a very intense homosexuality set

up; on the top of this (virtually in the conscious) there persisted the

earlier sadistic and predominantly masochistic sexual current; the ego

had on the whole changed its attitude towards sexuality, for it now

repudiated sexuality and rejected the dominant masochistic aims with

anxiety, just as it had reacted to the deeper homosexual aims with the

formation of a phobia. Thus the result of the dream was not so much

the triumph of a masculine current, as a reaction against a feminine

and  passive  one.  It  would  be  very  forced  to  ascribe  the  quality  of

masculinity to this reaction. The truth is that the ego has no sexual

currents,  but  only  an  interest  in  its  own  self-protection  and  in  the

preservation of its narcissism.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3588

 

   Let us now consider the phobia. It came into existence on the level

of  the  genital  organization,  and  shows  us  the  relatively  simple

mechanism  of  an  anxiety-hysteria.  The  ego,  by  developing  anxiety,

was  protecting  itself  against  what  it  regarded  as  an  overwhelming

danger,  namely,  homosexual  satisfaction.  But  the  process  of

repression  left  behind  it  a  trace  which  cannot  be  overlooked.  Theobject to which the dangerous sexual aim had been attached had to

have its place taken in consciousness by another one. What became

conscious  was  fear  not  of  the father  but  of  the wolf.  Nor  did  the

process  stop  at  the  formation  of  a  phobia  with  a  single  content.  A

considerable  time  afterwards  the  wolf  was  replaced  by  the  lion.

Simultaneously with sadistic impulses against small animals there was

a phobia directed towards them, in their capacity of representatives of

the boy’s rivals, the possible small children. The origin of the butterfly

phobia is of especial interest. It was like a repetition of the mechanism

that  produced  the  wolf  phobia  in  the  dream.  Owing  to  a  chance

stimulus an old experience, the scene with Grusha, was activated; her

threat of castration thus produced deferred effects, though at the time

it was uttered it had made no impression.¹

 

   ¹ The Grusha scene was, as I have said, a spontaneous product of the patient’s memory,

and no construction or stimulation by the physician played any part in evoking it. The gaps in it
were filled up by the analysis in a fashion which must be regarded as unexceptionable, if any
value  at  all  is  attached  to  the  analytic  method  of  work.  The  only  possible  rationalistic
explanation of the phobia would be the following. There is nothing extraordinary, it might be
said, in a child that was inclined to be nervous having had an anxiety attack in connection with
a yellow-striped butterfly, probably as a result of some inherited tendency to anxiety.(See
Stanley Hall, ‘A Synthetic Genetic Study of Fear’, 1914.) In ignorance of the true causation of
his  fear,  this  explanation  would  proceed,  the  patient  looked  about  for  something  in  his
childhood to which he could connect it; he made use of the chance similarity of names and the
recurrence of the stripes as a ground for the construction of an imaginary adventure with the
nursery-maid whom he still remembered. When, however, we observe that the trivial details of
this went (which, according to this view, was in itself an innocent one) - the scrubbing, the pail
and the broom - had enough power over the patient’s later life to determine his object-choice
permanently  and  compulsively,  then  the  butterfly  phobia  seems  to  have  acquired  an
inexplicable importance. The state of things on this hypothesis is thus seen to be at least as
remarkable as on mine, and any advantage that might be claimed for a rationalistic reading of
the scene has melted away. The Grusha scene is of particular value to us, since in relation to
it we can prepare our judgement upon the less certain primal scene.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3589

 

      It  may  truly  be  said  that  the  anxiety  that  was  concerned  in  the

formation of these phobias was a fear of castration. This statement

involves no contradiction of the view that the anxiety originated from

the repression of homosexual libido. Both modes of expression referto the same process: namely, the withdrawal of libido by the ego from

the  homosexual  wishful  impulse,  the  libido  having  then  become

converted into free anxiety and subsequently bound in phobias. The

first method of statement merely mentions in addition the motive by

which the ego was actuated.

   If we look into the matter more closely we shall see that our patient’s

first illness (leaving the disturbance of appetite out of account) is not

exhausted  when  we  have  extracted  the  phobia  from  it.  It  must  be

regarded as a true hysteria showing not merely anxiety-symptoms but

also phenomena of conversion. A portion of the homosexual impulse

was retained by the organ concerned in it; from that time forward, and

equally  during  his  adult  life,  his  bowel  behaved  like  a  hysterically

affected organ. The unconscious repressed homosexuality withdrew

into his bowel. It was precisely this trait of hysteria which was of such

great service in helping to clear up his later illness.

      We  must  now  summon  up  our  courage  to  attack  the  still  more

complicated structure of the obsessional neurosis. Let up once more

bear the situation in mind: a dominant masochistic sexual current and

a  repressed  homosexual  one,  and  an  ego  deep  in  hysterical

repudiation of them. What processes transformed this condition into

one of obsessional neurosis?

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3590

 

    The  transformation  did  not  occur  spontaneously,  through  internal

development, but through an outside influence. Its visible effect was

that the patient’s relation to his father, which stood in the foreground,

and which had so far found expression in the wolf phobia, was now

manifested in obsessional piety. I cannot refrain from pointing out that

the course of events in this part of the

patient’s history affords an unmistakable confirmation of an assertion

which  I  made  in Totem  and  Taboo  upon  the  relation  of  the  totem

animal to the deity.¹ I there decided in favour of the view that the idea

of God was not a development from the totem, but replaced it after

arising independently from a root common to both ideas. The totem, Imaintained,  was  the  first  father-surrogate,  and  the  god  was  a  later

one, in which the father had regained his human shape. And we find

the  same  thing  with  our  patient.  In  his  wolf  phobia  he  had  gone

through the stage of the totemic father-surrogate; but that stage was

now broken off, and, as a result of new relations between him and his

father, was replaced by a phase of religious piety.

    The  influence  that  provoked  this  transformation  was  the

acquaintance which he obtained through his mother’s agency with the

doctrines  of  religion  and  with  the  Bible  story.  This  educational

measure  had  the  desired  effect.  The  sadistic-masochistic  sexual

organization came slowly to an end, the wolf phobia quickly vanished,

and,  instead  of  sexuality  being  repudiated  with  anxiety,  a  higher

method  of  suppressing  it  made  its  appearance.  Piety  became  the

dominant

force in the child’s life. These victories, however, were not won without

struggles, of which his blasphemous thoughts were an indication, and

of which the establishment of an obsessive exaggeration of religious

ceremonial was the result.

  Apart from these pathological phenomena, it may be said that in the

present case religion achieved all the aims for the sake of which it is

included  in  the  education  of  the  individual.  It  put  a  restraint  on  his

sexual impulsions by affording them a sublimation and a safe mooring;

it  lowered  the  importance  of  his  family  relationships,  and  thus

protected him from the threat of isolation by giving him access to the

great community of mankind. The untamed and fear-ridden

child became social, well-behaved, and amenable to education.

 

  ¹ Totem and Taboo (1912-13), p. 2788.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3591

 

   The chief motive force of the influence which religion had on him

was his identification with the figure of Christ, which came particularly

easily to him owing to the accident of the date of his birth. Along this

path his extravagant love of his father, which had made the repressionnecessary, found its way at length to an ideal sublimation. As Christ,

he  could  love  his  father,  who  was  now  called  God,  with  a  fervour

which had sought in vain to discharge itself so long as his father had

been a mortal. The means by which he could bear witness to this love

were laid down by religion, and they were not haunted by that sense

of  guilt  from  which  his  individual  feelings  of  love  could  not  set

themselves free. In this way it was still possible for him to drain off his

deepest sexual current, which had already been precipitated in the

form of unconscious homosexuality; and at the same time his more

superficial masochistic impulsion found an incomparable sublimation,

without much renunciation, in the story of the Passion of Christ, who,

at the behest of his divine Father and in his honour, had let himself be

ill-treated and sacrificed. So it was that religion did its work for the

hard pressed child - by the combination which it afforded the believer

of satisfaction, of sublimation, of diversion from sensual processes to

purely spiritual ones, and of access to social relationships.

   The opposition which he at first offered to religion had three different

points of origin. To begin with, there was, in general, his characteristic

(which we have seen exemplified already) of fending off all novelties.

Any position of the libido which he had once taken up was obstinately

defended by him from fear of what he would lose by giving it up and

from distrust of the probability of a complete substitute being afforded

by  the  new  position  that  was  in  view.  This  is  an  important  and

fundamental psychological peculiarity, which I described in my Three

Essays  on  the  Theory  of  Sexuality  (1905d)  as  a  susceptibility  to

‘fixation’. Under the name of psychical ‘inertia’ Jung has attempted to

erect it into the principal cause of all the failures of neurotics. I think he

is wrong in this; for this factor has a far more general application and

plays an important part in the lives of the non-neurotic as well. Great

mobility or sluggishness of libidinal cathexes (as well as of other kinds

of energic cathexes) are special characteristics which attach to many

normal  people  and  by  no  means  to  all  neurotics,  and  which  have

hitherto not been brought into relation with other qualities. They are,

as it were, like prime numbers, not further divisible. We only know one

thing about them, and that is that mobility of the mental cathexes is a

quality which shows striking diminution with the advance of age. This

has given us one of the indications of the limits within which psycho-analytic treatment is effective. There are some people, however, who

retain this mental plasticity far beyond the usual age-limit, and others

who lose it very prematurely. If the latter are neurotics, we make the

unwelcome discovery that it is impossible to undo developments in

them  which,  in  apparently  similar  circumstances,  have  been  easily

dealt with in other people. So that in considering the conversion of

psychical energy no less than of physical, we must make use of the

concept  of  an entropy,  which  opposes  the  undoing  of  what  has

already occurred.

   A second point of attack was afforded by the circumstance that

religious doctrine is itself based upon a by no means unambiguous

relation  to  God  the  Father,  and  in  fact  bears  the  stamp  of  the

ambivalent attitude which presided over its origin. The patient’s own

ambivalence, which he possessed in a high degree of development,

helped him to detect the same feature in religion, and he brought to

bear on that feature those acute powers of criticism whose presence

could not fail to astonish us in a child of four and a half.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3592

 

   But there was a third factor at work, which was certainly the most

important of all, and to the operation of which we must ascribe the

pathological products of his struggle against religion. The truth was

that the mental current which impelled him to turn to men as sexual

objects and which should have been sublimated by religion was no

longer free; a portion of it was cut off by repression and so withdrawn

from the possibility of sublimation and tied to its original sexual aim. In

virtue of this state of things, the repressed portion kept making efforts

to forge its way through to the sublimated portion or to drag down the

latter to itself. The first ruminations which he wove round the figure of

Christ already involved the question whether that sublime son could

also fulfil the sexual relationship to his father which the patient had

retained in his unconscious. The only result of his repudiation of these

efforts  was  the  production  of  apparently  blasphemous  obsessive

thoughts, in which his physical affection for God asserted itself in theform  of  a  debasement.  A  violent  defensive  struggle  against  these

compromises then inevitably led to an obsessive exaggeration of all

the activities which are prescribed for giving expression to piety and a

pure  love  of  God.  Religion  won  in  the  end,  but  its  instinctual

foundations proved themselves to be incomparably stronger than the

durability of the products of their sublimation. As soon as the course of

events  presented  him  with  a  new  father-surrogate,  who  threw  his

weight into the scale against religion, it was dropped and replaced by

something  else.  Let  us  further  bear  in  mind,  as  an  interesting

complication, that his piety originated under the influence of women

(his mother and his nurse), while it was a masculine influence that set

him free from it.

   The origin of this obsessional neurosis on the basis of the sadistic-

anal organization confirms on the whole what I have said elsewhere

on the predisposition to obsessional neurosis (1913i). The previous

existence, however, of a severe hysteria in the present case makes it

more obscure in this respect.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3593

 

   I will conclude my survey of the patient’s sexual development by

giving some brief glimpses of its later vicissitudes. During the years of

puberty  a  markedly  sensual,  masculine  current,  with  a  sexual  aim

suitable  to  the  genital  organization,  made  its  appearance  in  him;  it

must be regarded as normal, and its history occupied the period up to

the time of his later illness. It was connected directly with the Grusha

scene, from which it borrowed its characteristic feature - a compulsive

falling in love that came on and passed off by sudden fits. This current

had  to  struggle  against  the  inhibitions  that  were  derived  from  his

infantile neurosis. There had been a violent revulsion in the direction

of  women,  and  he  had  thus  won  his  way  to  complete  masculinity.

From that time forward he retained women as his sexual object; but he

did  not  enjoy  this  possession,  for  a  powerful,  and  now  entirely

unconscious,  inclination  towards  men,  in  which  were  united  all  the

forces  of  the  earlier  phases  of  his  development,  was  constantlydrawing him away from his female objects and compelling him in the

intervals  to  exaggerate  his  dependence  upon  women.  He  kept

complaining during the treatment that he could not bear having to do

with women, and all our labours were directed towards disclosing to

him his unconscious relation to men. The whole situation might be

summarized  in  the  shape  of  a  formula.  His  childhood  had  been

marked by a wavering between activity and passivity, his puberty by a

struggle for masculinity, and the period after he had fallen ill by a fight

for the object of his masculine desires. The precipitating cause of his

neurosis was not one of the types of onset which I have been able to

put  together  as  special  cases  of  ‘frustration,’¹  and  it  thus  draws

attention to a gap in that classification. He broke down after an organic

affection of the genitals had revived his fear of castration, shattered

his  narcissism,  and  compelled  him  to  abandon  his  hope  of  being

personally favoured by destiny. He fell ill, therefore, as the result of a

narcissistic ‘frustration’. This excessive strength of his narcissism was

in complete harmony with the other indications of an inhibited sexual

development: with the fact that so few of his psychical trends were

concentrated  in  his  heterosexual  object  choice,  in  spite  of  all  its

energy, and that his homosexual attitude, standing so much nearer to

narcissism, persisted in him as an unconscious force with such very

great tenacity. Naturally, where disturbances like these are present,

psycho-analytic  treatment  cannot  bring  about  any  instantaneous

revolution or put matters upon a level with a normal development: it

can  only  get  rid  of  the  obstacles  and  clear  the  path,  so  that  the

influences  of  life  may  be  able  to  further  development  along  better

lines.

 

   ¹ ‘Types of Onset of Neurosis’ (1912c).

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3594

 

      I  shall  now  bring  together  some  peculiarities  of  the  patient’s

mentality which were revealed by the psycho-analytic treatment but

were not further elucidated and were accordingly not susceptible to

direct influence. Such were his tenacity of fixation, which has alreadybeen discussed, his extraordinary propensity to ambivalence, and (as

a third trait in a constitution which deserves the name of archaic) his

power  of  maintaining  simultaneously  the  most  various  and

contradictory libidinal cathexes, all of them capable of functioning side

by side. His constant wavering between these (a characteristic which

for a long time seemed to block the way to recovery and progress in

the treatment) dominated the clinical picture during his adult illness,

which I have scarcely been able to touch upon in these pages. This

was  undoubtedly  a  trait  belonging  to  the  general  character  of  the

unconscious, which in his case had persisted into processes that had

become  conscious.  But  it  showed  itself  only  in  the  products  of

affective  impulses;  in  the  region  of  pure  logic  he  betrayed,  on  the

contrary,  a  peculiar  skill  in  unearthing  contradictions  and

inconsistencies. So it was that his mental life impressed one in much

the  same  way  as  the  religion  of  Ancient  Egypt,  which  is  so

unintelligible  to  us  because  it  preserves  the  earlier  stages  of  its

development  side  by  side  with  the  end-products,  retains  the  most

ancient gods and their attributes along with the most modern ones,

and  thus,  as  it  were,  spreads  out  upon  a  two-dimensional  surface

what other instances of evolution show us in the solid.

 

   I have now come to the end of what I had to say about this case.

There remain two problems, of the many that it raises, which seem to

me  to  deserve  special  emphasis.  The  first  relates  to  the

phylogenetically  inherited  schemata,  which,  like  the  categories  of

philosophy,  are  concerned  with  the  business  of  ‘placing’  the

impressions derived from actual experience. I am inclined to take the

view that they are precipitates from the history of human civilization.

The  Oedipus  complex,  which  comprises  a  child’s  relation  to  his

parents, is one of them - is, in fact, the best known member of the

class. Wherever experiences fail to fit in with the hereditary schema,

they become remodelled in the imagination - a process which might

very profitably be followed out in detail. It is precisely such cases that

are  calculated  to  convince  us  of  the  independent  existence  of  the

schema. We are often able to see the schema triumphing over the

experience of the individual; as when in our present case the boy’s

father became the castrator and the menace of his infantile sexualityin spite of what was in other respects an inverted Oedipus complex. A

similar process is at work where a nurse comes to play the mother’s

part  or  where  the  two  become  fused  together.  The  contradictions

between experience and the schema seem to supply the conflicts of

childhood with an abundance of material.

 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3595

 

      The  second  problem  is  not  far  removed  from  the  first,  but  it  is

incomparably more important. If one considers the behaviour of the

four-year-old child towards the re-activated primal scene,¹ or even if

one thinks of the far simpler reactions of the one-and-a-half-year-old

child when the scene was actually experienced, it is hard to dismiss

the view that some sort of hardly definable knowledge, something, as

it were, preparatory to an understanding, was at work in the child at

the time.² We can form no conception of what this may have consisted

in; we have nothing at our disposal but the single analogy - and it is an

excellent one - of the far-reaching instinctive knowledge of animals.

   If human beings too possessed an instinctive endowment such as

this,  it  would  not  be  surprising  that  it  should  be  very  particularly

concerned with the processes of sexual life, even though it could not

be by any means confined to them. This instinctive factor would then

be the nucleus of the unconscious, a primitive kind of mental activity,

which would later be dethroned and overlaid by human reason, when

that faculty came to be acquired, but which in some people, perhaps

in every one, would retain the power of drawing down to it the higher

mental processes. Repression would be the return to this instinctive

stage, and man would thus be paying for his great new acquisition

with  his  liability  to  neurosis,  and  would  be  bearing  witness  by  the

possibility of the neuroses to the existence of those earlier, instinct-

like,  preliminary  stages.  The  significance  of  the  traumas  of  early

childhood would lie in their contributing material to this unconscious

which would save it from being worn away by the subsequent course

of development.

    ¹ I may disregard the fact that it was not possible to put this behaviour into words until

twenty years afterwards; for all the effects that we traced back to the scene had already been
manifested in the form of symptoms, obsessions, etc., in the patient’s childhood and long
before the analysis. It is also a matter of indifference in this connection whether we choose to
regard it as a primal scene or as a primal phantasy.

   ² I must once more emphasize the fact that these reflections would be vain if the dream and

the neurosis had not themselves occurred in infancy.
 


                    From The History Of An Infantile Neurosis

                                                                                      3596

 

   I am aware that expression has been given in many quarters to

thoughts like these, which emphasize the hereditary, phylogenetically

acquired factor in mental life. In fact, I am of opinion that people have

been far too ready to find room for them and ascribe importance to

them in psycho-analysis. I consider that they are only admissible when

psycho-analysis  strictly  observes  the  correct  order  of  precedence,

and, after forcing its way through the strata of what has been acquired

by  the  individual,  comes  at  last  upon  traces  of  what  has  been

inherited.¹

 

   ¹ (Footnote added  1923:)  I  will  once  more  set  out  here  the  chronology  of  the  events

mentioned in this case history.
   Born on Christmas Day.
   1 ½ years old: Malaria. Observation of his parents copulating; or observation of them when
they were together, into which he later introduced a phantasy of them copulating.
   Just before 2 ½: Scene with Grusha.
   2 ½: Screen memory of his parents’ departure with his sister. This showed him alone with
his Nanya and so disowned Grusha and his sister.
   Before 3 ¼: His mother’s laments to the doctor.
   3 ¼: Beginning of his seduction by his sister. Soon afterwards the threat of castration from
his Nanya.
   3 ½: The English governess. Beginning of the change in his character.
   4: The wolf dream. Origin of the phobia.
   4 ½: Influence of the Bible story. Appearance of the obsessional symptoms.
   Just before 5: Hallucination of the loss of his finger.
   5: Departure from the first estate.
   After 6: Visit to his sick father.
   8 and 10: Final outbreaks of the obsessional neurosis.
 
   It will have been easy to guess from my account that the patient was a Russian. I parted
from him, regarding him as cured, a few weeks before the unexpected outbreak of the Great
War; and I did not see him again until the shifting chances of the war had given the Central
European  Powers  access  to  South  Russia.  He  then  came  to  Vienna  and  reported  thatimmediately after the end of the treatment he had been seized with a longing to tear himself
free from my influence. After a few months’ work, a piece of the transference which had not
hitherto been overcome was successfully dealt with. Since then the patient has felt normal
and has behaved unexceptionably, in spite of the war having robbed him of his home, his
possessions, and all his family relationships. It may be that his very misery, by gratifying his
sense of guilt, contributed to the consolidation of his recovery.

                                                                                       3597

 

    ON TRANSFORMATIONS OF INSTINCT AS EXEMPLIFIED IN

                                  ANAL EROTISM

                                        (1917)

 


                                                                                      3598

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3599

 

    ON TRANSFORMATIONS OF INSTINCT AS EXEMPLIFIED IN

                                  ANAL EROTISM

 

Some years ago, observations made during psycho-analysis led me to

suspect  that  the  constant  co-existence  in  any  one  of  the  three

character-traits of orderliness, parsimony and obstinacy indicated an

intensification of the anal-erotic components in his sexual constitution,

and that these modes of reaction, which were favoured by his ego,

had been established during the course of his development through

the assimilation of his anal erotism.¹

   In that publication my main object was to make known the fact of

this  established  relation;  I  was  little  concerned  about  its  theoretical

significance.  Since  then  there  has  been  a  general  consensus  of

opinion  that  each  one  of  the  three  qualities,  avarice,  pedantry  and

obstinacy, springs from anal-erotic sources - or, to express it more

cautiously and more completely - draws powerful contributions from

those sources. The cases in which these defects of character were

combined and which in consequence bore a special stamp (the ‘anal

character’)  were  merely  extreme  instances,  which  were  bound  to

betray  the  particular  connection  that  interests  us  here  even  to  an

unobservant eye.

      As  a  result  of  numerous  impressions,  and  in  particular  of  one

specially cogent analytical observation, I came to the conclusion a fewyears later that in the development of the libido in man the phase of

genital  primacy  must  be  preceded  by  a  ‘pregenital  organization’  in

which sadism and anal erotism play the leading parts.²

   From that moment we had to face the problem of the later history of

the  anal-erotic  instinctual  impulses.  What  becomes  of  them  when,

owing to the establishment of a definitive genital organization, they

have  lost  their  importance  in  sexual  life?  Do  they  preserve  their

original nature, but in a state of repression? Are they sublimated or

assimilated by transformation into character-traits? Or do they find a

place within the new organization of sexuality characterized by genital

primacy? Or, since none of these vicissitudes of anal erotism is likely

to be the only one, to what extent and in what way does each of them

share  in  deciding  its  fate?  For  the  organic  sources  of  anal  erotism

cannot of course be buried as a result of the emergence of the genital

organization.

 

   ¹ ‘Character and Anal Erotism’ (1908b).

   ² ‘The Predisposition to Obsessional Neurosis’ (1913i).

 


      On Transformations Of Instinct As Exemplified In Anal Erotism

                                                                                      3600

 

   One would think that there could be no lack of material from which to

provide  an  answer,  since  the  processes  of  development  and

transformation  in  question  must  have  taken  place  in  everyone

undergoing analysis. Yet the material is so obscure, the abundance of

ever-recurring impressions so confusing, that even now I am unable to

solve  the  problem  fully  and  can  do  no  more  than  make  some

contributions to its solution. In making them I need not refrain from

mentioning,  where  the  context  allows  it,  other  instinctual

transformations besides anal-erotic ones. Finally, it scarcely requires

to be emphasized that the developmental events here described - just

as the others found in psycho-analysis - have been inferred from the

regressions into which they had been forced by neurotic processes.

   As a starting-point for this discussion we may take the fact that it

appears as if in the products of the unconscious - spontaneous ideas,

phantasies and symptoms - the concepts faeces (money, gift), babyand penis  are  ill-distinguished  from  one  another  and  are  easily

interchangeable. We realize, of course, that to express oneself in this

way  is  incorrectly  to  apply  to  the  sphere  of  the  unconscious  terms

which belong properly to other regions of mental life, and that we have

been led astray by the advantages offered by an analogy. To put the

matter  in  a  form  less  open  to  objection,  these  elements  in  the

unconscious are often treated as if they were equivalent and could

replace one another freely.

   This is most easily seen in the relation between ‘baby’ and ‘penis’. It

cannot  be  without  significance  that  in  the  symbolic  language  of

dreams, as well as of everyday life, both may be replaced by the same

symbol; both baby and penis are called a ‘little one’. It is a well-known

fact that symbolic speech often ignores difference of sex. The ‘little

one’, which originally meant the male genital organ, may thus have

acquired a secondary application to the female genitals.

 


      On Transformations Of Instinct As Exemplified In Anal Erotism

                                                                                      3601

 

   If we penetrate deeply enough into the neurosis of a woman, we not

infrequently meet with the repressed wish to possess a penis like a

man. We call this wish ‘envy for a penis’ and include it in the castration

complex. Chance mishaps in the life of such a woman, mishaps which

are themselves frequently the result of a very masculine disposition,

have re-activated this infantile wish and, through the backward flow of

libido, made it the chief vehicle of her neurotic symptoms. In other

women we find no evidence of this wish for a penis; it is replaced by

the wish for a baby, the frustration of which in real life can lead to the

outbreak  of  a  neurosis.  It  looks  as  if  such  women  had  understood

(although this could not possibly have acted as a motive) that nature

has given babies to women as a substitute for the penis that has been

denied  them.  With  other  women,  again,  we  learn  that  both  wishes

were present in their childhood and that one replaced the other. At first

they  had  wanted  a  penis  like  a  man;  then  at  a  later,  though  still

childish,  stage  there  appeared  instead  the  wish  for  a  baby.  The

impression is forced upon us that this variety in our findings is causedby accidental factors during childhood (e.g. the presence or absence

of brothers or the birth of a new baby at some favourable time of life),

so  that  the  wish  for  a  penis  and  the  wish  for  a  baby  would  be

fundamentally identical.

   We can say what the ultimate outcome of the infantile wish for a

penis is in women in whom the determinants of a neurosis in later life

are absent: it changes into the wish for a man, and thus puts up with

the man as an appendage to the penis. This transformation, therefore,

turns an impulse which is hostile to the female sexual function into one

which is favourable to it. Such women are in this way made capable of

an erotic life based on the masculine type of object-love, which can

exist alongside the feminine one proper, derived from narcissism. We

already  know  that  in  other  cases  it  is  only  a  baby  that  makes  the

transition from narcissistic self-love to object-love possible. So that in

this respect too a baby can be represented by the penis.

 


      On Transformations Of Instinct As Exemplified In Anal Erotism

                                                                                      3602

 

   I have had occasional opportunities of being told women’s dreams

that  had  occurred  after  their  first  experience  of  intercourse.  They

revealed an unmistakable wish in the woman to keep for herself the

penis which she had felt. Apart from their libidinal origin, then, these

dreams indicated a temporary regression from man to penis as the

object of her wish. One would certainly be inclined to trace back the

wish for a man in a purely rationalistic way to the wish for a baby,

since a woman is bound to understand sooner or later that there can

be no baby without the co-operation of a man. It is, however, more

likely that the wish for a man arises independently of the wish for a

baby, and that when it arises - from understandable motives belonging

entirely  to  ego-psychology  -  the  original  wish  for  a  penis  becomes

attached  to  it  as  an  unconscious  libidinal  reinforcement.  The

importance of the process described lies in the fact that a part of the

young  woman’s  narcissistic  masculinity  is  thus  changed  into

femininity,  and  so  can  no  longer  operate  in  a  way  harmful  to  the

female sexual function.   Along another path, a part of the erotism of the pregenital phase,

too, becomes available for use in the phase of genital primacy. The

baby  is  regarded  as  ‘lumf’  (cf.  the  analysis  of  ‘Little  Hans’),  as

something  which  becomes  detached  from  the  body  by  passing

through  the  bowel.  A  certain  amount  of  libidinal  cathexis  which

originally attached to the contents of the bowel can thus be extended

to the baby born through it. Linguistic evidence of this identity of baby

and faeces is contained in the expression ‘to give someone a baby’.

For its faeces are the infant’s first gift, a part of his body which he will

give up only on persuasion by someone he loves, to whom indeed, he

will make a spontaneous gift of it as a token of affection; for, as a rule,

infants  do  not  dirty  strangers.  (There  are  similar  if  less  intense

reactions with urine.) Defaecation affords the first occasion on which

the  child  must  decide  between  a  narcissistic  and  an  object-loving

attitude. He either parts obediently with his faeces, ‘sacrifices’ them to

his love, or else retains them for purposes of auto-erotic satisfaction

and later as a means of asserting his own will. If he makes the latter

choice  we  are  in  the  presence  of  defiance  (obstinacy)  which,

accordingly, springs from a narcissistic clinging to anal erotism.

 


      On Transformations Of Instinct As Exemplified In Anal Erotism

                                                                                      3603

 

   It is probable that the first meaning which a child’s interest in faeces

develops is that of ‘gift’ rather than ‘gold’ or ‘money’. The child knows

no money apart from what is given him - no money acquired and none

inherited of his own. Since his faeces are his first gift, the child easily

transfers his interest from that substance to the new one which he

comes across as the most valuable gift in life. Those who question this

derivation of gifts should consider their experience of psycho-analytic

treatment, study the gifts they receive as doctors from their patients,

and watch the storms of transference which a gift from them can rouse

in their patients.

   Thus the interest in faeces is continued partly as interest in money,

partly as a wish for a baby, in which latter an anal-erotic and a genital

impulse (‘envy for a penis’) converge. But the penis has another anal-erotic significance apart from its relation to the interest in a baby. The

relationship between the penis and the passage lined with mucous

membrane which it fills and excites already has its prototype in the

pregenital, anal-sadistic phase. The faecal mass, or as one patient

called it, the faecal ‘stick’, represents as it were the first penis, and the

stimulated  mucous  membrane  of  the  rectum  represents  that  of  the

vagina. There are people whose anal erotism remains vigorous and

unmodified up to the age preceding puberty (ten to twelve years); we

learn  from  them  that  during  the  pregenital  phase  they  had  already

developed  in  phantasy  and  in  perverse  play  an  organization

analogous  to  the  genital  one,  in  which  penis  and  vagina  were

represented  by  the  faecal  stick  and  the  rectum.  In  other  people  -

obsessional  neurotics  -  we  can  observe  the  result  of  a  regressive

debasement of the genital organization. This is expressed in the fact

that  every  phantasy  originally  conceived  on  the  genital  level  is

transposed to the anal level - the penis being replaced by the faecal

mass and the vagina by the rectum.

      As  the  interest  in  faeces  recedes  in  a  normal  way,  the  organic

analogy  we  have  described  here  has  the  effect  of  transferring  the

interest  on  to  the  penis.  When,  later,  in  the  course  of  the  child’s

researches he discovers that babies are born from the bowel, they

inherit the greater part of his anal erotism; they have, however, been

preceded by the penis in this as well as in another sense.

 


      On Transformations Of Instinct As Exemplified In Anal Erotism

                                                                                      3604

 

   I feel sure that by this time the manifold interrelations of the series -

faeces, penis, baby - have become totally unintelligible; so I will try to

remedy  the  defect  by  presenting  them  diagramatically,  and  in

considering  the  diagram  we  can  review  the  same  material  in  a

different order. Unfortunately, this technical device is not sufficiently

pliable for our purpose, or possibly we have not yet learned to use it

with effect. In any case I hope the reader will not expect too much

from it.

  

                                          Fig. 2.

 

      Anal  erotism  finds  a  narcissistic  application  in  the  production  of

defiance, which constitutes an important reaction on the part of the

ego  against  demands  made  by  other  people.  Interest  in  faeces  is

carried over first to interest in gifts, and then to interest in money. In

girls, the discovery of the penis gives rise to envy for it, which later

changes into the wish for a man as the possessor of a penis. Even

before this the wish for a penis has changed into the wish for a baby,

or the latter wish has taken the place of the former one. An organic

analogy  between  penis  and  baby  (dotted  line)  is  expressed  by  the

existence of a symbol (‘little one’) common to both. A rational wish

(double line) then leads from the wish for a baby to the wish for a man:

we  have  already  appreciated  the  importance  of  this  instinctual

transformation.

 


      On Transformations Of Instinct As Exemplified In Anal Erotism

                                                                                      3605

 

   Another part of the nexus of relations can be observed much more

clearly in the male. It arises when the boy’s sexual researches leadhim  to  the  discovery  of  the  absence  of  a  penis  in  women.  He

concludes  that  the  penis  must  be  a  detachable  part  of  the  body,

something analogous to faeces, the first piece of bodily substance the

child  had  to  part  with.  Thus  the  old  anal  defiance  enters  into  the

composition  of  the  castration  complex.  The  organic  analogy  which

enabled the intestinal contents to be the forerunner of the penis during

the pregenital phase cannot come into account as a motive; but the

boy’s sexual researches lead him to a psychical substitute for it. When

a baby appears on the scene he regards it as ‘lumf’, in accordance

with  those  researches,  and  he  cathects  it  with  powerful  anal-erotic

interest. When social experiences teach that a baby is to be regarded

as  a  love-token,  a  gift,  the  wish  for  a  baby  receives  a  second

contribution from the same source. Faeces, penis and baby are all

three  solid  bodies;  they  all  three,  by  forcible  entry  or  expulsion,

stimulate a membranous passage, i.e. the rectum and the vagina, the

latter  being  as  it  were  ‘taken  on  lease’  from  the  rectum,  as  Lou

Andreas-Salomé aptly remarks.¹ Infantile sexual researches can only

lead to the conclusion that the baby follows the same route as the

faecal mass. The function of the penis is not usually discovered by

those  researches.  But  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  after  so  many

detours an organic correspondence reappears in the psychical sphere

as an unconscious identity.

 

   ¹ In her paper ‘"Anal" und "Sexual"‘ (1916).

                                                                                       3606

 

          A DIFFICULTY IN THE PATH OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

                                        (1917)

 


                                                                                      3607

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3608

 

          A DIFFICULTY IN THE PATH OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS

 

I will say at once that it is not an intellectual difficulty I am thinking of,

not anything that makes psycho-analysis hard for the hearer or reader

to  understand,  but  an  affective  one  -  something  that  alienates  the

feelings of those who come into contact with it, so that they become

less  inclined  to  believe  in  it  or  take  an  interest  in  it.  As  will  be

observed, the two kinds of difficulty amount to the same thing in the

end.  Where  sympathy  is  lacking,  understanding  will  not  come  very

easily.

   My present readers, I take it, have not so far had anything to do with

the  subject  and  I  shall  be  obliged,  therefore,  to  go  back  some

distance.  Out  of  a  great  number  of  individual  observations  and

impressions something in the nature of a theory has at last shaped

itself in psycho-analysis, and this is known by the name of the ‘libido

theory’.  As  is  well  known,  psycho-analysis  is  concerned  with  the

elucidation  and  removal  of  what  are  called  nervous  disorders.  A

starting-point had to be found from which to approach this problem,

and  it  was  decided  to  look  for  it  in  the  instinctual  life  of  the  mind.

Hypotheses  about  the  instincts  in  man  came  to  form  the  basis,

therefore, of our conception of nervous disease.

   Psychology as it is taught academically gives us but very inadequate

replies to questions concerning our mental life, but in no direction is its

information so meagre as in this matter of the instincts.   It is open to us to make our first soundings as we please. The

popular  view  distinguishes  between  hunger  and  love,  as  being  the

representatives  of  the  instincts  which  aim  respectively  at  the

preservation of the individual and at the reproduction of the species.

We accept this very evident distinction, so that in psycho-analysis too

we make a distinction between the self-preservative or ego-instincts

on the one hand and the sexual instincts on the other. The force by

which the sexual instinct is represented in the mind we call ‘libido’ -

sexual desire - and we regard it as something analogous to hunger,

the will to power, and so on, where the ego-instincts are concerned.

 


                  A Difficulty In The Path Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3609

 

   With this as a starting-point we go on to make our first important

discovery.  We  learn  that,  when  we  try  to  understand  neurotic

disorders,  by  far  the  greater  significance  attaches  to  the  sexual

instincts; that in fact neuroses are the specific disorders, so to speak,

of  the  sexual  function;  that  in  general  whether  or  not  a  person

develops a neurosis depends on the quantity of his libido, and on the

possibility of satisfying it and of discharging it through satisfaction; that

the form taken by the disease is determined by the way in which the

individual  passes  through  the  course  of  development  of  his  sexual

function, or, as we put it, by the fixations his libido has undergone in

the course of its development; and, further, that by a special, not very

simple technique for influencing the mind we are able to throw light on

the nature of some groups of neuroses and at the same time to do

away with them. Our therapeutic efforts have their greatest success

with  a  certain  class  of  neuroses  which  proceed  from  a  conflict

between  the  ego-instincts  and  the  sexual  instincts.  For  in  human

beings it may happen that the demands of the sexual instincts, whose

reach of course extends far beyond the individual, seem to the ego to

constitute  a  danger  which  threatens  its  self-preservation  or  its  self-

esteem.  The  ego  then  assumes  the  defensive,  denies  the  sexual

instincts the satisfaction they desire and forces them into those by-

paths of substitutive satisfaction which become manifest as nervoussymptoms.

   The psycho-analytic method of treatment is then able to subject this

process of repression to revision and to bring about a better solution

of  the  conflict  -  one  that  is  compatible  with  health.  Unintelligent

opposition accuses us of one-sidedness in our estimate of the sexual

instincts. ‘Human beings have other interests besides sexual ones,’

they say. We have not forgotten or denied this for a moment. Our one-

sidedness is like that of the chemist, who traces all compounds back

to the force of chemical attraction. He is not on that account denying

the force of gravity; he leaves that to the physicist to deal with.

   During the work of treatment we have to consider the distribution of

the patient’s libido; we look for the object presentations to which it is

bound and free it from them, so as to place it at the disposal of the

ego. In the course of this, we have come to form a very curious picture

of the original, primal distribution of libido in human beings. We have

been driven to assume that at the beginning of the development of the

individual all his libido (all his erotic tendencies, all his capacity for

love) is tied to himself - that as we say, it cathects his own ego. It is

only  later  that,  being  attached  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  major  vital

needs, the libido flows over from the ego on to external objects. Not till

then  are  we  able  to  recognize  the  libidinal  instincts  as  such  and

distinguish them from the ego instincts. It is possible for the libido to

become detached from these objects and withdrawn again into the

ego.

 


                  A Difficulty In The Path Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3610

 

   The condition in which the ego retains the libido is called by us

‘narcissism’, in reference to the Greek legend of the youth Narcissus

who was in love with his own reflection.

   Thus in our view the individual advances from narcissism to object-

love. But we do not believe that the whole of the libido ever passes

over  from  the  ego  to  objects.  A  certain  quantity  of  libido  is  always

retained  in  the  ego;  even  when  object-love  is  highly  developed,  a

certain amount of narcissism persists. The ego is a great reservoirfrom which the libido that is destined for objects flows out and into

which it flows back from those objects. Object-libido was at first ego-

libido  and  can  be  transformed  back  into  ego-libido.  For  complete

health it is essential that the libido should not lose this full mobility. As

an  illustration  of  this  state  of  things  we  may  think  of  an  amoeba,

whose  viscous  substance  puts  out  pseudopodia,  elongations  into

which the substance of the body extends but which can be retracted at

any time so that the form of the protoplasmic mass is restored.

   What I have been trying to describe in this outline is the libido theory

of the neuroses, upon which are founded all our conceptions of the

nature of these morbid states, together with our therapeutic measures

for  relieving  them.  We  naturally  regard  the  premises  of  the  libido

theory  as  valid  for  normal  behaviour  as  well.  We  speak  of  the

narcissism of small children, and it is to the excessive narcissism of

primitive  man  that  we  ascribe  his  belief  in  the  omnipotence  of  his

thoughts  and  his  consequent  attempts  to  influence  the  course  of

events in the external world by the technique of magic.

      After  this  introduction  I  propose  to  describe  how  the  universal

narcissism of men, their self-love, has up to the present suffered three

severe blows from the researches of science.

 


                  A Difficulty In The Path Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3611

 

   (a) In the early stages of his researches, man believed at first that

his dwelling-place, the earth, was the stationary centre of the universe,

with the sun, moon and planets circling round it. In this he was naïvely

following  the  dictates  of  his  sense  perceptions,  for  he  felt  no

movement of the earth, and wherever he had an unimpeded view he

found himself in the centre of a circle that enclosed the external world.

The central position of the earth, moreover, was a token to him of the

dominating part played by it in the universe and appeared to fit in very

well with his inclination to regard himself as lord of the world.

   The destruction of this narcissistic illusion is associated in our minds

with the name and work of Copernicus in the sixteenth century. But

long before his day the Pythagoreans had already cast doubts on theprivileged  position  of  the  earth,  and  in  the  third  century  B.  C.

Aristarchus of Samos had declared that the earth was much smaller

than  the  sun  and  moved  round  that  celestial  body.  Even  the  great

discovery  of  Copernicus,  therefore,  had  already  been  made  before

him. When this discovery achieved general recognition, the self-love

of mankind suffered its first blow, the cosmological one.

   (b) In the course of the development of civilization man acquired a

dominating position over his fellow-creatures in the animal kingdom.

Not content with this supremacy, however, he began to place a gulf

between his nature and theirs. He denied the possession of reason to

them, and to himself he attributed an immortal soul, and made claims

to  a  divine  descent  which  permitted  him  to  break  the  bond  of

community between him and the animal kingdom. Curiously enough,

this  piece  of  arrogance  is  still  foreign  to  children,  just  as  it  is  to

primitive  and  primaeval  man.  It  is  the  result  of  a  later,  more

pretentious stage of development. At the level of totemism primitive

man  had  no  repugnance  to  tracing  his  descent  from  an  animal

ancestor.  In  myths,  which  contain  the  precipitate  of  this  ancient

attitude of mind, the gods take animal shapes, and in the art of earliest

times  they  are  portrayed  with  animals’  heads.  A  child  can  see  no

difference  between  his  own  nature  and  that  of  animals.  He  is  not

astonished at animals thinking and talking in fairy-tales; he will transfer

an emotion of fear which he feels for his human father onto a dog or a

horse, without intending any derogation of his father by it. Not until he

is grown up does he become so far estranged from animals as to use

their names in vilification of human beings.

   We all know that little more than half a century ago the researches

of Charles Darwin and his collaborators and forerunners put an end to

this presumption on the part of man. Man is not a being different from

animals or superior to them; he himself is of animal descent, being

more closely related to some species and more distantly to others.

The acquisitions he has subsequently made have not succeeded in

effacing the evidences, both in his physical structure and in his mental

dispositions,  of  his  parity  with  them.  This  was  the  second,  the

biological blow to human narcissism.

                   A Difficulty In The Path Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3612

 

   (c) The third blow, which is psychological in nature, is probably the

most wounding.

   Although thus humbled in his external relations, man feels himself to

be supreme within his own mind. Somewhere in the core of his ego he

has  developed  an  organ  of  observation  to  keep  a  watch  on  his

impulses  and  actions  and  see  whether  they  harmonize  with  its

demands. If they do not, they are ruthlessly inhibited and withdrawn.

His internal perception, consciousness, gives the ego news of all the

important occurrences in the mind’s working, and the will, directed by

these reports, carries out what the ego orders and modifies anything

that seeks to accomplish itself spontaneously. For this mind is not a

simple thing; on the contrary, it is a hierarchy of superordinated and

subordinated agencies, a labyrinth of impulses striving independently

of one another towards action, corresponding with the multiplicity of

instincts and of relations with the external world, many of which are

antagonistic to one another and incompatible. For proper functioning it

is  necessary  that  the  highest  of  these  agencies  should  have

knowledge of all that is going forward and that its will should penetrate

everywhere,  so  as  to  exert  its  influence.  And  in  fact  the  ego  feels

secure both as to the completeness and trustworthiness of the reports

it receives and as to the openness of the channels through which it

enforces its commands.

   In certain diseases - including the very neuroses of which we have

made  special  study  -  things  are  different.  The  ego  feels  uneasy;  it

comes  up  against  limits  to  its  power  in  its  own  house,  the  mind.

Thoughts emerge suddenly without one’s knowing where they come

from, nor can one do anything to drive them away. These alien guests

even seem to be more powerful than those which are at the ego’s

command. They resist all the well-proved measures of enforcement

used  by  the  will,  remain  unmoved  by  logical  refutation,  and  are

unaffected by the contradictory assertions of reality. Or else impulses

appear which seem like those of a stranger, so that the ego disowns

them; yet it has to fear them and take precautions against them. The

ego says to itself: ‘This is an illness, a foreign invasion.’ It increases itsvigilance, but cannot understand why it feels so strangely paralysed.

 


                  A Difficulty In The Path Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3613

 

   Psychiatry, it is true, denies that such things mean the intrusion into

the mind of evil spirits from without; beyond this, however, it can only

say with a shrug: ‘Degeneracy, hereditary disposition, constitutional

inferiority!’  Psycho-analysis  sets  out  to  explain  these  uncanny

disorders; it engages in careful and laborious investigations, devises

hypotheses and scientific constructions, until at length it can speak

thus to the ego:-

   ‘Nothing has entered into you from without; a part of the activity of

your own mind has been withdrawn from your knowledge and from the

command  of  your  will.  That,  too,  is  why  you  are  so  weak  in  your

defence; you are using one part of your force to fight the other part

and  you  cannot  concentrate  the  whole  of  your  force  as  you  would

against  an  external  enemy.  And  it  is  not  even  the  worst  or  least

important  part  of  your  mental  forces  that  has  thus  become

antagonistic to you and independent of you. The blame, I am bound to

say,  lies  with  yourself.  You  over-estimated  your  strength  when  you

thought you could treat your sexual instincts as you liked and could

utterly ignore their intentions. The result is that they have rebelled and

have taken their own obscure paths to escape this suppression; they

have established their rights in a manner you cannot approve. How

they have achieved this, and the paths which they have taken, have

not come to your knowledge. All you have learned is the outcome of

their work - the symptom which you experience as suffering. Thus you

do not recognize it as a derivative of your own rejected instincts and

do not know that it is a substitutive satisfaction of them.

 


                  A Difficulty In The Path Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3614

 

   ‘The whole process, however, only becomes possible through the

single circumstance that you are mistaken in another important pointas well. You feel sure that you are informed of all that goes on in your

mind if it is of any importance at all, because in that case, you believe,

your  consciousness  gives  you  news  of  it.  And  if  you  have  had  no

information of something in your mind you confidently assume that it

does  not  exist  there.  Indeed,  you  go  so  far  as  to  regard  what  is

"mental" as identical with what is "conscious" - that is, with what is

known to you in spite of the most obvious evidence that a great deal

more must constantly be going on in your mind than can be known to

your consciousness. Come, let yourself be taught something on this

one point! What is in your mind does not coincide with what you are

conscious of; whether something is going on in your mind and whether

you hear of it, are two different things. In the ordinary way, I will admit,

the intelligence which reaches your consciousness is enough for your

needs; and you may cherish the illusion that you learn of all the more

important things. But in some cases, as in that of an instinctual conflict

such as I have described, your intelligence service breaks down and

your will then extends no further than your knowledge. In every case,

however,  the  news  that  reaches  your  consciousness  is  incomplete

and often not to be relied on. Often enough, too, it happens that you

get news of events only when they are over and when you can no

longer do anything to change them. Even if you are not ill, who can tell

all that is stirring in your mind of which you know nothing or are falsely

informed? You behave like an absolute ruler who is content with the

information  supplied  him  by  his  highest  officials  and  never  goes

among the people to hear their voice. Turn your eyes inward, look into

your own depths, learn first to know yourself! Then you will understand

why you were bound to fall ill; and perhaps, you will avoid falling ill in

future.’

   It is thus that psycho-analysis has sought to educate the ego. But

these two discoveries - that the life of our sexual instincts cannot be

wholly  tamed,  and  that  mental  processes  are  in  themselves

unconscious  and  only  reach  the  ego  and  come  under  its  control

through  incomplete  and  untrustworthy  perceptions  -  these  two

discoveries amount to a statement that the ego is not master in its

own house. Together they represent the third blow to man’s self-love,

what I may call the psychological one. No wonder, then, that the ego

does  not  look  favourably  upon  psycho-analysis  and  obstinatelyrefuses to believe in it.

 


                  A Difficulty In The Path Of Psycho-Analysis

                                                                                      3615

 

      Probably  very  few  people  can  have  realized  the  momentous

significance  for  science  and  life  of  the  recognition  of  unconscious

mental processes. It was not psycho-analysis, however, let us hasten

to add, which first took this step. There are famous philosophers who

may  be  cited  as  forerunners  -  above  all  the  great  thinker

Schopenhauer, whose unconscious ‘Will’ is equivalent to the mental

instincts of psycho-analysis. It was this same thinker, moreover, who

in words of unforgettable impressiveness admonished mankind of the

importance, still so greatly under-estimated by it, of its sexual craving.

Psycho-analysis has this advantage only, that it has not affirmed these

two propositions which are so distressing to narcissism - the psychical

importance of sexuality and the unconsciousness of mental life - on an

abstract basis, but has demonstrated them in matters that touch every

individual personally and force him to take up some attitude towards

these problems. It is just for this reason, however, that it brings on

itself the aversion and resistances which still hold back in awe before

the great name of the philosopher.

                                                                                       3616

 

        A CHILDHOOD RECOLLECTION FROM DICHTUNG UND

                                      WAHRHEIT

                                        (1917)

 


                                                                                      3617

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3618

 

        A CHILDHOOD RECOLLECTION FROM DICHTUNG UND

                                      WAHRHEIT

 

‘If  we  try  to  recollect  what  happened  to  us  in  the  earliest  years  of

childhood, we often find that we confuse what we have heard from

others with what is really a possession of our own derived from what

we ourselves have witnessed.’ This remark is found on one of the first

pages of Goethe’s account of his life, which he began to write at the

age of sixty. It is preceded only by some information about his birth,

which  ‘took  place  on  August  28,  1749,  at  midday  on  the  stroke  of

twelve’. The stars were in a favourable conjunction and may well have

been the cause of his survival, for at his entry into the world he was

‘as  though  dead’,  and  it  was  only  after  great  efforts  that  he  was

brought to life. There follows on this a short description of the house

and of the place in it where the children - he and his younger sister -

best liked to play. After this, however, Goethe relates in fact only one

single event which can be assigned to the ‘earliest years of childhood’

(the years up to four?) and of which he seems to have preserved a

recollection of his own.

      The  account  of  it  runs  as  follows:  ‘And  three  brothers  (von

Ochsenstein by name) who lived over the way became very fond of

me; they were orphan sons of the late magistrate, and they took an

interest in me and used to tease me in all sorts of ways.   ‘My people used to like to tell of all kinds of pranks in which these

men,  otherwise  of  a  serious  and  retiring  disposition,  used  to

encourage me. I will quote only one of these exploits. The crockery-

fair was just over, and not only had the kitchen been fitted up from it

with  what  would  be  needed  for  some  time  to  come,  but  miniature

utensils of the same sort had been bought for us children to play with.

One fine afternoon, when all was quiet in the house, I was playing with

my  dishes  and  pots  in  the  hall’  (a  place  which  had  already  been

described, opening on to the street) ‘and, since this seemed to lead to

nothing, I threw a plate into the street, and was overjoyed to see it go

to bits so merrily. The von Ochsensteins, who saw how delighted I

was and how joyfully I clapped my little hands, called out "Do it again!"

I did not hesitate to sling out a pot on to the paving-stones, and then,

as they kept crying "Another!", one after another all my little dishes,

cooking-pots  and  pans.  My  neighbours  continued  to  show  their

approval and I was highly delighted to be amusing them. But my stock

was all used up, and still they cried "Another!" So I ran off straight into

the kitchen and fetched the earthenware plates, which made an even

finer show as they smashed to bits. And thus I ran backwards and

forwards, bringing one plate after another, as I could reach them in

turn from the dresser; and, as they were not content with that, I hurled

every piece of crockery I could set hold of to the same destruction.

Only later did someone come and interfere and put a stop to it all. The

damage was done, and to make up for so much broken earthenware

there was at least an amusing story, which the rascals who had been

its instigators enjoyed to the end of their lives.’

 


          A Childhood Recollection From Dichtung Und Wahrheit

                                                                                      3619

 

      In  pre-analytic  days  it  was  possible  to  read  this  without  finding

occasion  to  pause  and  without  feeling  surprised,  but  later  on  the

analytic conscience became active. We had formed definite opinions

and expectations about the memories of earliest childhood, and would

have liked to claim universal validity for them. It should not be a matter

of indifference or entirely without meaning which detail of a child’s lifehad  escaped  the  general  oblivion.  It  might  on  the  contrary  be

conjectured  that  what  had  remained  in  memory  was  the  most

significant  element  in  that  whole  period  of  life,  whether  it  had

possessed such an importance at the time, or whether it had gained

subsequent importance from the influence of later events.

   The high value of such childish recollections was, it is true, obvious

only  in  a  few  cases.  Generally  they  seemed  indifferent,  worthless

even,  and  it  remained  at  first  incomprehensible  why  just  these

memories should have resisted amnesia; nor could the person who

had  preserved  them  for  long  years  as  part  of  his  own  store  of

memories  see  more  in  them  than  any  stranger  to  whom  he  might

relate them. Before their significance could be appreciated, a certain

work  of  interpretation  was  necessary.  This  interpretation  either

showed  that  their  content  required  to  be  replaced  by  some  other

content,  or  revealed  that  they  were  related  to  some  other

unmistakably important experiences and had appeared in their place

as what are known as ‘screen memories’.

   In every psycho-analytic investigation of a life-history it is always

possible to explain the meaning of the earliest childhood memories

along these lines. Indeed, it usually happens that the very recollection

to  which  the  patient  gives  precedence,  which  he  relates  first,  with

which  he  introduces  the  story  of  his  life,  proves  to  be  the  most

important, the very one that holds the key to the secret pages of his

mind. But the little childish episode related in Dichtung und Wahrheit

does not rise to our expectations. The ways and means that with our

patients lead to interpretation are of course not available to us here;

the  episode  does  not  seem  in  itself  to  admit  of  any  traceable

connection with important impressions at a later date. A mischievous

trick  with  damaging  effects  on  the  household  economy,  carried  out

under  the  spur  of  outside  encouragement,  is  certainly  no  fitting

headpiece for all that Goethe has to tell us of his richly filled life. An

impression of utter innocence and irrelevance clings to this childish

memory, and it might be taken as a warning not to stretch the claims

of psycho-analysis too far nor to apply it in unsuitable places.

   The little problem, therefore, had long since slipped out of my mind,

when  one  day  chance  brought  me  a  patient  in  whom  a  similar

childhood memory appeared in a clearer connection. He was a man oftwenty-seven, highly educated and gifted, whose life at that time was

entirely  filled  with  a  conflict  with  his  mother  that  affected  all  his

interests, and from the effects of which his capacity for love and his

ability  to  lead  an  independent  existence  bad  suffered  greatly.  This

conflict went far back into his childhood; certainly to his fourth year.

Before that he had been a very weakly child, always ailing, and yet

that sickly period was glorified into a paradise in his memory; for then

he  had  had  exclusive,  uninterrupted  possession  of  his  mother’s

affection. When he was not yet four, a brother, who is still living, was

born,  and  in  his  reaction  to  that  disturbing  event  he  became

transformed  into  an  obstinate,  unmanageable  boy,  who  perpetually

provoked his mother’s severity. More over, he never regained the right

path.

 


          A Childhood Recollection From Dichtung Und Wahrheit

                                                                                      3620

 

   When he came to me for treatment - by no means the least reason

for his coming was that his mother, a religious bigot, had a horror of

psycho-analysis - his jealousy of the younger brother (which had once

actually been manifested as a murderous attack on the infant in its

cradle) had long been forgotten. He now treated his brother with great

consideration;  but  certain  curious  fortuitous  actions  of  his  (which

involved  sudden  and  severe  injuries  to  favourite  animals,  like  his

sporting dog or birds which he had carefully reared,) were probably to

be understood as echoes of these hostile impulses against the little

brother.

   Now this patient related that, at about the time of the attack on the

baby he so much hated, he had thrown all the crockery he could lay

hands on out of the window of their country house into the road-the

very same thing that Goethe relates of his childhood in Dichtung und

Wahrheit! I may remark that my patient was of foreign nationality and

was  not  acquainted  with  German  literature;  he  had  never  read

Goethe’s autobiography.

   This communication naturally suggested to me that an attempt might

be made to explain Goethe’s childish memory on the lines forced uponus by my patient’s story. But could the necessary conditions for this

explanation be shown to exist in the poet’s childhood? Goethe himself,

it  is  true,  makes  the  instigation  of  the  von  Ochsenstein  brothers

responsible for his childish prank. But from his own narrative it can be

seen that these grown-up neighbours merely encouraged him to go on

with what he was doing. The beginning was on his own initiative, and

the reason he gives for this beginning - ‘since this (the game) seemed

to lead to nothing’ - is surely, without any forcing of its meaning, a

confession that at the time of writing it down and probably for many

years previously he was not aware of any adequate motive for his

behaviour.

   It is well known that Johann Wolfgang and his sister Cornelia were

the eldest survivors of a considerable family of very weakly children.

Dr. Hanns Sachs has been so kind as to supply me with the following

details concerning these brothers and sisters of Goethe’s, who died in

childhood:

   (a) Hermann Jakob, baptized Monday, November 27, 1752; reached

the age of six years and six weeks; buried January 13, 1759.

   (b)  Katharina  Elisabetha,  baptized  Monday,  September  9,  1754;

buried  Thursday,  December  22,  1755.  (One  year  and  four  months

old).

   (c) Johanna Maria, baptized Tuesday, March 29, 1757, and buried

Saturday, August 11, 1759. (Two years and four months old)- (This

was doubtless the very pretty and attractive little girl celebrated by her

brother.)

   (d) Georg Adolph, baptized Sunday, June 15, 1760; buried, eight

months old, Wednesday, February 18, 1761.

 


          A Childhood Recollection From Dichtung Und Wahrheit

                                                                                      3621

 

   Goethe’s next youngest sister, Cornelia Friederica Christiana, was

born  on  December  7,  1750,  when  he  was  fifteen  months  old.  This

slight difference in age almost excludes the possibility of her having

been  an  object  of  jealousy.  It  is  known  that,  when  their  passions

awake,  children  never  develop  such  violent  reactions  against  thebrothers  and  sisters  they  find  already  in  existence,  but  direct  their

hostility  against  the  newcomers.  Nor  is  the  scene  we  are

endeavouring to interpret reconcilable with Goethe’s tender age at the

time of, or shortly after, Cornelia’s birth.

   At the time of the birth of the first little brother, Hermann Jakob,

Johann Wolfgang was three and a quarter years old. Nearly two years

later, when he was about five years old, the second sister was born.

Both  ages  come  under  consideration  in  dating  the  episode  of  the

throwing out of the crockery. The earlier is perhaps to be preferred;

and it would best agree with the case of my patient, who was about

three and a quarter years old at the birth of his brother.

   Moreover, Goethe’s brother Hermann Jakob, to whom we are thus

led in our attempt at interpretation, did not make so brief a stay in the

family nursery as the children born afterwards. One might feel some

surprise  that  the  autobiography  does  not  contain  a  word  of

remembrance of him.¹ He was over six, and Johann Wolfgang was

nearly ten, when he died. Dr. Hitschmann, who was kind enough to

place his notes on this subject at my disposal, says:

   ‘Goethe, too, as a little boy saw a younger brother die without regret.

At least, according to Bettina Brentano his mother gave the following

account: "It struck her as very extraordinary that he shed no tears at

the death of his younger brother Jakob who was his playfellow; he

seemed on the contrary to feel annoyance at the grief of his parents

and sisters. When, later on, his mother asked the young rebel if he

had not been fond of his brother, he ran into his room and brought out

from  under  the  bed  a  heap  of  papers  on  which  lessons  and  little

stories  were  written,  saying  that  he  had  done  all  this  to  teach  his

brother."  So  it  seems  all  the  same  that  the  elder  brother  enjoyed

playing father to the younger and showing him his superiority.’

 

   ¹ (Footnote added 1924:) I take this opportunity of withdrawing an incorrect statement which

should not have been made. In a later passage in this first volume the younger brother is
mentioned and described. It occurs in connection with memories of the serious illnesses of
childhood, from which this brother also suffered ‘not a little’. ‘He was a delicate child, quiet and
self-willed, and we never had much to do with each other. Besides, he hardly survived the
years of infancy.’
 


          A Childhood Recollection From Dichtung Und Wahrheit                                                                                      3622

 

   The opinion might thus be formed that the throwing of crockery out

of the window was a symbolic action, or, to put it more correctly, a

magic action, by which the child (Goethe as well as my patient) gave

violent expression to his wish to get rid of a disturbing intruder. There

is no need to dispute a child’s enjoyment of smashing things; if an

action is pleasurable in itself, that is not a hindrance but rather an

inducement to repeat it in obedience to other purposes as well. It is

unlikely, however, that it could have been the pleasure in the crash

and the breaking which ensured the childish prank a lasting place in

adult  memory.  Nor  is  there  any  objection  to  complicating  the

motivation of the action by adding a further factor. A child who breaks

crockery  knows  quite  well  that  he  is  doing  something  naughty  for

which  grown-ups  will  scold  him,  and  if  he  is  not  restrained  by  that

knowledge,  he  probably  has  a  grudge  against  his  parents  that  he

wants to satisfy; he wants to show naughtiness.

   The pleasure in breaking and in broken things would be satisfied,

too, if the child simply threw the breakable object on the ground. The

hurling  them  out  of  the  window  into  the  street  would  still  remain

unexplained. This ‘out!’ seems to be an essential part of the magic

action and to arise directly from its hidden meaning. The new baby

must be got rid of - through the window, perhaps because he came in

through the window. The whole action would thus be equivalent to the

verbal response, already familiar to us, of a child who was told that the

stork had brought a little brother. ‘The stork can take him away again!’

was his verdict.

 


          A Childhood Recollection From Dichtung Und Wahrheit

                                                                                      3623

 

   All the same, we are not blind to the objections - apart from any

internal uncertainties - against basing the interpretation of a childhood

act on a single parallel. For this reason I had for years kept back my

theory about the little scene in Dichtung und Wahrheit. Then one day I

had  a  patient  who  began  his  analysis  with  the  following  remarks,

which I set down word for word: ‘I am the eldest of a family of eight ornine children.¹ One of my earliest recollections is of my father sitting

on the bed in his night-shirt, and telling me laughingly that I had a new

brother.  I  was  then  three  and  three-quarters  years  old;  that  is  the

difference in age between me and my next younger brother. I know,

too, that a short time after (or was it a year before?)²I threw a lot of

things, brushes - or was it only one brush? - shoes and other things,

out  of  the  window  into  the  street.  I  have  a  still  earlier  recollection.

When I was two years old, I spent a night with my parents in a hotel

bedroom at Linz on the way to the Salzkammergut. I was so restless

in the night and made such a noise that my father had to beat me. ’

   After hearing this statement I threw all doubts to the winds. When in

analysis two things are brought out one immediately after the other, as

though  in  one  breath,  we  have  to  interpret  this  proximity  as  a

connection  of  thought.  It  was,  therefore,  as  if  the  patient  had  said,

‘Because I found that I had got a new brother, I shortly afterwards

threw  these  things  into  the  street.’  The  act  of  flinging  the  brushes,

shoes and so on, out of the window must be recognized as a reaction

to  the  birth  of  the  brother.  Nor  is  it  a  matter  for  regret  that  in  this

instance the objects thrown out were not crockery but other things,

probably, anything the child could reach at the moment. - The hurling

out (through the window into the street) thus proves to be the essential

thing in the act, while the pleasure in the smashing and the noise, and

the  class  of  object  on  which  ‘execution  is  done’,  are  variable  and

unessential points.

   Naturally, the principle of there being a connection of thought must

be applied as well to the patient’s third childish recollection, which is

the earliest, though it was put at the end of the short series. This can

easily  be  done.  Evidently  the  two-year-old  child  was  so  restless

because he could not bear his parents being in bed together. On the

journey it was no doubt impossible to avoid the child being a witness

of this. The feelings which were aroused at that time in the jealous

little boy left him with an embitterment against women which persisted

and permanently interfered with the development of his capacity for

love.

 

   ¹ A momentary error of a striking character. It was probably induced by the influence of the

intention, which was already showing itself, to get rid of a brother. (Cf. Ferenczi, 1912, ‘On
Transitory Symptoms during Analysis’.)    ² This  doubt,  attaching  to  the  essential  point  of  the  communication  for  purposes  of

resistance, was shortly afterwards withdrawn by the patient of his own accord.
 


          A Childhood Recollection From Dichtung Und Wahrheit

                                                                                      3624

 

 

   After making these two observations I expressed the opinion at a

meeting of the Vienna Psycho-Analytical Society that occurrences of

the  same  kind  might  be  not  infrequent  among  young  children;  in

response, Frau Dr. von Hug-Hellmuth placed two further observations

at my disposal, which I append here.

 

                                            I

 

   ‘At the age of about three and a half, little Erich quite suddenly

acquired the habit of throwing everything he did not like out of the

window. He also did it, however, with things that were not in his way

and did not concern him. On his father’s birthday - he was three years

and four and a half months old - he snatched a heavy rolling-pin from

the  kitchen,  dragged  it  into  the  living-room  and  threw  it  out  of  the

window of the third-floor flat into the street. Some days later he sent

after it the kitchen-pestle, and then a pair of heavy mountaineering

boots of his father’s, which he had first to take out of the cupboard.¹

   ‘At that time his mother had a miscarriage, in the seventh or eighth

month of pregnancy, and after that the child was "sweet and quiet and

so good that he seemed quite changed". In the fifth or sixth month he

repeatedly said to his mother, "Mummy, I’II jump on your tummy" - or,

"I’II  push  your  tummy  in."  And  shortly  before  the  miscarriage,  in

October, he said, "If I must have a brother, at least I don’t want him till

after Christmas."’

 

                                            II

 

   ‘A young lady of nineteen told me spontaneously that her earliest

recollection was as follows: "I see myself, frightfully naughty, sitting

under  the  table  in  the  dining-room,  ready  to  creep  out.  My  cup  ofcoffee is standing on the table - I can still see the pattern on the china

quite plainly - and Granny comes into the room just as I am going to

throw it out of the window.

   ‘"For the fact was that no one had been bothering about me, and in

the  meantime  a  skin  had  formed  on  the  coffee,  which  was  always

perfectly dreadful to me and still is.

   ‘"On that day my brother, who is two and a half years younger than I

am, was born, and so no one had had any time to spare for me.

   ‘"They always tell me that I was insupportable on that day: at dinner

I  threw  my  father’s  favourite  glass  on  the  floor,  I  dirtied  my  frock

several times, and was in the worst temper from morning to night. In

my rage I tore a bath-doll to pieces."’

 

   ¹ ‘He always chose heavy objects.’

 


          A Childhood Recollection From Dichtung Und Wahrheit

                                                                                      3625

 

 

   These two cases scarcely call for a commentary. They establish

without further analytic effort that the bitterness children feel about the

expected or actual appearance of a rival finds expression in throwing

objects  out  of  the  window  and  in  other  acts  of  naughtiness  and

destructiveness.  In  the  first  case  the  ‘heavy  objects’  probably

symbolized the mother herself, against whom the child’s anger was

directed so long as the new baby had not yet appeared. The three-

and-a-half-year-old boy knew about his mother’s pregnancy and had

no doubt that she had got the baby in her body. ‘Little Hans’¹ and his

special dread of heavily loaded carts may be recalled here.² In the

second case the very youthful age of the child, two and a half years, is

noteworthy.

   If we now return to Goethe’s childhood memory and put in the place

it  occupies  in Dichtung  und  Wahrheit  what  we  believe  we  have

obtained through observations of other children, a perfectly valid train

of thought emerges which we should not otherwise have discovered. It

would run thus: ‘I was a child of fortune: destiny preserved my life,

although I came into the world as though dead. Even more, destinyremoved my brother, so that I did not have to share my mother’s love

with him.’ The train of thought then goes on to someone else who died

in those early days - the grandmother who lived like a quiet friendly

spirit in another part of the house.

   I have, however, already remarked elsewhere that if a man has

been  his  mother’s  undisputed  darling  he  retains  throughout  life  the

triumphant  feeling,  the  confidence  in  success,  which  not  seldom

brings actual success along with it. And Goethe might well have given

some such heading to his autobiography as: ‘My strength has its roots

in my relation to my mother.’

 

   ¹ Cf. ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’, (1909b)

   ² Further confirmation of this pregnancy-symbolism was given me some time ago by a lady

of over fifty. She had often been told that as a little child, when she could hardly talk, she used
to  drag  her  father  to  the  window  in  great  agitation  whenever  a  heavy  furniture-van  was
passing along the street. In view of other recollections of the houses they had lived in, it
became possible to establish that she was then younger than two and three quarter years. At
about that time the brother next to her was born, and in consequence of this addition to the
family a move was made. At about the same time, she often had an alarming feeling before
going to sleep of something uncannily large, that came up to her, and ‘her hands got so thick’.

                                                                                       3626

 

          LINES OF ADVANCE IN PSYCHO-ANALYTIC THERAPY

                                        (1919)

 


                                                                                      3627

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3628

 

          LINES OF ADVANCE IN PSYCHO-ANALYTIC THERAPY

 

GENTLEMEN, - As you know, we have never prided ourselves on the

completeness and finality of our knowledge and capacity. We are just

as ready now as we were earlier to admit the imperfections of our

understanding, to learn new things and to alter our methods in any

way that can improve them.

   Now that we are met together once more after the long and difficult

years of separation that we have lived through, I feel drawn to review

the position of our therapeutic procedure - to which, indeed, we owe

our  place  in  human  society  -  and  to  take  a  survey  of  the  new

directions in which it may develop.

   We have formulated our task as physicians thus: to bring to the

patient’s knowledge the unconscious, repressed impulses existing in

him, and, for that purpose, to uncover the resistances that oppose this

extension  of  his  knowledge  about  himself.  Does  the  uncovering  of

these  resistances  guarantee  that  they  will  also  be  overcome?

Certainly not always; but our hope is to achieve this by exploiting the

patient’s transference to the person of the physician, so as to induce

him  to  adopt  our  conviction  of  the  inexpediency  of  the  repressive

process established in childhood and of the impossibility of conducting

life on the pleasure principle. I have set out elsewhere the dynamic

conditions prevailing in the fresh conflict through which we lead the

patient and which we substitute in him for his previous conflict - that ofhis illness. I have nothing at the moment to alter in that account.

 


                Lines Of Advance In Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      3629

 

   The work by which we bring the repressed mental material into the

patient’s consciousness has been called by us psycho-analysis. Why

‘analysis’ - which means breaking up or separating out, and suggests

an analogy with the work carried out by chemists on substances which

they find in nature and bring into their laboratories? Because in an

important  respect  there  really  is  an  analogy  between  the  two.  The

patient’s symptoms and pathological manifestations, like all his mental

activities,  are  of  a  highly  composite  kind;  the  elements  of  this

compound are at bottom motives, instinctual impulses. But the patient

knows nothing of these elementary motives or not nearly enough. We

teach him to understand the way in which these highly complicated

mental formations are compounded; we trace the symptoms back to

the  instinctual  impulses  which  motivate  them;  we  point  out  to  the

patient these instinctual motives, which are present in his symptoms

and  of  which  he  has  hitherto  been  unaware,  -  just  as  a  chemist

isolates the fundamental substance, the chemical ‘element’, out of the

salt in which it had been combined with other elements and in which it

was  unrecognizable.  In  the  same  way,  as  regards  those  of  the

patient’s mental manifestations that were not considered pathological,

we show him that he was only to a certain extent conscious of their

motivation - that other instinctual impulses of which he had remained

in ignorance had co-operated in producing them.

   Again, we have thrown light on the sexual impulsions in man by

separating  them  into  their  component  elements;  and  when  we

interpret a dream we proceed by ignoring the dream as a whole and

starting associations from its single elements.

   This well-founded comparison of medical psycho-analytic activity

with  a  chemical  procedure  might  suggest  a  new  direction  for  our

therapy. We have analysed the patient - that is, separated his mental

processes into their elementary constituents and demonstrated these

instinctual elements in him singly and in isolation; what could be morenatural than to expect that we should also help him to make a new

and a better combination of them? You know that this demand has

actually been put forward. We have been told that after an analysis of

a sick mind a synthesis of it must follow. And, close upon this, concern

has been expressed that the patient might be given too much analysis

and too little synthesis; and there has then followed a move to put all

the  weight  on  this  synthesis  as  the  main  factor  in  the

psychotherapeutic effect, to see in it a kind of restoration of something

that had been destroyed - destroyed, as it were, by vivisection.

 


                Lines Of Advance In Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      3630

 

   But I cannot think, Gentlemen, that any new task is set us by this

psycho-synthesis. If I allowed myself to be frank and uncivil I should

say it was nothing but an empty phrase. I will limit myself to remarking

that it is merely pushing a comparison so far that it ceases to have any

meaning, or, if you prefer, that it is an unjustifiable exploitation of a

name. A name, however, is only a label applied to distinguish a thing

from other similar things, not a syllabus, a description of its content or

a definition. And the two objects compared need only coincide at a

single point and may be entirely different from each other in everything

else. What is psychical is something so unique and peculiar to itself

that no one comparison can reflect its nature. The work of psycho-

analysis suggests analogies with chemical analysis, but it does so just

as much with the intervention of a surgeon or the manipulations of an

orthopaedist  or  the  influence  of  an  educator.  The  comparison  with

chemical analysis has its limitation: for in mental life we have to deal

with  trends  that  are  under  a  compulsion  towards  unification  and

combination. Whenever we succeed in analysing a symptom into its

elements, in freeing an instinctual impulse from one nexus, it does not

remain in isolation, but immediately enters into a new one.¹

   In actual fact, indeed, the neurotic patient presents us with a torn

mind,  divided  by  resistances.  As  we  analyse  it  and  remove  the

resistances, it grows together; the great unity which we call his ego fits

into itself all the instinctual impulses which before had been split offand held apart from it. The psycho-synthesis is thus achieved during

analytic  treatment  without  our  intervention,  automatically  and

inevitably. We have created the conditions for it by breaking up the

symptoms into their elements and by removing the resistances. It is

not  true  that  something  in  the  patient  has  been  divided  into  its

components  and  is  now  quietly  waiting  for  us  to  put  it  somehow

together again.

   Developments in our therapy, therefore, will no doubt proceed along

other lines; first and foremost, along the one which Ferenczi, in his

paper  ‘Technical  Difficulties  in  an  Analysis  of  Hysteria’  (1919),  has

lately termed ‘activity’ on the part of the analyst.

 

   ¹ After all, something very similar occurs in chemical analysis. Simultaneously with the

isolation of the various elements induced by the chemist, syntheses which are no part of his
intention  come  about,  owing  to  the  liberation  of  the  elective  affinities  of  the  substances
concerned.
 


                Lines Of Advance In Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      3631

 

   Let us at once agree upon what we mean by this activity. We have

defined  our  therapeutic  task  as  consisting  of  two  things:  making

conscious the repressed material and uncovering the resistances. In

that we are active enough, to be sure. But are we to leave it to the

patient to deal alone with the resistances we have pointed out to him?

Can we give him no other help in this besides the stimulus he gets

from the transference? Does it not seem natural that we should help

him in another way as well, by putting him into the mental situation

most favourable to the solution of the conflict which is our aim? After

all, what he can achieve depends, too, on a combination of external

circumstances.  Should  we  hesitate  to  alter  this  combination  by

intervening in a suitable manner? I think activity of such a kind on the

part of the analysing physician is unobjectionable and entirely justified.

   You will observe that this opens up a new field of analytic technique

the working over of which will require close application and which will

lead to quite definite rules of procedure. I shall not attempt to-day to

introduce  you  to  this  new  technique,  which  is  still  in  the  course  ofbeing evolved, but will content myself with enunciating a fundamental

principle which will probably dominate our work in this field. It runs as

follows: Analytic  treatment  should  be  carried  through,  as  far  as  is

possible, under privation - in a state of abstinence.

   How far it is possible to show that I am right in this must be left to a

more  detailed  discussion.  By  abstinence,  however,  is  not  to  be

understood doing without any and every satisfaction - that would of

course not be practicable; nor do we mean what it popularly connotes,

refraining from sexual intercourse; it means something else which has

far more to do with the dynamics of falling ill and recovering.

 


                Lines Of Advance In Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      3632

 

   You will remember that it was a frustration that made the patient ill,

and  that  his  symptoms  serve  him  as  substitutive  satisfactions.  It  is

possible to observe during the treatment that every improvement in his

condition reduces the rate at which he recovers and diminishes the

instinctual  force  impelling  him  towards  recovery.  But  this  instinctual

force is indispensible; reduction of it endangers our aim - the patient’s

restoration to health. What, then, is the conclusion that forces itself

inevitably upon us? Cruel though it may sound, we must see to it that

the  patient’s  suffering,  to  a  degree  that  is  in  some  way  or  other

effective,  does  not  come  to  an  end  prematurely.  If,  owing  to  the

symptoms having been taken apart and having lost their value, his

suffering  becomes  mitigated,  we  must  reinstate  it  elsewhere  in  the

form of some appreciable privation; otherwise we run the danger of

never  achieving  any  improvements  except  quite  insignificant  and

transitory ones.

   As far as I can see, the danger threatens from two directions in

especial. On the one hand, when the illness has been broken down by

the analysis, the patient makes the most assiduous efforts to create

for  himself  in  place  of  his  symptoms  new  substitutive  satisfactions,

which  now  lack  the  feature  of  suffering.  He  makes  use  of  the

enormous  capacity  for  displacement  possessed  by  the  now  partly

liberated  libido,  in  order  to  cathect  with  libido  and  promote  to  theposition  of  substitutive  satisfactions  the  most  diverse  kinds  of

activities, preferences and habits, not excluding some that have been

his  already.  He  continually  finds  new  distractions  of  this  kind,  into

which the energy necessary to carrying on the treatment escapes, and

he knows how to keep them secret for a time. It is the analyst’s task to

detect these divergent paths and to require him every time to abandon

them, however harmless the activity which leads to satisfaction may

be  in  itself.  The  half-recovered  patient  may  also  enter  on  less

harmless  paths  -  as  when,  for  instance,  if  he  is  a  man,  he  seeks

prematurely  to  attach  himself  to  a  woman.  It  may  be  observed,

incidentally, that unhappy marriage and physical infirmity are the two

things that most often supersede a neurosis. They satisfy in particular

the sense of guilt (need for punishment) which makes many patients

cling so fast to their neuroses. By a foolish choice in marriage they

punish themselves; they regard a long organic illness as a punishment

by fate and thereafter often cease to keep up their neurosis.

 


                Lines Of Advance In Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      3633

 

   In all such situations activity on the part of the physician must take

the  form  of  energetic  opposition  to  premature  substitutive

satisfactions.  It  is  easier  for  him,  however,  to  prevent  the second

danger which jeopardizes the propelling force of the analysis, though it

is not one to be under-estimated. The patient looks for his substitutive

satisfactions  above  all  in  the  treatment  itself,  in  his  transference-

relationship with the physician; and he may even strive to compensate

himself by this means for all the other privations laid upon him. Some

concessions  must  of  course  be  made  to  him,  greater  or  less,

according to the nature of the case and the patient’s individuality. But

it is not good to let them become too great. Any analyst who out of the

fullness of his heart, perhaps, and his readiness to help, extends to

the  patient  all  that  one  human  being  may  hope  to  receive  from

another, commits the same economic error as that of which our non-

analytic institutions for nervous patients are guilty. Their one aim is to

make everything as pleasant as possible for the patient, so that hemay feel well there and be glad to take refuge there again from the

trials  of  life.  In  so  doing  they  make  no  attempt  to  give  him  more

strength for facing life and more capacity for carrying out his actual

tasks in it. In analytic treatment all such spoiling must be avoided. As

far as his relations with the physician are concerned, the patient must

be left with unfulfilled wishes in abundance. It is expedient to deny him

precisely  those  satisfactions  which  he  desires  most  intensely  and

expresses most importunately.

   I do not think I have exhausted the range of desirable activity on the

part of the physician in saying that a condition of privation is to be kept

up during the treatment. Activity in another direction during analytic

treatment has already, as you will remember, been a point at issue

between us and the Swiss school. We refused most emphatically to

turn a patient who puts himself into our hands in search of help into

our private property, to decide his fate for him, to force our own ideals

upon  him,  and  with  the  pride  of  a  Creator  to  form  him  in  our  own

image and see that it is good. I still adhere to this refusal, and I think

that this is the proper place for the medical discretion which we have

had to ignore in other connections. I have learnt by experience, too,

that such a far-reaching activity towards patients is not in the least

necessary  for  therapeutic  purposes.  For  I  have  been  able  to  help

people with whom I had nothing in common - neither race, education,

social position nor outlook upon life in general - without affecting their

individuality. At the time of the controversy I have just spoken of, I had

the impression, to be sure, that the objections of our spokesmen - I

think it was Ernest Jones who took the chief part - were too harsh and

uncompromising. We cannot avoid taking some patients for treatment

who are so helpless and incapable of ordinary life that for them one

has to combine analytic with educative influence; and even with the

majority,  occasions  now  and  then  arise  in  which  the  physician  is

bound  to  take  up  the  position  of  teacher  and  mentor.  But  it  must

always  be  done  with  great  caution,  and  the  patient  should  be

educated  to  liberate  and  fulfil  his  own  nature,  not  to  resemble

ourselves.

 


                Lines Of Advance In Psycho-Analytic Therapy                                                                                      3634

 

   Our honoured friend, J. J. Putnam, in the land of America which is

now so hostile to us, must forgive us if we cannot accept his proposal

either - namely that psycho-analysis should place itself in the service

of a particular philosophical outlook on the world and should urge this

upon the patient for the purpose of ennobling his mind. In my opinion,

this is after all only to use violence, even though it is overlaid with the

most honourable motives.

   Lastly, another quite different kind of activity is necessitated by the

gradually  growing  appreciation  that  the  various  forms  of  disease

treated by us cannot all be dealt with by the same technique. It would

be premature to discuss this in detail, but I can give two examples of

the  way  in  which  a  new  kind  of  activity  comes  into  question.  Our

technique  grew  up  in  the  treatment  of  hysteria  and  is  still  directed

principally to the cure of that affection. But the phobias have already

made  it  necessary  for  us  to  go  beyond  our  former  limits.  One  can

hardly master a phobia if one waits till the patient lets the analysis

influence him to give it up. He will never in that case bring into the

analysis the material indispensable for a convincing resolution of the

phobia.  One  must  proceed  differently.  Take  the  example  of

agoraphobia; there are two classes of it, one mild, the other severe.

Patients belonging to the first class suffer from anxiety when they go

into the street by themselves, but they have not yet given up going out

alone on that account; the others protect themselves from the anxiety

by altogether ceasing to go about alone. With these last one succeeds

only when one can induce them by the influence of the analysis to

behave like phobic patients of the first class - that is, to go into the

street and to struggle with their anxiety while they make the attempt.

One starts, therefore, by moderating the phobia so far; and it is only

when  that  has  been  achieved  at  the  physician’s  demand  that  the

associations and memories come into the patient’s mind which enable

the phobia to be resolved.

   In severe cases of obsessive acts a passive waiting attitude seems

even  less  indicated.  Indeed  in  general  these  cases  incline  to  an

‘asymptotic’  process  of  recovery,  an  interminable  protraction  of  the

treatment.  Their  analysis  is  always  in  danger  of  bringing  to  light  agreat deal and changing nothing. I think there is little doubt that here

the correct technique can only be to wait until the treatment itself has

become a compulsion, and then with this counter-compulsion forcibly

to  suppress  the  compulsion  of  the  disease.  You  will  understand,

however, that these two instances I have given you are only samples

of the new developments towards which our therapy is tending.

 


                Lines Of Advance In Psycho-Analytic Therapy

                                                                                      3635

 

      And  now  in  conclusion  I  will  cast  a  glance  at  a  situation  which

belongs to the future - one that will seem fantastic to many of you, but

which I think, nevertheless, deserves that we should be prepared for it

in our minds. You know that our therapeutic activities are not very far-

reaching. There are only a handful of us, and even by working very

hard each one can devote himself in a year to only a small number of

patients. Compared to the vast amount of neurotic misery which there

is in the world, and perhaps need not be, the quantity we can do away

with is almost negligible. Besides this, the necessities of our existence

limit  our  work  to  the  well-to-do  classes,  who  are  accustomed  to

choose their own physicians and whose choice is diverted away from

psycho-analysis  by  all  kinds  of  prejudices.  At  present  we  can  do

nothing for the wider social strata, who suffer extremely seriously from

neuroses.

   Now let us assume that by some kind of organization we succeeded

in  increasing  our  numbers  to  an  extent  sufficient  for  treating  a

considerable mass of the population. On the other hand, it is possible

to foresee that at some time or other the conscience of society will

awake and remind it that the poor man should have just as much right

to assistance for his mind as he now has to the life-saving help offered

by surgery; and that the neuroses threaten public health no less than

tuberculosis, and can be left as little as the latter to the impotent care

of  individual  members  of  the  community.  When  this  happens,

institutions or out-patient clinics will be started, to which analytically-

trained physicians will be appointed, so that men who would otherwise

give way to drink, women who have nearly succumbed under theirburden of privations, children for whom there is no choice but between

running  wild  or  neurosis,  may  be  made  capable,  by  analysis,  of

resistance and of efficient work. Such treatments will be free. It may

be a long time before the State comes to see these duties as urgent.

Present conditions may delay its arrival even longer. Probably these

institutions will first be started by private charity. Some time or other,

however, it must come to this.

   We shall then be faced by the task of adapting our technique to the

new conditions. I have no doubt that the validity of our psychological

assumptions will make its impression on the uneducated too, but we

shall need to look for the simplest and most easily intelligible ways of

expressing our theoretical doctrines. We shall probably discover that

the poor are even less ready to part with their neuroses than the rich,

because the hard life that awaits them if they recover offers them no

attraction, and illness gives them one more claim to social help. Often,

perhaps,  we  may  only  be  able  to  achieve  anything  by  combining

mental assistance with some material support, in the manner of the

Emperor  Joseph.  It  is  very  probable,  too,  that  the  large-scale

application  of  our  therapy  will  compel  us  to  alloy  the  pure  gold  of

analysis  freely  with  the  copper  of  direct  suggestion;  and  hypnotic

influence, too, might find a place in it again, as it has in the treatment

of war neuroses. But, whatever form this psychotherapy for the people

may take, whatever the elements out of which it is compounded, its

most effective and most important ingredients will assuredly remain

those borrowed from strict and untendentious psycho-analysis.

                                                                                       3636

 

    ON THE TEACHING OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS IN UNIVERSITIES

                                        (1919)

 


                                                                                      3637

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3638

 

    ON THE TEACHING OF PSYCHO-ANALYSIS IN UNIVERSITIES

 

The  question  of  the  advisability  of  teaching  psycho-analysis  in

Universities  may  be  considered  from  two  points  of  view:  that  of

psycho-analysis and that of the University.

   (1) The inclusion of psycho-analysis in the University curriculum

would no doubt be regarded with satisfaction by every psycho-analyst.

At  the  same  time  it  is  clear  that  the  psycho-analyst  can  dispense

entirely with the University without any loss to himself. For what he

needs in the matter of theory can be obtained from the literature of the

subject  and,  going  more  deeply,  at  the  scientific  meetings  of  the

psycho-analytic  societies  as  well  as  by  personal  contact  with  their

more experienced members. As regards practical experience, apart

from what he gains from his own personal analysis, he can acquire it

by carrying out treatments, provided that he can get supervision and

guidance from recognized psycho-analysts.

   The fact that an organization of this kind exists is actually due to the

exclusion  of  psycho-analysis  from  Universities.  And  it  is  therefore

evident that these arrangements will continue to perform an effective

function so long as this exclusion persists.

   (2) So far as the Universities are concerned, the question depends

on their deciding whether they are willing to attribute any value at all to

psycho-analysis in the training of physicians and scientists. If so, the

further problem remains of how it is to be incorporated into the regulareducational framework.

   The importance of psycho-analysis for the whole of medical and

academic training is based on the following facts:

   (a) This training has been quite rightly criticized during the last few

decades for the one-sided way in which it directs the student into the

fields of anatomy, physics and chemistry, while failing, on the other

hand, to make plain to him the significance of mental factors in the

different vital functions as well as in illnesses and their treatment. This

short-coming in medical education makes itself felt later as a flagrant

blind spot in the physician. This will not only show itself in his lack of

interest in the most absorbing problems of human life, whether healthy

or  diseased,  but  will  also  render  him  unskilful  in  his  treatment  of

patients, so that even quacks and ‘healers’ will have a greater effect

on them than he does.

 


            On The Teaching Of Psycho-Analysis In Universities

                                                                                      3639

 

   This obvious deficiency led some time ago to the inclusion in the

University curriculum of courses of lectures on medical psychology.

But so long as these lectures were based on academic psychology or

on  experimental  psychology  (which  deals  only  with  questions  of

detail), they were unable to meet the requirements of the student’s

training; nor could they bring him any nearer to the problems of life in

general  or  to  those  of  his  profession.  For  these  reasons  the  place

occupied by this kind of medical psychology in the curriculum proved

insecure.

   A course of lectures on psycho-analysis, on the other hand, would

certainly  answer  these  requirements.  Before  coming  to  psycho-

analysis proper, an introductory course would be needed, which would

deal in detail with the relations between mental and physical life - the

basis of all kinds of psychotherapy -, would describe the various kinds

of  suggestive  procedures,  and  would  finally  show  how  psycho-

analysis  constitutes  the  outcome  and  culmination  of  all  the  earlier

methods of mental treatment. Psycho-analysis, in fact, more than any

other system, is fitted for teaching psychology to the medical student.   (b) Another of the functions of psycho-analysis should be to afford a

preparation for the study of psychiatry. This, in its present shape, is

exclusively descriptive in character; it merely teaches the student to

recognize a series of pathological entities, enabling him to distinguish

which are incurable and which are dangerous to the community. Its

sole  connection  with  the  other  branches  of  medical  science  lies  in

organic aetiology - that is, in its anatomical findings; but it offers not

the  slightest  understanding  of  the  facts  observed.  Such  an

understanding can be furnished only by a depth-psychology.

   In America, according to the best of my information, it has already

been  recognized  that  psycho-analysts  (the  first  attempt  at  a  depth-

psychology) has made successful inroads into this unexplored region

of psychiatry. Many medical schools in that country, accordingly, have

already  organized  courses  of  psycho-analysis  as  an  introduction  to

psychiatry.

      The  teaching  of  psycho-analysis  would  have  to  proceed  in  two

stages: an elementary course, designed for all medical students, and

a course of specialized lectures for psychiatrists.

 


            On The Teaching Of Psycho-Analysis In Universities

                                                                                      3640

 

      (c)  In  the  investigation  of  mental  processes  and  intellectual

functions, psycho-analysis pursues a specific method of its own. The

application  of  this  method  is  by  no  means  confined  to  the  field  of

psychological disorders, but extends also to the solution of problems

in art, philosophy and religion. In this direction it has already yielded

several new points of view and thrown valuable light on such subjects

as the history of literature, on mythology, on the history of civilizations

and on the philosophy of religion. Thus the general psycho-analytic

course should be thrown open to the students of these branches of

learning as well. The fertilizing effects of psycho-analytic thought on

these  other  disciplines  would  certainly  contribute  greatly  towards

forging a closer link, in the sense of a universitas literarum, between

medical  science  and  the  branches  of  learning  which  lie  within  the

sphere of philosophy and the arts.   To sum up, it may be asserted that a University stands only to gain

by the inclusion in its curriculum of the teaching of psycho-analysis.

That teaching, it is true, can only be given in a dogmatic and critical

manner, by means of theoretical lectures; for these lectures will allow

only a very restricted opportunity for carrying out experiments or for

practical demonstrations. For the purposes of research, it should be

sufficient for teachers of psycho-analysis to have access to an out-

patient department for the supply of the necessary material in the form

of  ‘neurotic’  patients.  For  psycho-analytic  psychiatry,  a  mental  in-

patient department would also have to be available.

      Consideration,  lastly,  must  be  given  to  the  objection  that,  along

these  lines,  the  medical  student  will  never  learn  psycho-analysis

proper. This is indeed true, if we have in mind the actual practice of

psycho-analysis.  But  for  the  purposes  we  have  in  view  it  will  be

enough if he learns something about psycho-analysis and something

from it. After all, University training does not equip the medical student

to  be  a  skilled  surgeon;  and  no  one  who  chooses  surgery  as  a

profession can avoid further training in the form of several years of

work in a surgical department of a hospital.

                                                                                       3641

 

                          ‘A CHILD IS BEING BEATEN’

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL

                                    PERVERSIONS

                                        (1919)

 


                                                                                      3642

 

 Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3643

 

                          ‘A CHILD IS BEING BEATEN’

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE STUDY OF THE ORIGIN OF SEXUAL

                                    PERVERSIONS

 

                                            I

 

It  is  surprising  how  often  people  who  seek  analytic  treatment  for

hysteria or an obsessional neurosis confess to having indulged in the

phantasy: ‘A child is being beaten.’ Very probably there are still more

frequent instances of it among the far greater number of people who

have not been obliged to come to analysis by manifest illness.

   The phantasy has feelings of pleasure attached to it, and on their

account the patient has reproduced it on innumerable occasions in the

past  or  may  even  still  be  doing  so.  At  the  climax  of  the  imaginary

situation there is almost invariably a masturbatory satisfaction - carried

out, that is to say, on the genitals. At first this takes place voluntarily,

but later on it does so in spite of the patient’s efforts, and with the

characteristics of an obsession.

   It is only with hesitation that this phantasy is confessed to. Its first

appearance is recollected with uncertainty. The analytic treatment of

the topic is met by unmistakable resistance. Shame and a sense of

guilt are perhaps more strongly excited in this connection than whensimilar accounts are given of memories of the beginning of sexual life.

Eventually it becomes possible to establish that the first phantasies of

the  kind  were  entertained  very  early  in  life:  certainly  before  school

age, and not later than in the fifth or sixth year. When the child was at

school and saw other children being beaten by the teacher, then, if the

phantasies  had  become  dormant,  this  experience  called  them  up

again, or, if they were still present, it reinforced them and noticeably

modified  their  content.  From  that  time  forward  it  was  ‘an  indefinite

number’  of  children  that  were  being  beaten.  The  influence  of  the

school was so clear that the patients concerned were at first tempted

to  trace  back  their  beating-phantasies  exclusively  to  these

impressions of school life, which dated from later than their sixth year.

But  it  was  never  possible  for  them  to  maintain  that  position;  the

phantasies had already been in existence before.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3644

 

   Though in the higher forms at school the children were no longer

beaten, the influence of such occasions was replaced and more than

replaced by the effects of reading, of which the importance was soon

to be felt. In my patients’ milieu it was almost always the same books

whose contents gave a new stimulus to the beating-phantasies: those

accessible  to  young  people,  such  as  what  was  known  as  the

‘Bibliothèque  rose’, Uncle  Tom’s  Cabin,  etc.  The  child  began  to

compete with these works of fiction by producing his own phantasies

and by constructing a wealth of situations and institutions, in which

children were beaten, or were punished and disciplined in some other

way, because of their naughtiness and bad behaviour.

   This phantasy - ‘a child is being beaten’ - was invariably cathected

with  a  high  degree  of  pleasure  and  had  its  issue  in  an  act  of

pleasurable  auto-erotic  satisfaction.  It  might  therefore  be  expected

that the sight of another child being beaten at school would also be a

source of similar enjoyment. But as a matter of fact this was never so.

The experience of real scenes of beating at school produced in the

child  who  witnessed  them  a  peculiarly  excited  feeling  which  wasprobably of a mixed character and in which repugnance had a large

share. In a few cases the real experience of the scenes of beating was

felt to be intolerable. Moreover, it was always a condition of the more

sophisticated phantasies of later years that the punishment should do

the children no serious injury.

   The question was bound to arise of what relation there might be

between the importance of the beating-phantasies and the part that

real corporal punishment might have played in the child’s bringing up

at home. It was impossible, on account of the one-sidedness of the

material, to confirm the first suspicion that the relation was an inverse

one.  The  individuals  from  whom  the  data  for  these  analyses  were

derived  were  very  seldom  beaten  in  their  childhood,  or  were  at  all

events not brought up by the help of the rod. Naturally, however, each

of these children was bound to have become aware at one time or

another of the superior physical strength of its parents or educators;

the fact that in every nursery the children themselves at times come to

blows requires no special emphasis.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3645

 

      As  regards  the  early  and  simple  phantasies  which  could  not  be

obviously traced to the influence of school impressions or of scenes

taken from books, further information would have been welcome. Who

was  the  child  that  was  being  beaten?  The  one  who  was  himself

producing the phantasy or another? Was it always the same child or

as often as not a different one? Who has it that was beating the child?

A grown-up person? And if so, who? Or did the child imagine that he

himself was beating another one? Nothing could be ascertained that

threw any light upon all these questions - only the hesitant reply: ‘I

know nothing more about it: a child is being beaten.’

   Enquiries as to the sex of the child that was being beaten met with

more  success,  but  none  the  less  brought  no  enlightenment.

Sometimes the answer was: ‘Always boys’, or ‘Only girls’; more often

it was: ‘I don’t know, or ‘It doesn’t matter which’. But the point to which

the questions were directed, the discovery of some constant relationbetween the sex of the child producing the phantasy and that of the

child that was being beaten, was never established. Now and again

another characteristic detail of the content of the phantasy came to

light: ‘A small child is being beaten on its naked bottom.’

   In these circumstances it was impossible at first even to decide

whether  the  pleasure  attaching  to  the  beating-phantasy  was  to  be

described as sadistic or masochistic.

 

                                            II

 

   A phantasy of this kind, arising, perhaps from accidental causes, in

early  childhood  and  retained  for  the  purpose  of  auto-erotic

satisfaction,  can,  in  the  light  of  our  present  knowledge,  only  be

regarded as a primary trait of perversion. One of the components of

the sexual function has, it seems, developed in advance of the rest,

has made itself prematurely independent, has undergone fixation and

in  consequence  been  withdrawn  from  the  later  processes  of

development, and has in this way given evidence of a peculiar and

abnormal  constitution  in  the  individual.  We  know  that  an  infantile

perversion of this sort need not persist for a whole lifetime; later on it

can be subjected to repression, be replaced by a reaction-formation,

or be transformed by sublimation. (It is possible that sublimation arises

out of some special process which would be held back by repression.)

But if these processes do not take place, then the perversion persists

to  maturity;  and  whenever  we  find  a  sexual  aberration  in  adults  -

perversion,  fetishism,  inversion  -  we  are  justified  in  expecting  that

anamnestic  investigation  will  reveal  an  event  such  as  I  have

suggested, leading to a fixation in childhood. Indeed, long before the

days of psycho-analysis, observers like Binet were able to trace the

strange sexual aberrations of maturity back to similar impressions and

to precisely the same period of childhood, namely, the fifth or sixth

year. But at this point the enquiry was confronted with the limitations

of our knowledge; for the impressions that brought about the fixation

were  without  any  traumatic  force.  They  were  for  the  most  part

commonplace and unexciting to other people. It was impossible to say

why the sexual impulse had undergone fixation particularly upon them.

It was possible, however, to look for their significance in the fact thatthey offered an occasion for fixation (even though it was an accidental

one) to precisely that component which was prematurely developed

and ready to press forward. We had in any case to be prepared to

come to a provisional end somewhere or other in tracing back the train

of causal connection; and the congenital constitution seemed exactly

to correspond with what was required for a stopping-place of that kind.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3646

 

   If the sexual component which has broken loose prematurely is the

sadistic one, then we may expect, on the basis of knowledge derived

from  other  sources,  that  its  subsequent  repression  will  result  in  a

disposition  to  an  obsessional  neurosis.  This  expectation  cannot  be

said to be contradicted by the results of enquiry. The present short

paper is based on the exhaustive study of six cases (four female and

two  male).  Of  these,  two  were  cases  of  obsessional  neurosis;  one

extremely severe and incapacitating, the other of moderate severity

and quite well accessible to influence. There was also a third case

which  at  all  events  exhibited  clearly  marked  individual  traits  of

obsessional neurosis. The fourth case, it must be admitted, was one

of  straightforward  hysteria,  with  pains  and  inhibitions;  and  the  fifth

patient,  who  had  come  to  be  analysed  merely  on  account  of

indecisiveness in life, would not have been classified at all by coarse

clinical diagnosis, or would have been dismissed as ‘psychasthenic’.

There is no need for feeling disappointed over these statistics. In the

first  place,  we  know  that  not  every  disposition  is  necessarily

developed into a disorder; in the second place, we ought to be content

to  explain  the  facts  before  us,  and  ought  as  a  rule  to  avoid  the

additional task of making it clear why something has not taken place.

   The present state of our knowledge would allow us to make our way

so  far  and  no  further  towards  the  comprehension  of  beating-

phantasies.  In  the  mind  of  the  analytic  physician,  it  is  true,  there

remains an uneasy suspicion that this is not a final solution of the

problem. He is obliged to admit to himself that to a great extent these

phantasies subsist apart from the rest of the content of a neurosis,and find no proper place in its structure. But impressions of this kind,

as I know from my own experience, are only too willingly put on one

side.

 

                                            III

 

   Strictly considered - and why should this question not be considered

with all possible strictness? - analytic work deserves to be recognized

as genuine psycho-analysis only when it has succeeded in removing

the  amnesia  which  conceals  from  the  adult  his  knowledge  of  his

childhood from its beginning (that is, from about the second to the fifth

year).  This  cannot  be  said  among  analysts  too  emphatically  or

repeated too often. The motives for disregarding this reminder are,

indeed, intelligible. It would be desirable to obtain practical results in a

shorter period and with less trouble. But at the present time theoretical

knowledge  is  still  far  more  important  to  all  of  us  than  therapeutic

success, and anyone who neglects childhood analysis is bound to fall

into the most disastrous errors. The emphasis which is laid here upon

the  importance  of  the  earliest  experiences  does  not  imply  any

underestimation  of  the  influence  of  later  ones.  But  the  later

impressions  of  life  speak  loudly  enough  through  the  mouth  of  the

patient, while it is the physician who has to raise his voice on behalf of

the claims of childhood.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3647

 

   It is in the years of childhood between the ages of two and four or

five that the congenital libidinal factors are first awakened by actual

experiences and become attached to certain complexes. The beating-

phantasies  which  are  now  under  discussion  show  themselves  only

towards the end of this period or after its termination. So it may quite

well  be  that  they  have  an  earlier  history,  that  they  go  through  a

process of development, that they represent an end-product and not

an initial manifestation.

   This suspicion is confirmed by analysis. A systematic application of

it shows that beating-phantasies have a historical development whichis by no means simple, and in the course of which they are changed in

most respects more than once as regards their relation to the author

of the phantasy, and as regards their object, their content and their

significance.

   In order to make it easier to follow these transformations in beating-

phantasies  I  shall  now  venture  to  confine  my  descriptions  to  the

female cases, which, since they are four as against two, in any case

constitute  the  greater  part  of  my  material.  Moreover,  beating-

phantasies in men are connected with another subject, which I shall

leave on one side in this paper. In my description I shall be careful to

avoid being more schematic than is inevitable for the presentation of

an average case. If then on further observation a greater complexity of

circumstances should come to light, I shall nevertheless be sure of

having before us a typical occurrence, and one, moreover, that is not

of an uncommon kind.

      The  first  phase  of  beating-phantasies  among  girls,  then,  must

belong  to  a  very  early  period  of  childhood.  Some  features  remain

curiously indefinite, as though they were a matter of indifference. The

scanty information given by the patients in their first statement, ‘a child

is being beaten’, seems to be justified in respect to this phase. But

another of their features can be established with certainty, and to the

same effect in every case. The child being beaten is never the one

producing the phantasy, but is invariably another child, most often a

brother or a sister if there is any. Since this other child may be a boy

or a girl, there is no constant relation between the sex of the child

producing  the  phantasy  and  that  of  the  child  being  beaten.  The

phantasy, then, is certainly not masochistic. It would be tempting to

call it sadistic, but one cannot neglect the fact that the child producing

the phantasy is never doing the beating herself. The actual identity of

the person who does the beating remains obscure at first. Only this

much can be established: it is not a child but an adult. Later on this

indeterminate  grown-up  person  becomes  recognizable  clearly  and

unambiguously as the (girl’s) father.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3648 

      This  first  phase  of  the  beating-phantasy  is  therefore  completely

represented  by  the  phrase:  ‘My  father  is  beating  the  child.’  I  am

betraying a great deal of what is to be brought forward later when

instead of this I say: ‘ My father is beating the child whom I hate.’

Moreover, one may hesitate to say whether the characteristics of a

‘phantasy’  can  yet  be  ascribed  to  this  first  step  towards  the  later

beating-phantasy. It is perhaps rather a question of recollections of

events which have been witnessed, or of desires which have arisen on

various occasions. But these doubts are of no importance.

   Profound transformations have taken place between this first phase

and the next. It is true that the person beating remains the same (that

is,  the  father);  but  the  child  who  is  beaten  has  been  changed  into

another one and is now invariably the child producing the phantasy.

The phantasy is accompanied by a high degree of pleasure, and has

now acquired a significant content, with the origin of which we shall be

concerned later. Now, therefore, the wording runs: ‘I am being beaten

by my father.’ It is of an unmistakably masochistic character.

   This second phase is the most important and the most momentous

of all. But we may say of it in a certain sense that it has never had a

real  existence.  It  is  never  remembered,  it  has  never  succeeded  in

becoming conscious. It is a construction of analysis, but it is no less a

necessity on that account.

   The third phase once more resembles the first. It has the wording

which  is  familiar  to  us  from  the  patient’s  statement.  The  person

beating is never the father, but is either left undetermined just as in the

first phase, or turns in a characteristic way into a representative of the

father, such as a teacher. The figure of the child who is producing the

beating-phantasy no longer itself appears in it. In reply to pressing

enquiries the patients only declare: ‘I am probably looking on.’ Instead

of  the  one  child  that  is  being  beaten,  there  are  now  a  number  of

children present as a rule. Most frequently it is boys who are being

beaten (in girls’ phantasies), but none of them is personally known to

the subject. The situation of being beaten, which was originally simple

and  monotonous,  may  go  through  the  most  complicated  alterations

and elaborations; and punishments and humiliations of another kind

may  be  substituted  for  the  beating  itself.  But  the  essentialcharacteristic which distinguishes even the simplest phantasies of this

phase from those of the first, and which establishes the connection

with the intermediate phase, is this: the phantasy now has strong and

unambiguous  sexual  excitement  attached  to  it,  and  so  provides  a

means  for  masturbatory  satisfaction.  But  this  is  precisely  what  is

puzzling.  By  what  path  has  the  phantasy  of  strange  and  unknown

boys  being  beaten  (a  phantasy  which  has  by  this  time  become

sadistic) found its way into the permanent possession of the little girl’s

libidinal trends?

      Nor  can  we  conceal  from  ourselves  that  the  interrelations  and

sequence of the three phases of the beating-phantasy, as well as all

its other peculiarities, have so far remained quite unintelligible.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3649

 

 

                                            IV

 

      If  the  analysis  is  carried  through  the  early  period  to  which  the

beating-phantasies are referred and from which they are recollected, it

shows us the child involved in the agitations of its parental complex.

      The  affections  of  the  little  girl  are  fixed  on  her  father,  who  has

probably done all he could to win her love, and in this way has sown

the seeds of an attitude of hatred and rivalry towards her mother. This

attitude exists side by side with a current of affectionate dependence

on  her,  and  as  years  go  on  it  may  be  destined  to  come  into

consciousness more and more clearly and forcibly, or else to give an

impetus to an excessive reaction of devotion to her. But it is not with

the  girl’s  relation  to  her  mother  that  the  beating-phantasy  is

connected. There are other children in the nursery, only a few years

older or younger, who are disliked on all sorts of other grounds, but

chiefly because the parents’ love has to be shared with them, and for

this reason they are repelled with all the wild energy characteristic of

the emotional life of those years. If the child in question is a younger

brother or sister (as in three of my four cases) it is despised as well as

hated; yet it attracts to itself the share of affection which the blindedparents  are  always  ready  to  give  the  youngest  child,  and  this  is  a

spectacle the sight of which cannot be avoided. One soon learns that

being  beaten,  even  if  it  does  not  hurt  very  much,  signifies  a

deprivation of love and a humiliation. And many children who believed

themselves  securely  enthroned  in  the  unshakable  affection  of  their

parents have by a single blow been cast down from all the heavens of

their  imaginary  omnipotence.  The  idea  of  the  father  beating  this

hateful child is therefore an agreeable one, quite apart from whether

he has actually been seen doing so. It means: ‘My father does not

love this other child, he loves only me.’

   This then is the content and meaning of the beating-phantasy in its

first phase. The phantasy obviously gratifies the child’s jealousy and is

dependent  upon  the  erotic  side  of  its  life,  but  is  also  powerfully

reinforced by the child’s egoistic interests. Doubt remains, therefore,

whether the phantasy ought to be described as purely ‘sexual’, nor

can one venture to call it ‘sadistic’.

   As is well known, all the signs on which we are accustomed to base

our distinctions tend to lose their clarity as we come nearer to the

source. So perhaps we may say in terms recalling the prophecy made

by  the  Three  Witches  to  Banquo:  ‘Not  clearly  sexual,  not  in  itself

sadistic, but yet the stuff from which both will later come.’ In any case,

however, there is no ground for suspecting that in this first phase the

phantasy is already at the service of an excitation which involves the

genitals and finds its outlet in a masturbatory act.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3650

 

   It is clear that the child’s sexual life has reached the stage of genital

organization, now that its incestuous love has achieved this premature

choice of an object. This can be demonstrated more easily in the case

of boys, but is also indisputable in the case of girls. Something like a

premonition of what are later to be the final and normal sexual aims

governs the child’s libidinal trends. We may justly wonder why this

should be so, but we may regard it as a proof of the fact that the

genitals  have  already  begun  playing  their  part  in  the  process  ofexcitation. With boys the wish to beget a child from their mother is

never  absent,  with  girls  the  wish  to  have  a  child  by  their  father  is

equally constant; and this in spite of their being completely incapable

of forming any clear idea of the means for fulfilling these wishes. The

child seems to be convinced that the genitals have something to do

with the matter, even though in its constant brooding it may look for

the essence of the presumed intimacy between its parents in relations

of another sort, such as in their sleeping together, micturating in each

other’s  presence,  etc.;  and  material  of  the  latter  kind  can  be  more

easily  apprehended  in  verbal  images  than  the  mystery  that  is

connected with the genitals.

   But the time comes when this early blossoming is nipped by the

frost. None of these incestuous loves can avoid the fate of repression.

They  may  succumb  to  it  on  the  occasion  of  some  discoverable

external event which leads to disillusionment - such as unexpected

slights, the unwelcome birth of a new brother or sister (which is felt as

faithlessness), etc.; or the same thing may happen owing to internal

conditions apart from any such events, perhaps simply because their

yearning remains unsatisfied too long. It is unquestionably true that

such events are not the effective causes, but that these love-affairs

are bound to come to grief sooner or later, though we cannot say on

what  particular  stumbling  block.  Most  probably  they  pass  away

because their time is over, because the children have entered upon a

new phase of development in which they are compelled to recapitulate

from the history of mankind the repression of an incestuous object-

choice,  just  as  at  an  earlier  stage  they  were  obliged  to  effect  an

object-choice of that very sort.¹ In the new phase no mental product of

the incestuous love-impulses that is present unconsciously is taken

over  by  consciousness;  and  anything  that  has  already  come  into

consciousness is expelled from it. At the same time as this process of

repression  takes  place,  a  sense  of  guilt  appears.  This  is  also  of

unknown origin, but there is no doubt whatever that it is connected

with the incestuous wishes, and that it is justified by the persistence of

those wishes in the unconscious.²

 

   ¹ Compare the part played by Fate in the myth of Oedipus.

   ² [Footnote added 1924:] See the continuation of this line of thought in ‘The Dissolution ofthe Oedipus Complex’ (1924d).
 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3651

 

   The phantasy of the period of incestuous love had said: ‘He (my

father) loves only me, and not the other child, for he is beating it.’ The

sense  of  guilt  can  discover  no  punishment  more  severe  than  the

reversal of this triumph: ‘No, he does not love you, for he is beating

you.’  In  this  way  the  phantasy  of  the  second  phase,  that  of  being

beaten by her father, is a direct expression of the girl’s sense of guilt,

to which her love for her father has now succumbed. The phantasy,

therefore, has become masochistic. So far as I know, this is always

so; a sense of guilt is invariably the factor that transforms sadism into

masochism. But this is certainly not the whole content of masochism.

The sense of guilt cannot have won the field alone; a share must also

fall to the love-impulse. We must remember that we are dealing with

children in whom the sadistic component was able for constitutional

reasons  to  develop  prematurely  and  in  isolation.  We  need  not

abandon this point of view. It is precisely such children who find it

particularly  easy  to  hark  back  to  the  pregenital,  sadistic-anal

organization of their sexual life. If the genital organization, when it has

scarcely been effected, is met by repression, the result is not only that

every  psychical  representation  of  the  incestuous  love  becomes

unconscious,  or  remains  so,  but  there  is  another  result  as  well:  a

regressive  debasement  of  the  genital  organization  itself  to  a  lower

level. ‘My father loves me’ was meant in a genital sense; owing to the

regression it is turned into ‘My father is beating me (I am being beaten

by my father)’. This being beaten is now a convergence of the sense

of guilt and sexual love. It is not only the punishment for the forbidden

genital relation, but also the regressive substitute for that relation, and

from this latter source it derives the libidinal excitation which is from

this  time  forward  attached  to  it,  and  which  finds  its  outlet  in

masturbatory  acts.  Here  for  the  first  time  we  have  the  essence  of

masochism.

   This second phase - the child’s phantasy of being itself beaten by its

father - remains unconscious as a rule, probably in consequence ofthe intensity of the repression. I cannot explain why nevertheless in

one of my six cases, that of a male, it was consciously remembered.

This man, now grown up, had preserved the fact clearly in his memory

that he used to employ the idea of being beaten by his mother for the

purpose of masturbation, though to be sure he soon substituted for his

own mother the mothers of his school-fellows or other women who in

some way resembled her. It must not be forgotten that when a boy’s

incestuous  phantasy  is  transformed  into  the  corresponding

masochistic one, one more reversal has to take place than in the case

of  a  girl,  namely  the  substitution  of  passivity  for  activity;  and  this

additional degree of distortion may save the phantasy from having to

remain unconscious as a result of repression. In this way the sense of

guilt would be satisfied by regression instead of by repression. In the

female cases the sense of guilt, in itself perhaps more exacting, could

be appeased only by a combination of the two.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3652

 

   In two of my four female cases an elaborate superstructure of day-

dreams,  which  was  of  great  significance  for  the  life  of  the  person

concerned, had grown up over the masochistic beating-phantasy. The

function  of  this  superstructure  was  to  make  possible  a  feeling  of

satisfied excitation, even though the masturbatory act was abstained

from. In one of these cases the content - being beaten by the father -

was  allowed  to  venture  again  into  consciousness,  so  long  as  the

subject’s own ego was made unrecognizable by a thin disguise. The

hero of these stories was invariably beaten (or later only punished,

humiliated, etc.) by his father.

   I repeat, however, that as a rule the phantasy remains unconscious,

and can only be reconstructed in the course of the analysis. This fact

perhaps vindicates patients who say they remember that with them

masturbation  made  its  appearance  before  the  third  phase  of  the

beating-phantasy (shortly to be discussed), and that this phase was

only a later addition, made perhaps under the impression of scenes at

school. Every time I have given credit to these statements I have feltinclined  to  assume  that  the  masturbation  was  at  first  under  the

dominance of unconscious phantasies and that conscious ones were

substituted for them later.

   I look upon the beating-phantasy in its familiar third phase, which is

its final form, as a substitute of this sort. Here the child who produces

the phantasy appears almost as a spectator, while the father persists

in  the  shape  of  a  teacher  or  some  other  person  in  authority.  The

phantasy, which now resembles that of the first phase, seems to have

become sadistic once more. It appears as though in the phrase, ‘My

father  is  beating  the  child,  he  loves  only  me’,  the  stress  has  been

shifted back on to the first part after the second part has undergone

repression.  But  only  the form  of  this  phantasy  is  sadistic;  the

satisfaction which is derived from it is masochistic. Its significance lies

in the fact that it has taken over the libidinal cathexis of the repressed

portion and at the same time the sense of guilt which is attached to

the content of that portion. All of the many unspecified children who

are  being  beaten  by  the  teacher  are,  after  all,  nothing  more  than

substitutes for the child itself.

   We find here for the first time, too, something like a constancy of sex

in the persons who play a part in the phantasy. The children who are

being beaten are almost invariably boys, in the phantasies of boys just

as much as in those of girls. This characteristic is naturally not to be

explained by any rivalry between the sexes, as otherwise of course in

the phantasies of boys it would be girls who would be being beaten;

and it has nothing to do with the sex of the child who was hated in the

first phase. But it points to a complication in the case of girls. When

they  turn  away  from  their  incestuous  love  for  their  father,  with  its

genital significance, they easily abandon their feminine role. They spur

their  ‘masculinity  complex’  (Van  Ophuijsen,  1917)  into  activity,  and

from  that  time  forward  only  want  to  be  boys.  For  that  reason  the

whipping-boys who represent them are boys too. In both the cases of

day-dreaming - one of which almost rose to the level of a work of art -

the heroes were always young men; indeed women used not to come

into these creations at all, and only made their first appearance after

many years, and then in minor parts.

                               'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3653

 

 

                                            V

 

   I hope I have brought forward my analytic observations in sufficient

detail,  and  I  should  only  like  to  add  that  the  six  cases  I  have

mentioned so often do not exhaust my material. Like other analysts, I

have at my disposal a far larger number of cases which have been

investigated less thoroughly. These observations can be made use of

along various lines: for elucidating the genesis of the perversions in

general and of masochism in particular, and for estimating the part

played by difference of sex in the dynamics of neurosis.

   The most obvious result of such a discussion is its application to the

origin of the perversions. The view which brought into the foreground

in this connection the constitutional reinforcement or premature growth

of a single sexual component is not shaken, indeed; but it is seen not

to comprise the whole truth. The perversion is no longer an isolated

fact in the child’s sexual life, but falls into its place among the typical,

not to say normal, processes of development which are familiar to us.

It is brought into relation with the child’s incestuous love-object, with

its Oedipus complex. It first comes into prominence in the sphere of

this complex, and after the complex has broken down it remains over,

often  quite  by  itself,  the  inheritor  of  the  charge  of  libido  from  that

complex and weighed down by the sense of guilt that was attached to

it. The abnormal sexual constitution, finally, has shown its strength by

forcing  the  Oedipus  complex  into  a  particular  direction,  and  by

compelling it to leave an unusual residue behind.

   A perversion in childhood, as is well known, may become the basis

for  the  construction  of  a  perversion  having  a  similar  sense  and

persisting  throughout  life,  one  which  consumes  the  subject’s  whole

sexual life. On the other hand the perversion may be broken off and

remain  in  the  background  of  a  normal  sexual  development,  from

which, however, it continues to withdraw a certain amount of energy.

The first of these alternatives was already known before the days of

analysis.  Analytic  investigation,  however,  of  such  fully-developed

cases  almost  bridges  the  gulf  between  the  two.  For  we  find  oftenenough  with  these  perverts  that  they  too  made  an  attempt  at

developing normal sexual activity, usually at the age of puberty; but

their attempt had not enough force in it and was abandoned in the

face of the first obstacles which inevitably arise, where upon they fell

back upon their infantile fixation once and for all.

   It would naturally be important to know whether the origin of infantile

perversions from the Oedipus complex can be asserted as a general

principle. While this cannot be decided without further investigation, it

does  not  seem  impossible.  When  we  recall  the  anamneses  which

have  been  obtained  in  adult  cases  of  perversion  we  cannot  fail  to

notice that the decisive impression, the ‘first experience’, of all these

perverts, fetishists, etc., is scarcely ever referred back to a time earlier

than  the  sixth  year.  At  this  time,  however,  the  dominance  of  the

Oedipus complex is already over; the experience which is recalled,

and which has been effective in such a puzzling way, may very well

have  represented  the  legacy  of  that  complex.  The  connections

between  the  experience  and  the  complex  which  is  by  this  time

repressed are bound to remain obscure so long as analysis has not

thrown any light on the time before the first ‘pathogenic’ impression.

So it may be imagined how little value is to be attached, for instance,

to an assertion that a case of homosexuality is congenital, when the

ground given for this belief is that ever since his eighth or sixth year

the person in question has felt inclinations only towards his own sex.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3654

 

   If, however, the derivation of perversions from the Oedipus complex

can be generally established, our estimate of its importance will have

gained added strength. For in our opinion the Oedipus complex is the

actual  nucleus  of  neuroses,  and  the  infantile  sexuality  which

culminates in this complex is the true determinant of neuroses. What

remains of the complex in the unconscious represents the disposition

to  the  later  development  of  neuroses  in  the  adult.  In  this  way  the

beating-phantasy and other analogous perverse fixations would also

only  be  precipitates  of  the  Oedipus  complex,  scars,  so  to  say,  leftbehind after the process has ended, just as the notorious ‘sense of

inferiority’ corresponds to a narcissistic scar of the same sort. In taking

this view of the matter I must express my unreserved agreement with

Marcinowski (1918), who has recently put it forward most happily. As

is well known, this neurotic delusion of inferiority is only a partial one,

and is completely compatible with the existence of a self-overvaluation

derived from other sources. The origin of the Oedipus complex itself,

and  the  destiny  which  compels  man,  probably  alone  among  all

animals, to begin his sexual life twice over, first like all other creatures

in his early childhood, and then after a long interruption once more at

the age of puberty - all the problems that are connected with man’s

‘archaic heritage’ - have been discussed by me elsewhere, and I have

no intention of going into them in this place.

      Little  light  is  thrown  upon  the  genesis  of  masochism  by  our

discussion of the beating-phantasy. To begin with, there seems to be

a confirmation of the view that masochism is not the manifestation of a

primary  instinct,  but  originates  from  sadism  which  has  been  turned

round upon the self - that is to say, by means of regression from an

object  to  the  ego.¹  Instincts  with  a  passive  aim  must  be  taken  for

granted as existing, especially among women. But passivity is not the

whole of masochism. The characteristic of unpleasure belongs to it as

well, - a bewildering accompaniment to the satisfaction of an instinct.

The transformation of sadism into masochism appears to be due to

the  influence  of  the  sense  of  guilt  which  takes  part  in  the  act  of

repression. Thus repression is operative here in three ways: it renders

the consequences of the genital organization unconscious, it compels

that organization itself to regress to the earlier sadistic-anal stage, and

it  transforms  the  sadism  of  this  stage  into  masochism,  which  is

passive and again in a certain sense narcissistic. The second of these

three  effects  is  made  possible  by  the  weakness  of  the  genital

organization, which must be presupposed in these cases. The third

becomes  necessary  because  the  sense  of  guilt  takes  as  much

objection  to  sadism  as  to  incestuous  object-choice  genitally

conceived. Again, the analyses do not tell us the origin of the sense of

guilt itself. It seems to be brought along by the new phase upon which

the  child  is  entering,  and,  if  it  afterwards  persists,  it  seems  to

correspond to a scar-like formation which is similar to the sense ofinferiority. According to our present orientation in the structure of the

ego, which is as yet uncertain, we should assign it to the agency in the

mind which sets itself up as a critical conscience over against the rest

of  the  ego,  which  produces  Silberer’s  functional  phenomenon  in

dreams, and which cuts itself loose from the ego in delusions of being

watched.

 

   ¹ Cf. Instincts and their Vicissitudes’ (1915c).

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3655

 

      We  may  note  too  in  passing  that  the  analysis  of  the  infantile

perversion dealt with here is also of help in solving an old riddle - one

which, it is true, has always troubled those who have not accepted

psycho-analysis  more  than  analysts  themselves.  Yet  quite  recently

even Bleuler regarded it as a remarkable and inexplicable fact that

neurotics make masturbation the central point of their sense of guilt.

We  have  long  assumed  that  this  sense  of  guilt  relates  to  the

masturbation of early childhood and not to that of puberty, and that in

the main it is to be connected not with the act of masturbation but with

the phantasy which, although unconscious, lies at its root - that is to

say, with the Oedipus complex.

   As regards the third and apparently sadistic phase of the beating-

phantasy, I have already discussed the significance that it gains as the

vehicle of the excitation impelling towards masturbation; and I have

shown how it arouses activities of the imagination which on the one

hand continue the phantasy along the same line, and on the other

hand  neutralize  it  through  compensation.  Nevertheless  the  second

phase, the unconscious and masochistic one, in which the child itself

is being beaten by its father, is incomparably the more important. This

is not only because it continues to operate through the agency of the

phase  that  takes  its  place;  we  can  also  detect  effects  upon  the

character,  which  are  directly  derived  from  its  unconscious  form.

People  who  harbour  phantasies  of  this  kind  develop  a  special

sensitiveness and irritability towards anyone whom they can include in

the class of fathers. They are easily offended by a person of this kind,and  in  that  way  (to  their  own  sorrow  and  cost)  bring  about  the

realization of the imagined situation of being beaten by their father. I

should not be surprised if it were one day possible to prove that the

same phantasy is the basis of the delusional litigiousness of paranoia.

 

                                            VI

 

      It  would  have  been  quite  impossible  to  give  a  clear  survey  of

infantile beating-phantasies if I had not limited it, except in one or two

connections, to the state of things in females. I will briefly recapitulate

my conclusions. The little girl’s beating phantasy passes through three

phases, of which the first and third are consciously remembered, the

middle one remaining unconscious. The two conscious phases appear

to  be  sadistic,  whereas  the  middle  and  unconscious  one  is

undoubtedly of a masochistic nature; its content consists in the child’s

being beaten by her father, and it carries with it the libidinal charge

and the sense of guilt. In the first and third phantasies the child who is

being beaten is always someone other than the subject; in the middle

phase  it  is  always  the  child  herself;  in  the  third  phase  it  is  almost

invariably only boys who are being beaten. The person who does the

beating is from the first her father, replaced later on by a substitute

taken  from  the  class  of  fathers.  The  unconscious  phantasy  of  the

middle phase had primarily a genital significance and developed by

means of repression and regression out of an incestuous wish to be

loved by the father. Another fact, though its connection with the rest

does not appear to be close, is that between the second and third

phases the girls change their sex, for in the phantasies of the latter

phase they turn into boys.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3656

 

   I have not been able to get so far in my knowledge of beating-

phantasies in boys, perhaps because my material was unfavourable. I

naturally expected to find a complete analogy between the state of

things in the case of boys and in that of girls, the mother taking the

father’s place in the phantasy. This expectation seemed to be fulfilled;for  the  content  of  the  boy’s  phantasy  which  was  taken  to  be  the

corresponding one was actually his being beaten by his mother (or

later on by a substitute for her). But this phantasy, in which the boy’s

own self was retained as the person who was being beaten, differed

from  the  second  phase  in  girls  in  that  it  was  able  to  become

conscious. If on this account, however, we attempt to draw a parallel

between it and the third phase of the girl’s phantasy, a new difference

is found, for the figure of the boy himself is not replaced by a number

of unknown, and unspecified children, least of all by a number of girls.

Therefore  the  expectation  of  there  being  a  complete  parallel  was

mistaken.

   My male cases with an infantile beating-phantasy comprised only a

few  who  did  not  exhibit  some  other  gross  injury  to  their  sexual

activities; again they included a fairly large number of persons who

would have to be described as true masochists in the sense of being

sexual perverts. They were either people who obtained their sexual

satisfaction  exclusively  from  masturbation  accompanied  by

masochistic phantasies; or they were people who had succeeded in

combining masochism with their genital activity in such a way that,

along  with  masochistic  performances  and  under  similar  conditions,

they were able to bring about erection and emission or to carry out

normal  intercourse.  In  addition  to  this  there  was  the  rarer  case  in

which a masochist is interfered with in his perverse activities by the

appearance  of  obsessional  ideas  of  unbearable  intensity.  Now

perverts who can obtain satisfaction do not often have occasion to

come for analysis. But as regards the three classes of masochists that

have been mentioned there may be strong motives to induce them to

go  to  an  analyst.  The  masochist  masturbator  finds  that  he  is

absolutely  impotent  if  after  all  he  does  attempt  intercourse  with  a

woman; and the man who has hitherto effected intercourse with the

help of a masochistic idea or performance may suddenly make the

discovery  that  the  alliance  which  was  so  convenient  for  him  has

broken down, his genital organs no longer reacting to the masochistic

stimulus.  We  are  accustomed  confidently  to  promise  recovery  to

psychically impotent patients who come to us for treatment; but we

ought to be more guarded in making this prognosis so long as the

dynamics  of  the  disturbance  are  unknown  to  us.  It  comes  as  adisagreeable surprise if the analysis reveals the cause of the ‘merely

psychical’ impotence to be a typically masochistic attitude, perhaps

deeply embedded since infancy.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3657

 

   As regards these masochistic men, however, a discovery is made at

this  point  which  warns  us  not  to  pursue  the  analogy  between  their

case  and  that  of  women  any  further  at  present,  but  to  judge  each

independently.  For  the  fact  emerges  that  in  their  masochistic

phantasies, as well as in the performances they go through for their

realization,  they  invariably  transfer  themselves  into  the  part  of  a

woman;  that  is  to  say,  their  masochistic  attitude  coincides  with  a

feminine  one.  This  can  easily  be  demonstrated  from  details  of  the

phantasies; but many patients are even aware of it themselves, and

give expression to it as a subjective conviction. It makes no difference

if in a fanciful embellishment of the masochistic scene they keep up

the fiction that a mischievous boy, or page, or apprentice is going to

be  punished.  On  the  other  hand  the  persons  who  administer

chastisement  are  always  women,  both  in  the  phantasies  and  the

performances.  This  is  confusing  enough;  and  the  further  question

must be asked whether this feminine attitude already forms the basis

of the masochistic element in the infantile beating-phantasy.¹

   Let us therefore leave aside consideration of the state of things in

cases of adult masochism, which it is so hard to clear up, and turn to

the infantile beating-phantasy in the male sex. Analysis of the earliest

years  of  childhood  once  more  allows  us  to  make  a  surprising

discovery in this field. The phantasy which has as its content being

beaten by the mother, and which is conscious or can become so, is

not a primary one. It possesses a preceding stage which is invariably

unconscious and has as its content: ‘I am being beaten by my father.’

This preliminary stage, then, really corresponds to the second phase

of the phantasy in the girl. The familiar and conscious phantasy: ‘I am

being beaten by my mother’, takes the place of the third phase in the

girl, in which, as has been mentioned already, unknown boys are theobjects that are being beaten. I have not been able to demonstrate

among boys a preliminary stage of a sadistic nature that could be set

beside  the  first  phase  of  the  phantasy  in  girls,  but  I  will  not  now

express any final disbelief in its existence, for I can readily see the

possibility of meeting with more complicated types.

   In the male phantasy - as I shall call it briefly, and, I hope, without

any risk of being misunderstood - the being beaten also stands for

being loved (in a genital sense), though this has been debased to a

lower  level  owing  to  regression.  So  the  original  form  of  the

unconscious male phantasy was not the provisional one that we have

hitherto given: ‘I am being beaten by my father’, but rather: ‘I am loved

by my father’. The phantasy has been transformed by the processes

with which we are familiar into the conscious phantasy: ‘I am being

beaten  by  my  mother’.  The  boy’s  beating-phantasy  is  therefore

passive  from  the  very  beginning,  and  is  derived  from  a  feminine

attitude towards his father. It corresponds with the Oedipus complex

just as the female one (that of the girl) does; only the parallel relation

which we expected to find between the two must be given up in favour

of a common character of another kind. In both cases the beating-

phantasy has its origin in an incestuous attachment to the father.

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] Further remarks on this subject will be found in ‘The Economic

Problem of Masochism’ (1924c).

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3658

 

   It will help to make matters clearer if at this point I enumerate the

other similarities and differences between beating phantasies in the

two  sexes.  In  the  case  of  the  girl  the  unconscious  masochistic

phantasy starts from the normal Oedipus attitude; in that of the boy it

starts from the inverted attitude, in which the father is taken as the

object of love. In the case of the girl the phantasy has a preliminary

stage  (the  first  phase),  in  which  the  beating  bears  no  special

significance  and  is  performed  upon  a  person  who  is  viewed  with

jealous hatred. Both of these features are absent in the case of the

boy, but this particular difference is one which might be removed bymore  fortunate  observation.  In  her  transition  to  the  conscious

phantasy  which  takes  the  place  of  the  unconscious  one,  the  girl

retains the figure of her father, and in that way keeps unchanged the

sex of the person beating; but she changes the figure and sex of the

person  being  beaten,  so  that  eventually  a  man  is  beating  male

children. The boy, on the contrary, changes the figure and sex of the

person beating, by putting his mother in the place of his father; but he

retains his own figure, with the result that the person beating and the

person being beaten are of opposite sexes. In the case of the girl what

was originally a masochistic (passive) situation is transformed into a

sadistic one by means of repression, and its sexual quality is almost

effaced. In the case of the boy the situation remains masochistic, and

shows a greater resemblance to the original phantasy with its genital

significance, since there is a difference of sex between the person

beating  and  the  person  being  beaten.  The  boy  evades  his

homosexuality  by  repressing  and  remodelling  his  unconscious

phantasy:  and  the  remarkable  thing  about  his  later  conscious

phantasy  is  that  it  has  for  its  content  a  feminine  attitude  without  a

homosexual object-choice. By the same process, on the other hand,

the  girl  escapes  from  the  demands  of  the  erotic  side  of  her  life

altogether. She turns herself in phantasy into a man, without herself

becoming active in a masculine way, and is no longer anything but a

spectator of the event which takes the place of a sexual act.

   We are justified in assuming that no great change is effected by the

repression  of  the  original  unconscious  phantasy.  Whatever  is

repressed  from  consciousness  or  replaced  in  it  by  something  else

remains intact and potentially operative in the unconscious. The effect

of regression to an earlier stage of the sexual organization is quite

another matter. As regards this we are led to believe that the state of

things changes in the unconscious as well. Thus in both sexes the

masochistic phantasy of being beaten by the father, though not the

passive phantasy of being loved by him, lives on in the unconscious

after  repression  has  taken  place.  There  are,  besides,  plenty  of

indications that the repression has only very incompletely attained its

object. The boy, who has tried to escape from a homosexual object-

choice, and who has not changed his sex, nevertheless feels like a

woman in his conscious phantasies, and endows the women who arebeating  him  with  masculine  attributes  and  characteristics.  The  girl,

who  has  even  renounced  her  sex,  and  who  has  on  the  whole

accomplished a more thoroughgoing work of repression, nevertheless

does not become freed from her father; she does not venture to do the

beating  herself;  and  since  she  has  herself  become  a  boy,  it  is

principally boys whom she causes to be beaten.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3659

 

 

   I am aware that the differences that I have here described between

the two sexes in regard to the nature of the beating-phantasy have not

been cleared up sufficiently. But I shall not attempt to unravel these

complications by tracing out their dependence on other factors, as I do

not consider that the material for observation is exhaustive. So far as it

goes,  however,  I  should  like  to  make  use  of  it  as  a  test  for  two

theories.  These  theories  stand  in  opposition  to  each  other,  though

both  of  them  deal  with  the  relation  between  repression  and  sexual

character, and each, according to its own view, represents the relation

as a very intimate one. I may say at once that I have always regarded

both theories as incorrect and misleading.

   The first of these theories is anonymous. It was brought to my notice

many  years  ago  by  a  colleague  with  whom  I  was  at  that  time  on

friendly  terms.  The  theory  is  so  attractive  on  account  of  its  bold

simplicity that the only wonder is that it should not have found its way

into the literature of the subject except in a few scattered allusions. It

is based on the fact of the bisexual constitution of human beings, and

asserts  that  the  motive  force  of  repression  in  each  individual  is  a

struggle between the two sexual characters. The dominant sex of the

person, that which is the more strongly developed, has repressed the

mental representation of the subordinated sex into the unconscious.

Therefore  the  nucleus  of  the  unconscious  (that  is  to  say,  the

repressed) is in each human being that side of him which belongs to

the opposite sex. Such a theory as this can only have an intelligible

meaning if we assume that a person’s sex is to be determined by theformation of his genitals; for otherwise it would not be certain which is

a person’s stronger sex and we should run the risk of reaching from

the results of our enquiry the very fact which has to serve as its point

of departure. To put the theory briefly: with men, what is unconscious

and repressed can be brought down to feminine instinctual impulses;

and conversely with women.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3660

 

   The second theory is of more recent origin. It is in agreement with

the first one in so far as it too represents the struggle between the two

sexes as being the decisive cause of repression. In other respects it

comes  into  conflict  with  the  former  theory;  moreover,  it  looks  for

support to sociological rather than biological sources. According to this

theory  of  the  ‘masculine  protest’,  formulated  by  Alfred  Adler,  every

individual makes efforts not to remain on the inferior ‘feminine line’

and struggles towards the ‘masculine line’, from which satisfaction can

alone be derived. Adler makes the masculine protest responsible for

the whole formation both of character and of neuroses. Unfortunately

he  makes  so  little  distinction  between  the  two  processes,  which

certainly have to be kept separate, and sets altogether so little store in

general by the fact of repression, that to attempt to apply the doctrine

of  the  masculine  protest  to  repression  brings  with  it  the  risk  of

misunderstanding. In my opinion such an attempt could only lead us to

infer that the masculine protest, the desire to break away from the

feminine line, was in every case the motive force of repression. The

repressing agency, therefore, would always be a masculine instinctual

impulse, and the repressed would be a feminine one. But symptoms

would also be the result of a feminine impulse, for we cannot discard

the characteristic feature of symptoms - that they are substitutes for

the repressed, substitutes that have made their way out in spite of

repression.

   Now let us take these two theories, which may be said to have in

common a sexualization of the process of repression, and test them

by applying them to the example of the beating phantasies which wehave been studying. The original phantasy, ‘I am being beaten by my

father’, corresponds, in the case of the boy, to a feminine attitude, and

is therefore an expression of that part of his disposition which belongs

to the opposite sex. If this part of him undergoes repression, the first

theory seems shown to be correct; for this theory set it up as a rule

that what belongs to the opposite sex is identical with the repressed. It

scarcely answers to our expectations, it is true, when we find that the

conscious  phantasy,  which  arises  after  repression  has  been

accomplished, nevertheless exhibits the feminine attitude once more,

though this time directed towards the mother. But we will not go into

such  doubtful  points,  when  the  whole  question  can  be  so  quickly

decided. There can be no doubt that the original phantasy in the case

of  the  girl,  ‘I  am  being  beaten  (i.  e.  I  am  loved)  by  my  father’,

represents a feminine attitude, and corresponds to her dominant and

manifest sex; according to the theory, therefore, it ought to escape

repression, and there would be no need for its becoming unconscious.

But as a matter of fact it does become unconscious, and is replaced

by a conscious phantasy which disavows the girl’s manifest sexual

character.  The  theory  is  therefore  useless  as  an  explanation  of

beating-phantasies,  and  is  contradicted  by  the  facts.  It  might  be

objected that it is precisely in unmanly boys and unwomanly girls that

these  beating-phantasies  appeared  and  went  through  these

vicissitudes;  or  that  it  was  a  trait  of  femininity  in  the  boy  and  of

masculinity  in  the  girl  which  must  be  made  responsible  for  the

production of a passive phantasy in the boy, and its repression in the

girl. We should be inclined to agree with this view, but it would not be

any  the  less  impossible  to  defend  the  supposed  relation  between

manifest  sexual  character  and  the  choice  of  what  is  destined  for

repression. In the last resort we can only see that both in male and

female individuals masculine as well as feminine instinctual impulses

are found, and that each can equally well undergo repression and so

become unconscious.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3661

    The theory of the masculine protest seems to maintain its ground

very much better on being tested in regard to the beating-phantasies.

In the case of both boys and girls the beating phantasy corresponds

with  a  feminine  attitude  -  one,  that  is,  in  which  the  individual  is

lingering on the ‘feminine line’ - and both sexes hasten to get free from

this attitude by repressing the phantasy. Nevertheless, it seems to be

only with the girl that the masculine protest is attended with complete

success, and in that instance, indeed, an ideal example is to be found

of the operation of the masculine protest. With the boy the result is not

entirely satisfactory; the feminine line is not given up, and the boy is

certainly not ‘on top’ in his conscious masochistic phantasy. It would

therefore agree with the expectations derived from the theory if we

were to recognize that this phantasy was a symptom which had come

into  existence  through  the  failure  of  the  masculine  protest.  It  is  a

disturbing  fact,  to  be  sure,  that  the  girl’s  phantasy,  which  owes  its

origin to the forces of repression, also has the value and meaning of a

symptom.  In  this  instance,  where  the  masculine  protest  has

completely achieved its object, surely the determining condition for the

formation of a symptom must be absent.

   Before we are led by this difficulty to a suspicion that the whole

conception of the masculine protest is inadequate to meet the problem

of  neuroses  and  perversions,  and  that  its  application  to  them  is

unfruitful, we will for a moment leave the passive beating-phantasies

and turn our attention to other instinctual manifestations of infantile

sexual life - manifestations which have equally undergone repression.

No one can doubt that there are also wishes and phantasies which

keep to the masculine line from their very nature, and which are the

expression of masculine instinctual impulses - sadistic tendencies, for

instance, or a boy’s lustful feelings towards his mother arising out of

the normal Oedipus complex. It is no less certain that these impulses,

too,  are  overtaken  by  repression.  If  the  masculine  protest  is  to  be

taken  as  having  satisfactorily  explained  the  repression  of  passive

phantasies (which later become masochistic), then it becomes for that

very  reason  totally  inapplicable  to  the  opposite  case  of  active

phantasies. That is to say, the doctrine of the masculine protest is

altogether  incompatible  with  the  fact  of  repression.  Unless  we  are

prepared to throw away all that has been acquired in psychology sinceBreuer’s first cathartic treatment and through its agency, we cannot

expect  that  the  principle  of  the  masculine  protest  will  acquire  any

significance in the elucidation of the neuroses and perversions.

 


                              'A Child Is Being Beaten'

                                                                                      3662

 

   The theory of psycho-analysis (a theory based on observation) holds

firmly to the view that the motive forces of repression must not be

sexualized.  Man’s  archaic  heritage  forms  the  nucleus  of  the

unconscious mind; and whatever part of that heritage has to be left

behind in the advance to later phases of development, because it is

unserviceable or incompatible with what is new and harmful to it, falls

a victim to the process of repression. This selection is made more

successfully with one group of instincts than with the other. In virtue of

special circumstances which have often been pointed out already, the

latter  group,  that  of  the  sexual  instincts,  are  able  to  defeat  the

intentions  of  repression,  and  to  enforce  their  representation  by

substitutive formations of a disturbing kind. For this reason infantile

sexuality,  which  is  held  under  repression,  acts  as  the  chief  motive

force  in  the  formation  of  symptoms;  and  the  essential  part  of  its

content, the Oedipus complex, is the nuclear complex of neuroses. I

hope that in this paper I have raised an expectation that the sexual

aberrations  of  childhood,  as  well  as  those  of  mature  life,  are

ramifications of the same complex.

                                                                                       3663

 

          INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND THE WAR

                                      NEUROSES

                                        (1919)

 


                                                                                      3664

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3665

 

          INTRODUCTION TO PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND THE WAR

                                      NEUROSES

 

This  small  book  on  the  war  neuroses  -  the  opening  volume  of  our

Internationale  Psychoanalytische  Bibliothek  -  deals  with  a  subject

which until recently enjoyed the advantage of being in the greatest

degree topical. When it came up for discussion at the Fifth Psycho-

Analytical Congress, which was held in Budapest in September, 1918,

official  representatives  from  the  highest  quarters  of  the  Central

European Powers were present as observers at the papers and other

proceedings.  The  hopeful  result  of  this  first  contact  was  that  the

establishment  of  psycho-analytic  Centres  was  promised,  at  which

analytically trained physicians would have leisure and opportunity for

studying the nature of these puzzling disorders and the therapeutic

effect exercised on them by psycho-analysis. Before these proposals

could  be  put  into  effect,  the  war  came  to  an  end,  the  state

organizations collapsed and interest in the war neuroses gave place to

other  concerns.  It  is,  however,  a  significant  fact  that,  when  war

conditions  ceased  to  operate,  the  greater  number  of  the  neurotic

disturbances brought about by the war simultaneously vanished. The

opportunity for a thorough investigation of these affections was thus

unluckily lost - though, we must add, the early recurrence of such an

opportunity is not a thing to be desired.      But  this  episode,  though  it  is  now  closed,  was  not  without  an

important  influence  on  the  spread  of  psycho-analysis.  Medical  men

who  had  hitherto  held  back  from  any  approach  to  psycho-analytic

theories  were  brought  into  closer  contact  with  them  when,  in  the

course of their duties as army doctors, they were obliged to deal with

war neuroses. The reader will be able to gather from Ferenczi’s paper

with what hesitations and under what disguises these closer contacts

were  made.  Some  of  the  factors  which  psycho-analysis  had

recognized and described long before as being at work in peace-time

neuroses - the psychogenic origin of the symptoms, the importance of

unconscious  instinctual  impulses,  the  part  played  in  dealing  with

mental  conflicts  by  the  primary  gain  from  being  ill  (‘the  flight  into

illness’) - were observed to be present equally in the war neuroses

and  were  accepted  almost  universally.  Simmel’s  studies  show,  too,

what successes could be achieved by treating war neurotics by the

method of catharsis, which, as we know, was the first step towards the

psycho-analytic technique.

 


          Introduction To Psycho-Analysis And The War Neuroses

                                                                                      3666

 

   There is, however, no need to consider that these approaches to

psycho-analysis  imply  any  reconciliation  or  any  appeasement  of

opposition.  Suppose  someone  has  hitherto  rejected  the  whole  of  a

complex  of  interdependent  propositions,  but  now  suddenly  finds

himself in a position to convince himself of the truth of one portion of

the whole. It might be thought that he will begin to hesitate about his

opposition  in  general  and  permit  himself  some  degree  of  deferent

expectation  that  the  other  portion,  about  which  he  has  had  no

personal experience and can consequently form no judgement of his

own, may also turn out to be true. This other portion of psycho-analytic

theory, with which the study of the war neuroses did not come into

contact, is to the effect that the motive forces which are expressed in

the formation of symptoms are sexual and that neuroses arise from a

conflict between the ego and the sexual instincts which it repudiates.

(‘Sexuality’ in this context is to be understood in the extended sense inwhich it is used in psycho-analysis and is not to be confused with the

narrower concept of ‘genitality’.) Now it is quite true, as Ernest Jones

remarks  in  his  contribution  to  this  volume,  that  this  portion  of  the

theory has not yet been proved to apply to the war neuroses. The

work that might prove it has not yet been taken in hand. It may be that

the war neuroses are altogether unsuitable material for the purpose.

But the opponents of psycho-analysis, whose dislike of sexuality is

evidently stronger than their logic, have been in a hurry to proclaim

that the investigation of the war neuroses has finally disproved this

portion  of  psycho-analytic  theory.  They  have  been  guilty  here  of  a

slight confusion. If the investigation of the war neuroses (and a very

superficial one at that) has not shown that the sexual theory of the

neuroses is correct, that is something very different from its showing

that that theory is incorrect. With the help of an impartial attitude and a

little  good  will,  it  should  not  be  hard  to  find  the  way  to  a  further

clarification of the subject.

 


          Introduction To Psycho-Analysis And The War Neuroses

                                                                                      3667

 

      The  war  neuroses,  in  so  far  as  they  are  distinguished  from  the

ordinary neuroses of peace-time by special characteristics, are to be

regarded as traumatic neuroses whose occurrence has been made

possible or has been promoted by a conflict in the ego. Abraham’s

paper  affords  good  evidence  for  this  conflict,  which  has  also  been

recognized by the English and American writers quoted by Jones. The

conflict is between the soldier’s old peaceful ego and his new warlike

one, and it becomes acute as soon as the peace-ego realizes what

danger  it  runs  of  losing  its  life  owing  to  the  rashness  of  its  newly

formed, parasitic double. It would be equally true to say that the old

ego  is  protecting  itself  from  a  mortal  danger  by  taking  flight  into  a

traumatic neurosis or to say that it is defending itself against the new

ego which it sees is threatening its life. Thus the precondition of the

war  neuroses,  the  soil  that  nourishes  them,  would  seem  to  be  a

national army; there would be no possibility of their arising in an army

of professional soldiers or mercenaries.      Apart  from  this,  the  war  neuroses  are  only  traumatic  neuroses,

which,  as  we  know,  occur  in  peace-time  too  after  frightening

experiences or severe accidents, without any reference to a conflict in

the ego.

   The theory of the sexual aetiology of the neuroses, or, as we prefer

to say, the libido theory of the neuroses, was originally put forward

only in relation to the transference neuroses of peace-time and is easy

to demonstrate in their case by the use of the technique of analysis.

But  its  application  to  the  other  disorders  which  we  later  grouped

together as the narcissistic neuroses already met with difficulties. An

ordinary  dementia  praecox,  a  paranoia  or  a  melancholia  are

essentially quite unsuitable material for demonstrating the validity of

the  libido  theory  or  for  serving  as  a  first  introduction  to  an

understanding of it; and it is for that reason that psychiatrists, who

neglect the transference neuroses, are unable to come to terms with

it.  But  the  traumatic  neuroses  of  peace-time  have  always  been

regarded as the most refractory material of all in this respect; so that

the  emergence  of  the  war  neuroses  could  not  introduce  any  new

factor into the situation that already existed.

   It only became possible to extend the libido theory to the narcissistic

neuroses  after  the  concept  of  a  ‘narcissistic  libido’  had  been  put

forward  and  applied  -  a  concept,  that  is,  of  an  amount  of  sexual

energy attached to the ego itself and finding satisfaction in the ego just

as satisfaction is usually found only in objects. This entirely legitimate

development of the concept of sexuality promises to accomplish as

much  for  the  severer  neuroses  and  for  the  psychoses  as  can  be

expected of a theory which is feeling its way forwards on an empirical

basis. The traumatic neuroses of peace will also fit into the scheme as

soon as a successful outcome has been reached of our investigations

into the relations which undoubtedly exist between fright, anxiety and

narcissistic libido.

 


          Introduction To Psycho-Analysis And The War Neuroses

                                                                                      3668

 

   The traumatic neuroses and war neuroses may proclaim too loudlythe effects of mortal danger and may be silent or speak only in muted

tones of the effects of frustration in love. But, on the other hand, the

ordinary transference neuroses of peace-time set no aetiological store

by the factor of mortal danger which, in the former class of neuroses,

plays so mighty a part. It is even held that the peace-time neuroses

are promoted by indulgence, good living and inactivity - which would

afford an interesting contrast to the living-conditions under which the

war  neuroses  develop.  If  they  were  to  follow  the  example  of  their

opponents,  psycho-analysts,  finding  that  their  patients  had  fallen  ill

owing to frustration in love (owing to the claims of the libido being

unsatisfied) would have to maintain that there can be no such things

as danger-neuroses or that the disorders that appear after frightening

experiences  are  not  neuroses.  They  have,  of  course,  no  notion  of

maintaining any such thing. On the contrary, a convenient possibility

occurs to them of bringing the two apparently divergent sets of facts

together under a single hypothesis. In traumatic and war neuroses the

human ego is defending itself from a danger which threatens it from

without or which is embodied in a shape assumed by the ego itself. In

the transference neuroses of peace the enemy from which the ego is

defending itself is actually the libido, whose demands seem to it to be

menacing. In both cases the ego is afraid of being damaged - in the

latter  case  by  the  libido  and  in  the  former  by  external  violence.  It

might, indeed, be said that in the case of the war neuroses, in contrast

to  the  pure  traumatic  neuroses  and  in  approximation  to  the

transference  neuroses,  what  is  feared  is  nevertheless  an  internal

enemy. The theoretical difficulties standing in the way of a unifying

hypothesis of this kind do not seem insuperable: after all, we have a

perfect right to describe repression, which lies at the basis of every

neurosis,  as  a  reaction  to  a  trauma  -  as  an  elementary  traumatic

neurosis.

 


          Introduction To Psycho-Analysis And The War Neuroses

                                                                                      3669

 

                                      APPENDIX

 

      MEMORANDUM ON THE ELECTRICAL TREATMENT OF WAR NEUROTICS 

                                    (1955 [1920])

 

   There were plenty of patients even in peace-time who, after traumas

(that is, after frightening and dangerous experiences such as railway

accidents, etc.) exhibited severe disturbances in their mental life and

in their nervous activity, without physicians having reached an agreed

judgement on these states. Some supposed that with such patients it

was a question of severe injuries to the nervous system, similar to the

haemorrhages and inflammations occurring in non-traumatic illnesses.

And when anatomical examination failed to establish such processes,

they  nevertheless  maintained  their  belief  that  finer  changes  in  the

tissues  were  the  cause  of  the  symptoms  observed.  They  therefore

classed  these  traumatic  cases  among  the  organic  diseases.  Other

physicians maintained from the first that these states could only be

regarded  as  functional  disturbances,  and  that  the  nervous  system

remained  anatomically  intact.  But  medical  opinion  had  long  found

difficulty in explaining how such severe disturbances of function could

occur without any gross injury to the organ.

      The  war  that  has  recently  ended  produced  and  brought  under

observation  an  immense  number  of  these  traumatic  cases.  In  the

result, the controversy was decided in favour of the functional view.

The great majority of physicians no longer believe that the so-called

‘war  neurotics’  are  ill  as  a  result  of  tangible  organic  injuries  to  the

nervous  system,  and  the  more  clear-sighted  among  them  have

already  decided,  instead  of  using  the  indefinite  description  of  a

‘functional  change’,  to  introduce  the  unambiguous  term  ‘mental

change’.

   Although the war neuroses manifested themselves for the most part

as motor disturbances - tremors and paralyses - and although it was

plausible to suppose that such a gross impact as that produced by the

concussion due to the explosion of a shell near by or to being buried

by a fall of earth would lead to gross mechanical effects, observations

were nevertheless made which left no doubt as to the psychical nature

of the causation of these so-called war neuroses. How could this be

disputed  when  the  same  symptoms  appeared  behind  the  Front  as

well, far from the horrors of war, or immediately after a return fromleave? The physicians were therefore led to regard war neurotics in a

similar light to the nervous subjects of peace-time.

   What is known as the psycho-analytic school of psychiatry, which

was brought into being by me, had taught for the last twenty-five years

that the neuroses of peace could be traced back to disturbances of

emotional life. This explanation was now applied quite generally to war

neurotics. We had further asserted that neurotic patients suffered from

mental  conflicts  and  that  the  wishes  and  inclinations  which  were

expressed in the symptoms were unknown to the patients themselves

- were, that is to say, unconscious. It was therefore easy to infer that

the  immediate  cause  of  all  war  neuroses  was  an  unconscious

inclination in the soldier to withdraw from the demands, dangerous or

outrageous to his feelings, made upon him by active service. Fear of

losing his own life, opposition to the command to kill other people,

rebellion against the ruthless suppression of his own personality by his

superiors - these were the most important affective sources on which

the inclination to escape from war was nourished.

 


          Introduction To Psycho-Analysis And The War Neuroses

                                                                                      3670

 

   A soldier in whom these affective motives were very powerful and

clearly conscious would, if he was a healthy man, have been obliged

to  desert  or  pretend  to  be  ill.  Only  the  smallest  proportion  of  war

neurotics, however, were malingerers; the emotional impulses which

rebelled  in  them  against  active  service  and  drove  them  into  illness

were  operative  in  them  without  becoming  conscious  to  them.  They

remained unconscious because other motives, such as ambition, self-

esteem, patriotism, the habit of obedience and the example of others,

were to start with more powerful until, on some appropriate occasion,

they  were  overwhelmed  by  the  other,  unconsciously  operating

motives.

   This insight into the causation of the war neuroses led to a method

of  treatment  which  seemed  to  be  well-grounded  and  also  proved

highly effective in the first instance. It seemed expedient to treat the

neurotic as a malingerer and to disregard the psychological distinctionbetween  conscious  and  unconscious  intentions,  although  he  was

known not to be a malingerer. Since his illness served the purpose of

withdrawing him from an intolerable situation, the roots of the illness

would clearly be undermined if it was made even more intolerable to

him than active service. Just as he had fled from the war into illness,

means  were  now  adopted  which  compelled  him  to  flee  back  from

illness into health, that is to say, into fitness for active service. For this

purpose painful electrical treatment was employed, and with success.

Physicians are glossing over the facts in retrospect when they assert

that the strength of this electrical current was the same as had always

been  employed  in  functional  disorders.  This  would  only  have  been

effective  in  the  mildest  cases;  nor  did  it  fit  in  with  the  underlying

argument that a war neurotic’s illness had to be made painful so that

the balance of his motives would be tipped in favour of recovery.

   This painful form of treatment introduced in the German army for

therapeutic  purposes  could  no  doubt  also  be  employed  in  a  more

moderate fashion. If it was used in the Vienna Clinics, I am personally

convinced that it was never intensified to a cruel pitch by the initiative

of  Professor  Wagner-Jauregg.  I  cannot  vouch  for  other  physicians

whom I did not know. The psychological education of medical men is

in general decidedly deficient and more than one of them may have

forgotten  that  the  patient  whom  he  was  seeking  to  treat  as  a

malingerer was, after all, not one.

 


          Introduction To Psycho-Analysis And The War Neuroses

                                                                                      3671

 

   This therapeutic procedure, however, bore a stigma from the very

first. It did not aim at the patient’s recovery, or not in the first instance;

it aimed, above all, at restoring his fitness for service. Here Medicine

was serving purposes foreign to its essence. The physician himself

was under military command and had his own personal dangers to

fear - loss of seniority or a charge of neglecting his duty - if he allowed

himself to be led by considerations other than those prescribed for

him.  The  insoluble  conflict  between  the  claims  of  humanity,  which

normally carry decisive weight for a physician, and the demands of anational war was bound to confuse his activity.

   Moreover, the successes of treatment by a strong electric current,

which  were  brilliant  to  begin  with,  turned  out  afterwards  not  to  be

lasting. A patient who, having been restored to health by it, was sent

back  to  the  Front,  could  repeat  the  business  afresh  and  have  a

relapse, by means of which he at least gained time and escaped the

danger which was at the moment the immediate one. If he was once

more under fire his fear of the electric current receded, just as during

the treatment his fear of active service had faded. In the course of the

war years, too, a rapidly increasing fatigue in the popular spirit made

itself felt more and more, and a growing dislike of fighting, so that the

treatment  I  have  described  began  to  fail  in  its  effects.  In  these

circumstances some of the army doctors gave way to the inclination,

characteristic of Germans, to carry through their intentions regardless

of all else - which should never have happened. The strength of the

current,  as  well  as  the  severity  of  the  rest  of  the  treatment,  were

increased to an unbearable point in order to deprive war neurotics of

the advantage they gained from their illness. The fact has never been

contradicted that in German hospitals there were deaths at that time

during treatment and suicides as a result of it. I am quite unable to

say, however, whether the Vienna Clinics, too, passed through this

phase of therapy.

 


          Introduction To Psycho-Analysis And The War Neuroses

                                                                                      3672

 

   I am in a position to bring forward conclusive evidence of the final

break-down of the electrical treatment of the war neuroses. In 1918

Dr.  Ernst  Simmel,  head  of  a  hospital  for  war  neuroses  at  Posen,

published  a  pamphlet  in  which  he  reported  the  extraordinarily

favourable results achieved in severe cases of war neurosis by the

psychotherapeutic  method  introduced  by  me.  As  a  result  of  this

publication, the next Psycho-Analytical Congress, held in Budapest in

September 1918, was attended by official delegates of the German,

Austrian and Hungarian Army Command, who promised that Centres

should  be  set  up  for  the  purely  psychological  treatment  of  warneuroses. This promise was made although the delegates can have

been left in no doubt that with this considerate, laborious and tedious

kind of treatment it was impossible to count on the quickest restoration

of  these  patients  to  fitness  for  service.  Preparations  for  the

establishment of Centres of this kind were actually under way, when

the revolution broke out and put an end to the war and to the influence

of the administrative offices which had hitherto been all-powerful. But

with the end of the war the war neurotics, too, disappeared - a final but

impressive proof of the psychical causation of their illnesses.

                                                                  Vienna, 23. 2. 20.    

                                                                                       3673

 

                                    THE ‘UNCANNY’

                                        (1919)

 


                                                                                      3674

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      3675

 

                                    THE ‘UNCANNY’

 

                                            I

 

It is only rarely that a psycho-analyst feels impelled to investigate the

subject of aesthetics, even when aesthetics is understood to mean not

merely the theory of beauty but the theory of the qualities of feeling.

He works in other strata of mental life and has little to do with the

subdued  emotional  impulses  which,  inhibited  in  their  aims  and

dependent on a host of concurrent factors, usually furnish the material

for the study of aesthetics. But it does occasionally happen that he

has to interest himself in some particular province of that subject; and

this province usually proves to be a rather remote one, and one which

has been neglected in the specialist literature of aesthetics.

      The  subject  of  the  ‘uncanny’  is  a  province  of  this  kind.  It  is

undoubtedly related to what is frightening - to what arouses dread and

horror; equally certainly, too, the word is not always used in a clearly

definable sense, so that it tends to coincide with what excites fear in

general. Yet we may expect that a special core of feeling is present

which justifies the use of a special conceptual term. One is curious to

know  what  this  common  core  is  which  allows  us  to  distinguish  as

‘uncanny’ certain things which lie within the field of what is frightening.

      As  good  as  nothing  is  to  be  found  upon  this  subject  in

comprehensive  treatises  on  aesthetics,  which  in  general  prefer  toconcern  themselves  with  what  is  beautiful,  attractive  and  sublime  -

that is, with feelings of a positive nature - and with the circumstances

and  the  objects  that  call  them  forth,  rather  than  with  the  opposite

feelings  of  repulsion  and  distress.  I  know  of  only  one  attempt  in

medico-psychological literature, a fertile but not exhaustive paper by

Jentsch  (1906).  But  I  must  confess  that  I  have  not  made  a  very

thorough examination of the literature, especially the foreign literature,

relating to this present modest contribution of mine, for reasons which,

as may easily be guessed, lie in the times in which we live; so that my

paper is presented to the reader without any claim to priority.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3676

 

   In his study of the ‘uncanny’ Jentsch quite rightly lays stress on the

obstacle presented by the fact that people vary so very greatly in their

sensitivity  to  this  quality  of  feeling.  The  writer  of  the  present

contribution, indeed, must himself plead guilty to a special obtuseness

in the matter, where extreme delicacy of perception would be more in

place. It is long since he has experienced or heard of anything which

has  given  him  an  uncanny  impression,  and  he  must  start  by

translating himself into that state of feeling, by awakening in himself

the  possibility  of  experiencing  it.  Still,  such  difficulties  make

themselves powerfully felt in many other branches of aesthetics; we

need  not  on  that  account  despair  of  finding  instances  in  which  the

quality in question will be unhesitatingly recognized by most people.

   Two courses are open to us at the outset. Either we can find out

what meaning has come to be attached to the word ‘uncanny’ in the

course of its history; or we can collect all those properties of persons,

things, sense-impressions, experiences and situations which arouse in

us the feeling of uncanniness, and then infer the unknown nature of

the uncanny from what all these examples have in common. I will say

at once that both courses lead to the same result: the uncanny is that

class of the frightening which leads back to what is known of old and

long familiar. How this is possible, in what circumstances the familiar

can become uncanny and frightening, I shall show in what follows. Letme also add that my investigation was actually begun by collecting a

number  of  individual  cases,  and  was  only  later  confirmed  by  an

examination  of  linguistic  usage.  In  this  discussion,  however,  I  shall

follow the reverse course.

 

   The German word ‘unheimlich’ is obviously the opposite of ‘heimlich’

[‘homely’], ‘heimisch’ [‘native’] - the opposite of what is familiar; and

we  are  tempted  to  conclude  that  what  is  ‘uncanny’  is  frightening

precisely because it is not known and familiar. Naturally not everything

that is new and unfamiliar is frightening, however; the relation is not

capable of inversion. We can only say that what is novel can easily

become frightening and uncanny; some new things are frightening but

not by any means all. Something has to be added to what is novel and

unfamiliar in order to make it uncanny.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3677

 

      On  the  whole,  Jentsch  did  not  get  beyond  this  relation  of  the

uncanny to the novel and unfamiliar. He ascribes the essential factor

in  the  production  of  the  feeling  of  uncanniness  to  intellectual

uncertainty;  so  that  the  uncanny  would  always,  as  it  were,  be

something  one  does  not  know  one’s  way  about  in.  The  better

orientated in his environment a person is, the less readily will he get

the  impression  of  something  uncanny  in  regard  to  the  objects  and

events in it.

   It is not difficult to see that this definition is incomplete, and we will

therefore try to proceed beyond the equation ‘uncanny’ = ‘unfamiliar’.

We  will  first  turn  to  other  languages.  But  the  dictionaries  that  we

consult tell us nothing new, perhaps only because we ourselves speak

a language that is foreign. Indeed, we get an impression that many

languages  are  without  a  word  for  this  particular  shade  of  what  is

frightening.

   I should like to express my indebtedness to Dr. Theodor Reik for the

following excerpts:-

   LATIN: (K. E. Georges, Deutchlateinisches Wörterbuch, 1898). Anuncanny  place: locus  suspectus;  at  an  uncanny  time  of  night:

intempesta nocte.

   GREEK: (Rost’s and Schenkl’s Lexikons). ξέυος (i. e. strange, foreign).

   ENGLISH: (from the dictionaries of Lucas, Bellows, Flügel and Muret-

Sanders). Uncomfortable, uneasy, gloomy, dismal, uncanny, ghastly;

(of a house) haunted; (of a man) a repulsive fellow.

   FRENCH: (Sachs-Villatte). Inquiétant, sinistre, lugubre, mal à son aise.

   SPANISH: (Tollhausen, 1889). Sospechoso, de mal aguëro, lúgubre,

siniestro.

   The Italian and Portuguese languages seem to content themselves

with words which we should describe as circumlocutions. In Arabic

and Hebrew ‘uncanny’ means the same as ‘daemonic’, ‘gruesome’.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3678

 

   Let us therefore return to the German language. In Daniel Sanders’s

Wörterbuch  der  Deutschen  Sprache  (1860, 1,  729),  the  following

entry, which I here reproduce in full, is to be found under the word

‘heimlich’.  I  have  laid  stress  on  one  or  two  passages  by  italicizing

them.

 

     Heimlich,  adj.,  subst. Heimlichkeit  (pl. Heimlichkeiten):  I.  Also

heimelich, heimelig,  belonging  to  the  house,  not  strange,  familiar,

tame, intimate, friendly, etc.

   (a) (Obsolete) belonging to the house or the family, or regarded as

so  belonging  (cf.  Latin familiaris,  familiar): Die  Heimlichen,  the

members of the household; Der heimliche Rat (Gen. xli, 45; 2 Sam.

xxiii. 23; 1 Chron. xii. 25; Wisd. viii. 4), now more usually Geheimer

Rat [Privy Councillor].

   (b) Of animals: tame, companionable to man. As opposed to wild, e.

g. ‘Animals which are neither wild nor heimlich’, etc. ‘Wild animals . . .

that  are  trained  to  be heimlich  and  accustomed  to  men.’  ‘If  these

young  creatures  are  brought  up  from  early  days  among  men  they

become  quite heimlich,  friendly’  etc.  -  So  also:  ‘It  (the  lamb)  is  so

heimlich  and  eats  out  of  my  hand.’  ‘Nevertheless,  the  stork  is  abeautiful, heimelich bird.’

   (c) Intimate, friendlily comfortable; the enjoyment of quiet content,

etc., arousing a sense of agreeable restfulness and security as in one

within the four walls of his house. ‘Is it still heimlich to you in your

country where strangers are felling your woods?’ ‘She did not feel too

heimlich with him.’ ‘Along a high, heimlich, shady path . . ., beside a

purling,  gushing  and  babbling  woodland  brook.’  ‘To  destroy  the

Heimlichkeit  of  the  home,’  ‘I  could  not  readily  find  another  spot  so

intimate and heimlich as this.’ ‘We pictured it so comfortable, so nice,

so  cosy  and heimlich.’  ‘In  quiet Heimlichkeit,  surrounded  by  close

walls.’  ‘A  careful  housewife,  who  knows  how  to  make  a  pleasing

Heimlichkeit (Häuslichkeit) out of the smallest means.’ ‘The man who

till recently had been so strange to him now seemed to him all the

more heimlich.’ ‘The protestant land-owners do not feel . . . heimlich

among their catholic inferiors.’ ‘When it grows heimlich and still, and

the  evening  quiet  alone  watches  over  your  cell.’  ‘Quiet,  lovely  and

heimlich,  no  place  more  fitted  for  their  rest.’  ‘He  did  not  feel  at  all

heimlich about it.’ - Also, ‘The place was so peaceful, so lonely, so

shadily-heimlich.’ ‘The in- and outflowing waves of the current, dreamy

and  lullaby-heimlich.’  Cf.  in  especial Unheimlich.  Among  Swabian

Swiss  authors  in  especial,  often  as  a  trisyllable:  ‘How heimelich  it

seemed to Ivo again of an evening, when he was at home.’ ‘It was so

heimelig in the house.’ ‘The warm room and the heimelig afternoon.’

‘When a man feels in his heart that he is so small and the Lord so

great - that is what is truly heimelig.’ ‘Little by little they grew at ease

and heimelig among themselves.’ ‘Friendly Heimeligkeit.’ ‘I shall be

nowhere  more heimelich  than  I  am  here.’  ‘That  which  comes  from

afar  .  .  .  assuredly  does  not  live  quite heimelig  (heimatlich,

freundnachbarlich)  among  the  people.’  ‘The  cottage  where  he  had

once sat so often among his own people, so heimelig, so happy.’ ‘The

sentinel’s  horn  sounds  so heimelig  from  the  tower,  and  his  voice

invites so hospitably.’ ‘You go to sleep there so soft and warm, so

wonderfully heim’lig.’  - This  form  of  the  word  deserves  to  become

general in order to protect this perfectly good sense of the word from

becoming obsolete through an easy confusion with II. Cf.: ‘"The Zecks

are  all  ‘heimlich’."  (in  sense  II) "‘Heimlich’?   .  .  . What  do  you

understand by ‘heimlich’?" "Well, . . . they are like a buried spring or adried-up  pond.  One  cannot  walk  over  it  without  always  having  the

feeling  that  water  might  come  up  there  again."  "Oh,  we  call  it

‘unheimlich’;  you  call  it  ‘heimlich’.  Well,  what  makes  you  think  that

there  is  something  secret  and  untrustworthy  about  this

family?"’(Gutzkow).

   (d) Especially in Silesia: gay, cheerful; also of the weather.

   II. Concealed, kept from sight, so that others do not get to know of or

about it, withheld from others. To do something heimlich, i.e. behind

someone’s  back;  to  steal  away heimlich; heimlich  meetings  and

appointments;  to  look  on  with heimlich  pleasure  at  someone’s

discomfiture; to sigh or weep heimlich; to behave heimlich, as though

there  was  something  to  conceal; heimlich  love-affair,  love,  sin;

heimlich places (which good manners oblige us to conceal) (1 Sam. v.

6). ‘The heimlich chamber’ (privy) (2 Kings x. 27.). Also, ‘the heimlich

chair’. ‘To throw into pits or Heimlichkeiten’. - ‘Led the steeds heimlich

before Laomedon.’ - ‘As secretive, heimlich, deceitful and malicious

towards cruel masters . . . as frank, open, sympathetic and helpful

towards a friend in misfortune.’ ‘You have still to learn what is heimlich

holiest to me.’ ‘The heimlich art’ (magic). ‘Where public ventilation has

to stop, there heimlich machinations begin.’ ‘Freedom is the whispered

watchword  of heimlich  conspirators  and  the  loud  battle-cry  of

professed revolutionaries.’ ‘A holy, heimlich effect.’ ‘I have roots that

are most heimlich. I am grown in the deep earth.’ ‘My heimlich pranks.’

‘If he is not given it openly and scrupulously he may seize it heimlich

and  unscrupulously.’  ‘He  had  achromatic  telescopes  constructed

heimlich  and  secretly.’  ‘Henceforth  I  desire  that  there  should  be

nothing heimlich  any  longer  between  us.’  -  To  discover,  disclose,

betray someone’s Heimlichkeiten; ‘to concoct Heimlichkeiten behind

my  back’.  ‘In  my  time  we  studied Heimlichkeit’  ‘The  hand  of

understanding can alone undo the powerless spell of the Heimlichkeit

(of hidden gold).’ ‘Say, where is the place of concealment . . . in what

place  of  hidden Heimlichkeit?’  ‘Bees,  who  make  the  lock  of

Heimlichkeiten’ (i. e. sealing-wax). ‘Learned in strange Heimlichkeiten

(magic arts).

   For compounds see above, Ic. Note especially the negative ‘un-’:

eerie, weird, arousing gruesome fear: ‘Seeming quite unheimlich and

ghostly to him.’ ‘The unheimlich, fearful hours of night.’ ‘I had alreadylong  since  felt  an unheimlich,  even  gruesome  feeling.’  ‘Now  I  am

beginning to have an unheimlich feeling.’ . . . ‘Feels an unheimlich

horror.’  ‘Unheimlich  and  motionless  like  a  stone  image.’  ‘The

unheimlich mist called hill-fog.’ ‘These pale youths are unheimlich and

are brewing heaven knows what mischief.’ ‘"Unheimlich" is the name

for everything that ought to have remained . . . secret and hidden but

has come to light’ (Schelling). - ‘To veil the divine, to surround it with a

certain Unheimlichkeit.’ - Unheimlich is not often used as opposite to

meaning II (above).

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3679

 

 

   What interests us most in this long extract is to find that among its

different shades of meaning the word ‘heimlich’ exhibits one which is

identical with its opposite, ‘unheimlich’. What is heimlich thus comes to

be unheimlich.  (Cf.  the  quotation  from  Gutzkow:  ‘We  call  it

"unheimlich"; you call it "heimlich".’) In general we are reminded that

the word ‘heimlich’ is not unambiguous, but belongs to two sets of

ideas, which, without being contradictory, are yet very different: on the

one hand it means what is familiar and agreeable, and on the other,

what is concealed and kept out of sight. ‘Unheimlich’ is customarily

used,  we  are  told,  as  the  contrary  only  of  the  first  signification  of

heimlich’, and not of the second. Sanders tells us nothing concerning

a  possible  genetic  connection  between  these  two  meanings  of

heimlich. On the other hand, we notice that Schelling says something

which throws quite a new light on the concept of the Unheimlich, for

which we were certainly not prepared. According to him, everything is

unheimlich that ought to have remained secret and hidden but has

come to light.

   Some of the doubts that have thus arisen are removed if we consult

Grimm’s dictionary. (1877, 4, Part 2, 873 ff.)

   We read:

 

     Heimlich;  adj.  and  adv. vernaculus, occultus;  MHG.  heimelîch,heimlîch.

   (P. 874.) In a slightly different sense: ‘I feel heimlich, well, free from

fear.’ . . .

    (b) Heimlich is also used of a place free from ghostly influences . . .

familiar, friendly, intimate.

   (P. 875: β) Familiar, amicable, unreserved.

   4. From the idea of ‘homelike’, ‘belonging to the house’, the further

idea is developed of something withdrawn from the eyes of strangers,

something  concealed,  secret;  and  this  idea  is  expanded  in  many

ways . . .

   (P. 876.) ‘On the left bank of the lake there lies a meadow heimlich

in the wood.’ (Schiller, Wilhelm Tell, I. 4.) . . . Poetic licence, rarely so

used in modern speech . . . Heimlich is used in conjunction with a verb

expressing the act of concealing: ‘In the secret of his tabernacle he

shall hide me heimlich.’ (Ps. xxvii. 5.) . . . Heimlich parts of the human

body, pudenda   .  .  .  ‘the  men  that  died  not  were  smitten  on  their

heimlich parts.’ (1 Samuel v. 12.) . . .

   (c) Officials who give important advice which has to be kept secret in

matters  of  state  are  called heimlich  councillors;  the  adjective,

according to modern usage, has been replaced by geheim [secret] . . .

‘Pharaoh called Joseph’s name "him to whom secrets are revealed"‘

(heimlich councillor). (Gen. xli. 45.)

   (P. 878.) 6. Heimlich, as used of knowledge - mystic, allegorical: a

heimlich meaning, mysticus, divinus, occultus, figuratus.

      (P.  878.) Heimlich  in  a  different  sense,  as  withdrawn  from

knowledge, unconscious . . . Heimlich also has the meaning of that

which is obscure, inaccessible to knowledge . . . ‘Do you not see?

They  do  not  trust  us;  they  fear  the heimlich  face  of  the  Duke  of

Friedland.’ (Schiller, Wallensteins Lager, Scene 2.)

      9. The  notion  of  something  hidden  and  dangerous,  which  is

expressed  in  the  last  paragraph,  is  still  further  developed,  so  that

‘heimlich’ comes to have the meaning usually ascribed to ‘unheimlich’.

Thus: ‘At times I feel like a man who walks in the night and believes in

ghosts; every corner is heimlich and full of terrors for him’. (Klinger,

Theater, 3. 298.)

 

      Thus heimlich  is  a  word  the  meaning  of  which  develops  in  thedirection  of  ambivalence,  until  it  finally  coincides  with  its  opposite,

unheimlich. Unheimlich  is  in  some  way  or  other  a  sub-species  of

heimlich. Let us bear this discovery in mind, though we cannot yet

rightly  understand  it,  alongside  of  Schelling’s  definition  of  the

Unheimlich.  If  we  go  on  to  examine  individual  instances  of

uncanniness, these hints will become intelligible to us.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3680

 

 

                                            II

 

      When  we  proceed  to  review  the  things,  persons,  impressions,

events and situations which are able to arouse in us a feeling of the

uncanny  in  a  particularly  forcible  and  definite  form,  the  first

requirement  is  obviously  to  select  a  suitable  example  to  start  on.

Jentsch  has  taken  as  a  very  good  instance  ‘doubts  whether  an

apparently  animate  being  is  really  alive;  or  conversely,  whether  a

lifeless  object  might  not  be  in  fact  animate’;  and  he  refers  in  this

connection to the impression made by wax-work figures, ingeniously

constructed dolls and automata. To these he adds the uncanny effect

of epileptic fits, and of manifestations of insanity, because these excite

in the spectator the impression of automatic, mechanical processes at

work  behind  the  ordinary  appearance  of  mental  activity.  Without

entirely accepting this author’s view, we will take it as a starting-point

for our own investigation because in what follows he reminds us of a

writer who has succeeded in producing uncanny effects better than

anyone else.

 

   Jentsch writes: ‘In telling a story, one of the most successful devices

for easily creating uncanny effects is to leave the reader in uncertainty

whether  a  particular  figure  in  the  story  is  a  human  being  or  an

automaton, and to do it in such a way that his attention is not focused

directly upon his uncertainty, so that he may not be led to go into the

matter  and  clear  it  up  immediately.  That,  as  we  have  said,  would

quickly dissipate the peculiar emotional effect of the thing. E. T. A.Hoffmann  has  repeatedly  employed  this  psychological  artifice  with

success in his fantastic narratives.’

   This observation, undoubtedly a correct one, refers primarily to the

story of ‘The Sand-Man’ in Hoffmann’s Nachtstücken,¹ which contains

the  original  of  Olympia,  the  doll  that  appears  in  the  first  act  of

Offenbach’s opera, Tales of Hoffman. But I cannot think - and I hope

most readers of the story will agree with me - that the theme of the doll

Olympia, who is to all appearances a living being, is by any means the

only,  or  indeed  the  most  important,  element  that  must  be  held

responsible  for  the  quite  unparalleled  atmosphere  of  uncanniness

evoked by the story. Nor is this atmosphere heightened by the fact

that the author himself treats the episode of Olympia with a faint touch

of satire and uses it to poke fun at the young man’s idealization of his

mistress. The main theme of the story is, on the contrary, something

different, something which gives it its name, and which is always re-

introduced at critical moments: it is the theme of the ‘Sand-Man’ who

tears out children’s eyes.

      This  fantastic  tale  opens  with  the  childhood  recollections  of  the

student Nathaniel. In spite of his present happiness, he cannot banish

the memories associated with the mysterious and terrifying death of

his beloved father. On certain evenings his mother used to send the

children to bed early, warning them that ‘the Sand-Man was coming’;

and, sure enough, Nathaniel would not fail to hear the heavy tread of a

visitor, with whom his father would then be occupied for the evening.

When questioned about the Sand-Man, his mother, it is true, denied

that such a person existed except as a figure of speech; but his nurse

could  give  him  more  definite  information:  ‘He’s  a  wicked  man  who

comes when children won’t go to bed, and throws handfuls of sand in

their eyes so that they jump out of their heads all bleeding. Then he

puts the eyes in a sack and carries them off to the half-moon to feed

his children. They sit up there in their nest, and their beaks are hooked

like owls’ beaks, and they use them to peck up naughty boys’ and

girls’ eyes with.’

 

   ¹ Hoffmann’s Sämtliche Werke, Grisebach Edition, 3.

                                       The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3681

 

   Although little Nathaniel was sensible and old enough not to credit

the  figure  of  the  Sand-Man  with  such  gruesome  attributes,  yet  the

dread of him became fixed in his heart. He determined to find out what

the Sand-Man looked like; and one evening, when the Sand-Man was

expected again, he hid in his father’s study. He recognized the visitor

as the lawyer Coppelius, a repulsive person whom the children were

frightened  of  when  he  occasionally  came  to  a  meal;  and  he  now

identified this Coppelius with the dreaded Sand-Man. As regards the

rest of the scene, Hoffmann already leaves us in doubt whether what

we are witnessing is the first delirium of the panic-stricken boy, or a

succession of events which are to be regarded in the story as being

real. His father and the guest are at work at a brazier with glowing

flames. The little eavesdropper hears Coppelius call out: ‘Eyes here!

Eyes here!’ and betrays himself by screaming aloud. Coppelius seizes

him and is on the point of dropping bits of red-hot coal from the fire

into his eyes, and then of throwing them into the brazier, but his father

begs him off and saves his eyes. After this the boy falls into a deep

swoon; and a long illness brings his experience to an end. Those who

decide in favour of the rationalistic interpretation of the Sand-Man will

not fail to recognize in the child’s phantasy the persisting influence of

his nurse’s story. The bits of sand that are to be thrown into the child’s

eyes turn into bits of red-hot coal from the flames; and in both cases

they are intended to make his eyes jump out. In the course of another

visit of the Sand-Man’s, a year later, his father is killed in his study by

an explosion. The lawyer Coppelius disappears from the place without

leaving a trace behind.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3682

 

      Nathaniel,  now  a  student,  believes  that  he  has  recognized  this

phantom of horror from his childhood in an itinerant optician, an Italian

called  Giuseppe  Coppola,  who  at  his  university  town,  offers  him

weather-glasses for sale. When Nathaniel refuses, the man goes on:‘Not weather-glasses? not weather-glasses? also got fine eyes, fine

eyes!’ The student’s terror is allayed when he finds that the proffered

eyes are only harmless spectacles, and he buys a pocket spy-glass

from Coppola. With its aid he looks across into Professor Spalanzani’s

house opposite and there spies Spalanzani’s beautiful, but strangely

silent and motionless daughter, Olympia. He soon falls in love with her

so  violently  that,  because  of  her,  he  quite  forgets  the  clever  and

sensible girl to whom he is betrothed. But Olympia is an automaton

whose clock-work has been made by Spalanzani, and whose eyes

have been put in by Coppola, the Sand-Man. The student surprises

the two Masters quarrelling over their handiwork. The optician carries

off the wooden eyeless doll; and the mechanician, Spalanzani, picks

up  Olympia’s  bleeding  eyes  from  the  ground  and  throws  them  at

Nathaniel’s  breast,  saying  that  Coppola  had  stolen  them  from  the

student. Nathaniel succumbs to a fresh attack of madness, and in his

delirium his recollection of his father’s death is mingled with this new

experience. ‘Hurry up! hurry up! ring of fire!’ he cries. ‘Spin about, ring

of fire - Hurrah! Hurry up, wooden doll! lovely wooden doll, spin about

-.’ He then falls upon the professor, Olympia’s ‘father’, and tries to

strangle him.

   Rallying from a long and serious illness, Nathaniel seems at last to

have recovered. He intends to marry his betrothed, with whom he bas

become reconciled. One day he and she are walking through the city

market-place, over which the high tower of the Town Hall throws its

huge shadow. On the girl’s suggestion, they climb the tower, leaving

her  brother,  who  is  walking  with  them,  down  below.  From  the  top,

Clara’s attention is drawn to a curious object moving along the street.

Nathaniel looks at this thing through Coppola’s spy-glass, which he

finds in his pocket, and falls into a new attack of madness. Shouting

‘Spin about, wooden doll!’ he tries to throw the girl into the gulf below.

Her brother, brought to her side by her cries, rescues her and hastens

down  with  her  to  safety.  On  the  tower  above,  the  madman  rushes

round, shrieking ‘Ring of fire, spin about!’ - and we know the origin of

the words. Among the people who begin to gather below there comes

forward  the  figure  of  the  lawyer  Coppelius,  who  has  suddenly

returned. We may suppose that it was his approach, seen through the

spy-glass,  which  threw  Nathaniel  into  his  fit  of  madness.  As  theonlookers prepare to go up and overpower the madman, Coppelius

laughs and says: ‘Wait a bit; he’ll come down of himself.’ Nathaniel

suddenly  stands  still,  catches  sight  of  Coppelius,  and  with  a  wild

shriek ‘Yes! "Fine eyes - fine eyes"!’ flings himself over the parapet.

While he lies on the paving-stones with a shattered skull the Sand-

Man vanishes in the throng.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3683

 

   This short summary leaves no doubt, I think, that the feeling of

something uncanny is directly attached to the figure of the Sand-Man,

that is, to the idea of being robbed of one’s eyes, and that Jentsch’s

point of an intellectual uncertainty has nothing to do with the effect.

Uncertainty whether an object is living or inanimate, which admittedly

applied to the doll Olympia, is quite irrelevant in connection with this

other, more striking instance of uncanniness. It is true that the writer

creates a kind of uncertainty in us in the beginning by not letting us

know, no doubt purposely, whether he is taking us into the real world

or into a purely fantastic one of his own creation. He has, of course, a

right to do either; and if he chooses to stage his action in a world

peopled  with  spirits,  demons  and  ghosts,  as  Shakespeare  does  in

Hamlet, in Macbeth and, in a different sense, in A Midsummer-Night’s

Dream, we must bow to his decision and treat his setting as though it

were  real  for  as  long  as  we  put  ourselves  into  his  hands.  But  this

uncertainty  disappears  in  the  course  of  Hoffmann’s  story,  and  we

perceive  that  he  intends  to  make  us,  too,  look  through  the  demon

optician’s spectacles or spy-glass - perhaps, indeed, that the author in

his very own person once peered through such an instrument. For the

conclusion of the story makes it quite clear that Coppola the optician

really is the lawyer Coppelius ¹ and also, therefore, the Sand-Man.

   There is no question therefore, of any intellectual uncertainty here:

we  know  now  that  we  are  not  supposed  to  be  looking  on  at  the

products  of  a  madman’s  imagination,  behind  which  we,  with  the

superiority of rational minds, are able to detect the sober truth; and yet

this knowledge does not lessen the impression of uncanniness in theleast degree. The theory of intellectual uncertainty is thus incapable of

explaining that impression.

 

   ¹ Frau Dr. Rank has pointed out the association of the name with ‘coppella’ = crucible,

connecting  it  with  the  chemical  operations  that  caused  the  father’s  death;  and  also  with
‘coppo’ = eye-socket.
 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3684

 

   We know from psycho-analytic experience, however, that the fear of

damaging  or  losing  one’s  eyes  is  a  terrible  one  in  children.  Many

adults retain their apprehensiveness in this respect, and no physical

injury is so much dreaded by them as an injury to the eye. We are

accustomed to say, too, that we will treasure a thing as the apple of

our eye. A study of dreams, phantasies and myths has taught us that

anxiety about one’s eyes, the fear of going blind, is often enough a

substitute  for  the  dread  of  being  castrated.  The  self-blinding  of  the

mythical  criminal,  Oedipus,  was  simply  a  mitigated  form  of  the

punishment of castration - the only punishment that was adequate for

hum by the lex talionis. We may try on rationalistic grounds to deny

that fears about the eye are derived from the fear of castration, and

may argue that it is very natural that so precious an organ as the eye

should  be  guarded  by  a  proportionate  dread.  Indeed,  we  might  go

further  and  say  that  the  fear  of  castration  itself  contains  no  other

significance  and  no  deeper  secret  than  a  justifiable  dread  of  this

rational  kind.  But  this  view  does  not  account  adequately  for  the

substitutive  relation  between  the  eye  and  the  male  organ  which  is

seen to exist in dreams and myths and phantasies; nor can it dispel

the impression that the threat of being castrated in especial excites a

peculiarly violent and obscure emotion, and that this emotion is what

first  gives  the  idea  of  losing  other  organs  its  intense  colouring.  All

further  doubts  are  removed  when  we  learn  the  details  of  their

‘castration complex’ from the analysis of neurotic patients, and realize

its immense importance in their mental life

   Moreover, I would not recommend any opponent of the psycho-

analytic view to select this particular story of the Sand-Man with whichto support his argument that anxiety about the eyes has nothing to do

with the castration complex. For why does Hoffmann bring the anxiety

about eyes into such intimate connection with the father’s death? And

why does the Sand-Man always appear as a disturber of love? He

separates the unfortunate Nathaniel from his betrothed and from her

brother,  his  best  friend;  he  destroys  the  second  object  of  his  love,

Olympia, the lovely doll; and he drives him into suicide at the moment

when he has won back his Clara and is about to be happily united to

her. Elements in the story like these, and many others, seem arbitrary

and meaningless so long as we deny all connection between fears

about the eye and castration; but they become intelligible as soon as

we  replace  the  Sand-Man  by  the  dreaded  father  at  whose  hands

castration is expected.¹

 

   ¹ In fact, Hoffman’s imaginative treatment of his material has not made such wild confusion

of  its  elements  that  we  cannot  reconstruct  their  original  arrangement.  In  the  story  of
Nathaniel’s childhood, the figures of his father and Coppelius represent the two opposites into
which the father-imago is split by his ambivalence; whereas the one threatens to blind him -
that is, to castrate him -, the other, the ‘good’ father, intercedes for his sight. The part of the
complex  which  is  most  strongly  repressed,  the  death-wish  against  the  ‘bad’  father,  finds
expression in the death of the ‘good’ father, and Coppelius is made answerable for it. This pair
of fathers is represented later, in his student days, by Professor Spalanzani and Coppola the
optician. The Professor is in himself a member of the father-series, and Coppola is recognized
as identical with Coppelius the lawyer. Just as they used before to work together over the
secret brazier, so now they have jointly created the doll Olympia; the Professor is even called
the father of Olympia. This double occurrence of activity in common betrays them as divisions
of the father-imago: both the mechanician and the optician were the father of Nathaniel (and
of Olympia as well). In the frightening scene in childhood, Coppelius, after sparing Nathaniel’s
eyes, had screwed off his arms and legs as an experiment; that is, he had worked on him as a
mechanician would on a doll. This singular feature, which seems quite outside the picture of
the Sand-Man, introduces a new castration equivalent; but it also points to the inner identity of
Coppelius with his later counterpart, Spalanzani the mechanician, and prepares us for the
interpretation of Olympia. This automatic doll can be nothing else than a materialization of
Nathaniel’s feminine attitude towards his father in his infancy. Her fathers, Spalanzani and
Coppola, are, after all, nothing but new editions, reincarnations of Nathaniel’s pair of fathers.
Spalanzani’s otherwise incomprehensible statement that the optician has stolen Nathaniel’s
eyes (see above), so as to set them in the doll, now become significant as supplying evidence
of the identity of Olympia and Nathaniel. OIympia is, as it were, a dissociated complex of
Nathaniel’s which confronts him as a person, and Nathaniel’s enslavement to this complex is
expressed in his senseless obsessive love for Olympia. We may with justice call love of this
kind narcissistic, and we can understand why someone who has fallen victim to it should
relinquish the real, external object of his love. The psychological truth of the situation in which
the  young  man,  fixated  upon  his  father  by  his  castration  complex,  becomes  incapable  of
loving a woman, is amply proved by numerous analyses of patients whose story, though less
fantastic, is hardly less tragic than that of the student Nathaniel.   Hoffmann was the child of an unhappy marriage. When he was three years old, his father
left his small family, and was never united to them again. According to Grisebach, in his
biographical introduction to Hoffmann’s works, the writer’s relation to his father was always a
most sensitive subject with him.
 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3685

 

   We shall venture, therefore, to refer the uncanny effect of the Sand-

Man to the anxiety belonging to the castration complex of childhood.

But having reached the idea that we can make an infantile factor such

as this responsible for feelings of uncanniness, we are encouraged to

see whether we can apply it to other instances of the uncanny. We

find in the story of the Sand-Man the other theme on which Jentsch

lays stress, of a doll which appears to be alive. Jentsch believes that a

particularly  favourable  condition  for  awakening  uncanny  feelings  is

created  when  there  is  intellectual  uncertainty  whether  an  object  is

alive or not, and when an inanimate object becomes too much like an

animate one. Now, dolls are of course rather closely connected with

childhood life. We remember that in their early games children do not

distinguish at all sharply between living and inanimate objects, and

that they are especially fond of treating their dolls like live people. In

fact, I have occasionally heard a woman patient declare that even at

the age of eight she had still been convinced that her dolls would be

certain  to  come  to  life  of  she  were  to  look  at  them  in  a  particular,

extremely  concentrated,  way.  So  that  here,  too,  it  is  not  difficult  to

discover  a  factor  from  childhood.  But,  curiously  enough,  while  the

Sand-Man story deals with the arousing of an early childhood fear, the

idea of a ‘living doll’ excites no fear at all; children have no fear of their

dolls coming to life, they may even desire it. The source of uncanny

feelings  would  not,  therefore,  be  an  infantile  fear  in  this  case,  but

rather an infantile wish or even merely an infantile belief. There seems

to be a contradiction here; but perhaps it is only a complication, which

may be helpful to us later on.

 


                                      The 'Uncanny'

                                                                                      3686