                                                                                      1810

 

            DELUSIONS AND DREAMS IN JENSEN’S GRADIVA

                                        (1907)

 


                                                                                      1811

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1812

 

            DELUSIONS AND DREAMS IN JENSEN’S GRADIVA

 

                                            I

 

A group of men who regarded it as a settled fact that the essential

riddles of dreaming have been solved by the efforts of the author of

the  present  work¹  found  their  curiosity  aroused  one  day  by  the

question of the class of dreams that have never been dreamt at all -

dreams  created  by  imaginative  writers  and  ascribed  to  invented

characters in the course of a story. The notion of submitting this class

of dreams to an investigation might seem a waste of energy and a

strange  thing  to  undertake;  but  from  one  point  of  view  it  could  be

considered  justifiable.  It  is  far  from  being  generally  believed  that

dreams  have  a  meaning  and  can  be  interpreted.  Science  and  the

majority  of  educated  people  smile  if  they  are  set  the  task  of

interpreting  a  dream.  Only  the  common  people,  who  cling  to

superstitions and who on this point are carrying on the convictions of

antiquity, continue to insist that dreams can be interpreted. The author

of The  Interpretation  of  Dreams  has  ventured,  in  the  face  of  the

reproaches  of  strict  science,  to  become  a  partisan  of  antiquity  and

superstition. He is, it is true, far from believing that dreams foretell the

future, for the unveiling of which men have vainly striven from time

immemorial by every forbidden means. But even he has not been able

entirely to reject the relation of dreams to the future. For the dream,when  the  laborious  work  of  translating  it  had  been  accomplished,

revealed  itself  to  him  as  a  wish  of  the  dreamer’s  represented  as

fulfilled;  and  who  could  deny  that  wishes  are  predominantly  turned

towards the future?

   I have just said that dreams are fulfilled wishes. Anyone who is not

afraid of making his way through an abstruse book, and who does not

insist on a complicated problem being represented to him as easy and

simple in order to save him trouble and at the cost of honesty and

truth,  may  find  the  detailed  proof  of  this  thesis  in  the  work  I  have

mentioned. Meanwhile, he may set on one side the objections which

will  undoubtedly  occur  to  him  against  equating  dreams  and  wish-

fulfilments.

 

   ¹ See Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a).

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1813

 

   But we have gone a long way ahead. It is not a question yet of

establishing whether the meaning of a dream can always be rendered

by a fulfilled wish, or whether it may not just as often stand for an

anxious  expectation,  an  intention,  a  reflection,  and  so  on.  On  the

contrary,  the  question  that  first  arises  is  whether  dreams  have  a

meaning at all, whether they ought to be assessed as mental events.

Science answers ‘no’: it explains dreaming as a purely physiological

process, behind which, accordingly, there is no need to look for sense,

meaning or purpose. Somatic stimuli, so it says, play upon the mental

instrument during sleep and thus bring to consciousness now one idea

and  now  another,  robbed  of  all  mental  content:  dreams  are

comparable only to twitchings, not to expressive movements, of the

mind.

   Now in this dispute as to the estimation in which dreams should be

held, imaginative writers seem to be on the same side as the ancients,

as the superstitious public and as the author of The Interpretation of

Dreams. For when an author makes the characters constructed by his

imagination dream, he follows the everyday experience that people’s

thoughts and feelings are continued in sleep and he aims at nothingelse than to depict his heroes’ states of mind by their dreams. But

creative writers are valuable allies and their evidence is to be prized

highly, for they are apt to know a whole host of things between heaven

and earth of which our philosophy has not yet let us dream. In their

knowledge of the mind they are far in advance of us everyday people,

for  they  draw  upon  sources  which  we  have  not  yet  opened  up  for

science.  If  only  this  support  given  by  writers  in  favour  of  dreams

having a meaning were less ambiguous! A strictly critical eye might

object that writers take their stand neither for nor against particular

dreams having a psychical meaning; they are content to show how the

sleeping  mind  twitches  under  the  excitations  which  have  remained

active in it as off-shoots of waking life.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1814

 

   But even this sobering thought does not damp our interest in the

fashion in which writers make use of dreams. Even if thus enquiry

should  teach  us  nothing  new  about  the  nature  of  dreams,  it  may

perhaps enable us from this angle to gain some small insight into the

nature  of  creative  writing.  Real  dreams  were  already  regarded  as

unrestrained and unregulated structures - and now we are confronted

by unfettered imitations of these dreams! There is far less freedom

and  arbitrariness  in  mental  life,  however,  than  we  are  inclined  to

assume - there may even be none at all. What we call chance in the

world outside can, as is well known, be resolved into laws. So, too,

what we call arbitrariness in the mind rests upon laws, which we are

only now beginning dimly to suspect. Let us, then, see what we find!

   There are two methods that we might adopt for this inquiry. One

would  be  to  enter  deeply  into  a  particular  case,  into  the  dream-

creations of one author in one of his works. The other would be to

bring together and contrast all the examples that could be found of the

use of dreams in the works of different authors. The second method

would  seem  to  be  far  the  more  effective  and  perhaps  the  only

justifiable one, for it frees us at once from the difficulties involved in

adopting the artificial concept of ‘writers’ as a class. On investigationthis class falls apart into individual writers of the most various worth -

among  them  some  whom  we  are  accustomed  to  honour  as  the

deepest observers of the human mind. In spite of this, however, these

pages will be devoted to an enquiry of the first sort. It happened that in

the group of men among whom the notion first arose there was one

who recalled that in the work of fiction that had last caught his fancy

there were several dreams which had, as it were, looked at him with

familiar faces and invited him to attempt to apply to them the method

of The Interpretation of Dreams. He confessed that the subject-matter

of the little work and the scene in which it was laid may no doubt have

played the chief part in creating his enjoyment. For the story was set

in the frame of Pompeii and dealt with a young archaeologist who had

surrendered  his  interest  in  life  in  exchange  for  an  interest  in  the

remains of classical antiquity and who was now brought back to real

life  by  a  roundabout  path  which  was  strange  but  perfectly  logical.

During the treatment of this genuinely poetic material the reader had

been stirred by all kinds of thoughts akin to it and in harmony with it.

The work was a short tale by Wilhelm Jensen - Gradiva - which its

author himself described as a ‘Pompeian phantasy’.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1815

 

   And now I ought properly to ask all my readers to put aside this little

essay and instead to spend some time in acquainting themselves with

Gradiva (which first appeared in the bookshops in 1903), so that what

I refer to in the following pages may be familiar to them. But for the

benefit  of  those  who  have  already  read Gradiva  I  will  recall  the

substance of the story in a brief summary; and I shall count upon their

memory  to  restore  to  it  all  the  charm  of  which  this  treatment  will

deprive it.

 

      A  young  archaeologist,  Norbert  Hanold,  had  discovered  in  a

museum  of  antiquities  in  Rome  a  relief  which  had  so  immensely

attracted him that he was greatly pleased at obtaining an excellent

plaster  cast  of  it  which  he  could  hang  in  his  study  in  a  Germanuniversity town and gaze at with interest. The sculpture represented a

fully-grown girl stepping along, with her flowing dress a little pulled up

so as to reveal her sandalled feet. One foot rested squarely on the

ground; the other, lifted from the ground in the act of following after,

touched it only with the tips of the toes, while the sole and heel rose

almost  perpendicularly.  It  was  probably  the  unusual  and  peculiarly

charming gait thus presented that attracted the sculptor’s notice and

that still, after so many centuries, riveted the eyes of its archaeological

admirer.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1816

 

   The interest taken by the hero of the story in this relief is the basic

psychological fact in the narrative. It was not immediately explicable.

‘Dr. Norbert Hanold, Lecturer in Archaeology, did not in fact find in the

relief anything calling for special notice from the point of view of his

branch of science.’ (3.)¹ ‘He could not explain to himself what there

was in it that had provoked his attention. He only knew that he had

been  attracted  by  something  and  that  the  effect  had  continued

unchanged  ever  since.’  But  his  imagination  was  occupied  with  the

sculpture without ceasing. He found something ‘of to-day’ about it, as

though the artist had had a glimpse in the street and captured it ‘from

the life’. He gave the girl thus pictured as she stepped along the name

of ‘Gradiva’ - ‘the girl who steps along’. He made up a story that she

was  no  doubt  the  daughter  of  an  aristocratic  family,  perhaps  ‘of  a

patrician aedile, who carried out his office in the service of Ceres’, and

that she was on her way to the goddess’s temple. Then he found it

hard to fit her quiet, calm nature into the busy life of a capital city. He

convinced himself, rather, that she must be transported to Pompeii,

and  that  somewhere  there  she  was  stepping  across  the  curious

stepping-stones which have been dug up and which made it possible

to  cross  dry-foot  from  one  side  of  the  street  to  the  other  in  rainy

weather, though allowing carriage-wheels to pass between them as

well. Her features struck him as having a Greek look and he had no

doubt that she was of Hellenic origin. Little by little he brought thewhole of his archaeological learning into the service of these and other

phantasies relating to the original who had been the model for the

relief.

 

   ¹ [Plain numbers in brackets are page references to Jensen, Gradiva, 1903.]

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1817

 

      But  now  he  found  himself  confronted  by  an  ostensibly  scientific

problem which called for a solution. It was a question of his arriving at

a  critical  judgement  as  to  ‘whether  Gradiva’s  gait  as  she  stepped

along had been reproduced by the sculptor in a life-like manner’. He

found that he himself was not capable of imitating it, and in his quest

for the ‘reality’ of this gait he was led ‘to make observations of his own

from the life in order to clear the matter up’. (9.) This, however, forced

him into a course of behaviour that was quite foreign to him. ‘Hitherto,

the  female  sex  had  been  to  him  no  more  than  the  concept  of

something  made  of  marble  or  bronze,  and  he  had  never  paid  the

slightest attention to its contemporary representatives.’ Social duties

had  always  seemed  to  him  an  unavoidable  nuisance;  he  saw  and

heard young ladies whom he came across in society so little that when

he next met them he would pass them by without a sign; and this, of

course, made no favourable impression on them. Now, however, the

scientific task which he had taken on compelled him, in dry, but more

especially in wet, weather, to look eagerly in the street at women’s

and girls’ feet as they came into view - an activity which brought him

some angry, and some encouraging, glances from those who came

under his observation; ‘but he was aware of neither the one nor the

other.’ (10.) As an outcome of these careful studies he was forced to

the conclusion that Gradiva’s gait was not discoverable in reality; and

this filled him with regret and vexation.

      Soon  afterwards  he  had  a  terrifying  dream,  in  which  he  found

himself in ancient Pompeii on the day of the eruption of Vesuvius and

witnessed the city’s destruction. ‘As he was standing at the edge of

the forum beside the Temple of Jupiter, he suddenly saw Gradiva at

no great distance from him. Till then he had had no thought of herpresence, but now it occurred to him all at once and as though it was

something natural that, since she was a Pompeian, she was living in

her  native  town,  and, without  his  having  suspected  it,  living  as  his

contemporary.’ (12.) Fear of the fate that lay before her provoked him

to utter a warning cry, whereupon the figure, as she calmly stepped

along, turned her face towards him. But she then proceeded on her

way untroubled, till she reached the portico of the temple; there she

took her seat on one of the steps and slowly laid her head down on it,

while her face grew paler and paler, as though it were turning into

marble. When he hurried after her, he found her stretched out on the

broad step with a peaceful expression, like someone asleep, till the

rain of ashes buried her form.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1818

 

   When he awoke, the confused shouts of the inhabitants of Pompeii

calling for help still seemed to echo in his ears, and the dull muttering

of  the  breakers  in  the  agitated  sea.  But  even  after  his  returning

reflection recognized the sounds as the awakening signs of noisy life

in a great city, he retained his belief for a long time in the reality of

what  he  had  dreamt.  When  at  length  he  had  freed  himself  of  the

notion that he himself had been present at the destruction of Pompeii

almost two thousand years earlier, he was nevertheless left with what

seemed a true conviction that Gradiva had lived in Pompeii and been

buried there with the others in the year 79 A.D. The dream had as its

result that now for the first time in his phantasies about Gradiva he

mourned for her as someone who was lost.

      While  he  was  leaning  out  of  the  window,  absorbed  in  these

thoughts, his attention was caught by a canary warbling its song from

a  cage  in  the  open  window  of  the  house  opposite.  Suddenly

something passed with a start through the mind of the young man,

who seems not yet to have fully woken from his dream. He thought he

saw  in  the  street  a  form  like  his  Gradiva,  and  thought  he  even

recognized her characteristic gait. Without thinking, he hurried into the

street so as to catch up with her; and it was only the laughter andjeers of the passers-by at his early-morning attire that quickly drove

him back into his house. When he was in his room again, the singing

of  the  canary  in  its  cage  once  more  caught  his  attention  and

suggested a comparison with himself. He too, so it seemed to him,

was like someone sitting in a cage, though it was easier for him to

escape from it. As though as a further aftermath of his dream, and

perhaps, too, under the influence of the mild air of spring, a resolve

took shape in him to make a spring-time journey to Italy. A scientific

excuse for it soon presented itself, even though ‘the impulse to make

this journey had arisen from a feeling he could not name.’ (24.)

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1819

 

 

      Let  us  pause  for  a  moment  at  this  journey,  planned  for  such

remarkably uncogent reasons, and take a closer look at our hero’s

personality and behaviour. He still appears to us as incomprehensible

and foolish; we have no idea how his peculiar folly will be linked to

human feeling and so arouse our sympathy. It is an author’s privilege

to  be  allowed  to  leave  us  in  such  uncertainty.  The  charm  of  his

language and the ingenuity of his ideas offer us a provisional reward

for the reliance we place in him and for the still unearned sympathy

which we are ready to feel for his hero. Of this hero we are further told

that  he  was  pre-ordained  by  family  tradition  to  become  an

archaeologist,  that  in  his  later  isolation  and  independence  he  was

wholly absorbed in his studies and had turned completely away from

life and its pleasures. Marble and bronze alone were truly alive for

him; they alone expressed the purpose and value of human life. But

nature, perhaps with benevolent intent, had infused into his blood a

corrective  of  an  entirely  unscientific  sort  -  an  extremely  lively

imagination, which could show itself not only in his dreams but often in

his waking life as well. This division between imagination and intellect

destined him to become an artist or a neurotic; he was one of those

whose kingdom is not of this world. Thus it was that it could come

about  that  his  interest  was  attached  to  a  relief  representing  a  girlstepping  along  in  a  peculiar  fashion,  that  he  wove  his  phantasies

around her, imagined a name and origin for her, placed the figure he

had created in the setting of the Pompeii that was buried more than

eighteen hundred years before, and finally, after a strange anxiety-

dream, magnified his phantasy of the existence and death of this girl

named Gradiva into a delusion, which gained an influence over his

actions.  Such  products  of  the  imagination  would  seem  to  us

astonishing and inexplicable if we met them in someone in real life.

Since our hero, Norbert Hanold, is a fictitious person, we may perhaps

put a timid question to his author, and ask whether his imagination

was determined by forces other than its own arbitrary choice.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1820

 

 

   We had left our hero at the moment when he was apparently being

led by the song of a canary to decide on a journey to Italy, the purpose

of which was evidently not clear to him. We learn further that he had

no  fixed  plan  or  goal  for  his  journey.  An  inner  restlessness  and

dissatisfaction  drove  him  from  Rome  to  Naples  and  from  thence

further still. He found himself among the swarm of honeymooners and

was forced to notice the loving couples of ‘Edwins’ and ‘Angelinas’,¹

but was quite unable to understand their goings-on. He came to the

conclusion that of all the follies of mankind ‘getting married takes first

place, as the greatest and most incomprehensible, and the senseless

honeymoon  trips  to  Italy  are,  in  a  way,  the  crowning  touch  of  this

idiocy’. (27.) Having been disturbed in his sleep by the proximity of a

loving couple in Rome, he hurriedly fled to Naples, only to find other

‘Edwins’  and  ‘Angelinas’  there.  Having  gathered  from  their

conversation that the majority of these pairs of birds had no intention

of nesting among the ruins of Pompeii, but were flying towards Capri,

he determined to do what they did not, and only a few days after his

departure found himself ‘contrary to his expectation and intentions’ in

Pompeii.

   But without finding there the repose he was in search of. The partwhich had so far been played by the honeymoon couples, who had

troubled his spirits and harassed his thoughts, was now taken over by

the house-flies, which he was inclined to regard as the incarnation of

all that is absolutely evil and unnecessary. The two sorts of tormenting

spirits melted into a unity: some of the pairs of flies reminded him of

the honeymooners, and he suspected that they too were addressing

each other in their language as ‘dearest Edwin’ and ‘darling Angelina’.

Eventually, he could not but realize that ‘his dissatisfaction was not

caused only by his surroundings but that its source was in part derived

from within himself’. (42.) He felt that ‘he was discontented because

he lacked something, though it was not clear to him what’.

 

   ¹ [‘August’ and ‘Grete’ in the original. The names recur frequently in the course of the story

and  it  has  seemed  best  to  replace  them  by  those  conventionally  applied  to  English
honeymoon couples of the late Victorian age.]
 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1821

 

   Next morning he passed through the ‘Ingresso’ into Pompeii, and,

after  getting  rid  of  the  guide,  strolled  aimlessly  through  the  town,

without, strangely enough, remembering that only a short time before

he had been present in his dream at its burial. When later on, at the

‘hot and holy’ mid-day hour, which the ancients regarded as the hour

of ghosts, the other visitors had taken flight and the heaps of ruins lay

before him desolate and bathed in sunlight, he found that he was able

to carry himself back into the life that had been buried - but not by the

help of science. ‘What it taught was a lifeless, archaeological way of

looking  at  things,  and  what  came  from  its  mouth  was  a  dead,

philological  language.  These  were  of  no  help  to  an  understanding

through  the  spirit,  the  feelings,  the  heart  -  put  it  as  you  please.

Whoever had a longing for that must stand here alone, the only living

creature, in the hot silence of mid-day, among the relics of the past,

and look, but not with bodily eyes, and listen, but not with physical

ears. And then . . . the dead wakened and Pompeii began to live once

more.’ (55.)

      While  he  was  thus  animating  the  past  with  his  imagination,  hesuddenly saw the unmistakable Gradiva of his relief come out of a

house and step trippingly over the lava stepping stones to the other

side of the street, just as he had seen her do in his dream the other

night, when she had lain down as though to sleep, on the steps of the

Temple  of  Apollo.  ‘And  together  with  his  memory  something  else

came into his consciousness for the first time: without being aware

himself  of  the  impulse  within  him,  he  had  come  to  Italy  and  had

travelled on to Pompeii, without stopping in Rome or Naples, in order

to see whether he could find any traces of her. And "traces" literally;

for with her peculiar gait she must have left behind an imprint of her

toes in the ashes distinct from all the rest.’ (58.)

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1822

 

 

   At this point the tension in which the author has hitherto held us

grows for a moment into a painful sense of bewilderment. It is not only

our  hero  who  has  evidently  lost  his  balance;  we  too  have  lost  our

bearings  in  the  face  of  the  apparition  of  Gradiva,  who  was  first  a

marble figure and then an imaginary one. Is she a hallucination of our

hero, led astray by his delusions? It she a ‘real’ ghost? or a living

person? Not that we need believe in ghosts when we draw up this list.

The  author,  who  has  called  his  story  a  ‘phantasy’,  has  found  no

occasion so far for informing us whether he intends to leave us in our

world, decried for being prosaic and governed by the laws of science,

or whether he wishes to transport us into another and imaginary world,

in which spirits and ghosts are given reality. As we know from the

examples of Hamlet and Macbeth, we are prepared to follow him there

without  hesitation.  If  so,  the  imaginative  archaeologist’s  delusion

would have to be measured by another standard. Indeed, when we

consider how improbable it must be that a real person could exist who

bore  an  exact  resemblance  to  the  antique  sculpture,  our  list  of

alternatives shrinks to two: a hallucination or a mid-day ghost. A small

detail in the account soon cancels the first possibility. A large lizard

was lying motionless, stretched out in the sunshine, but fled at theapproach of Gradiva’s foot and darted away across the lava paving-

stones.  So  it  was  no  hallucination,  but  something  outside  our

dreamer’s mind. But could the reality of a rediviva startle a lizard?

 

   Gradiva disappeared in front of the House of Meleager. We shall not

be surprised to hear that Norbert Hanold pursued his delusion that

Pompeii had come to life around him at the mid-day hour of ghosts

and  supposed  that  Gradiva  too  had  come  to  life  again  and  had

entered the house in which she had lived before the fatal August day

in 79 A.D. Ingenious speculations upon the personality of its owner

(after  whom  the  house  was  probably  named),  and  upon  Gradiva’s

relationship to him, shot through his head, and proved that his science

was now completely in the service of his imagination. He entered the

house, and suddenly found the apparition once more, sitting on some

low steps between two yellow columns. ‘There was something white

stretched out across her knees; he could not clearly discern what it

was; it seemed to be a sheet of papyrus . . .’ On the basis of his latest

theories  if  her  origin  he  addressed  her  in  Greek,  and  waited  with

trepidation to learn whether, in her phantom presence she possessed

the  power  of  speech.  Since  she  made  no  reply,  he  addressed  her

instead in Latin. Then, with a smile on her lips: ‘If you want to speak to

me’, she said, ‘you must do it in German.’

 

   What a humiliation for us readers! So the author has been making

fun of us, and, with the help, as it were, of a reflection of the Pompeian

sunshine, has inveigled us into a delusion on a small scale, so that we

may  be  forced  to  pass  a  milder  judgement  on  the  poor  wretch  on

whom  the  mid-day  sun  was  really  shining.  Now,  however,  that  we

have been cured of our brief confusion, we know that Gradiva was a

German girl of flesh and blood - a solution which we were inclined to

reject as the most improbable one. And now, with a quiet sense of

superiority, we may wait to learn what the relation was between the

girl and her marble image, and how our young archaeologist arrived at

the phantasies which pointed towards her real personality.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva                                                                                      1823

 

 

   But our hero was not torn from his delusion as quickly as we have

been, for, as the author tells us, ‘though his belief made him happy, he

had  to  take  the  acceptance  of  quite  a  considerable  number  of

mysteries  into  the  bargain’.  (140.)  Moreover,  this  delusion  probably

had internal roots in him of which we know nothing and which do not

exist in ourselves. In his case, no doubt, energetic treatment would

seem  necessary  before  he  could  be  brought  back  to  reality.

Meanwhile all he could do was to fit his delusion into the wonderful

experience he had just had. Gradiva, who had perished with the rest

in the destruction of Pompeii, could be nothing other than a mid-day

ghost who had returned to life for the brief ghostly hour. But why was it

that, after hearing her reply delivered in German, he exclaimed ‘I knew

your voice sounded like that’? Not only we, but the girl herself was

bound to ask the question, and Hanold had to admit that he had never

heard it, though he had expected to in his dream, when he called to

her as she lay down to sleep on the temple steps. He begged her to

do the same thing again as she had then; but now she rose, gave him

a strange look, and in a few paces disappeared between the columns

of the court. A pretty butterfly had shortly before fluttered round her for

a while; and he interpreted it as a messenger from Hades reminding

the dead girl that she must return, since the mid-day hour of ghosts

was  at  an  end.  Hanold  still  had  time  to  call  after  the  girl  as  she

vanished: ‘Will you return here to morrow at the mid-day hour?’ To us,

however,  who  can  now  venture  upon  more  sober  interpretations,  it

looks as though the young lady had seen something improper in the

remark addressed to her by Hanold and had left him with a sense of

having been insulted; for after all she could have known nothing of his

dream. May not her sensibility have detected the erotic nature of his

request,  whose  motive  in  Hanold’s  eyes  lay  in  its  relation  to  his

dream?

   After Gradiva’s disappearance our hero had a careful look at all the

guests congregated for their mid-day meal at the Hotel Diomède and

went on to do the same at the Hotel Suisse, and he was then able to

feel assured that in neither of the only two hotels known to him inPompeii  was  there  anyone  bearing  the  remotest  resemblance  to

Gradiva. He would of course have rejected as nonsensical the idea

that  he  might  actually  meet  Gradiva  in  one  of  the  two  inns.  And

presently the wine pressed from the hot soil of Vesuvius helped to

intensify the whirl of feeling in which he spent the day.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1824

 

   For the following day one thing only was fixed: that Hanold must

once  more  be  in  the  House  of  Meleager  at  mid-day;  and,  in

expectation  of  that  moment,  he  made  his  way  into  Pompeii  by  an

irregular route - over the ancient city wall. A sprig of asphodel, hung

about with its white bell shaped blossoms, seemed to him significant

enough, as the flower of the underworld, for him to pluck it and carry it

with him. But as he waited, the whole science of archaeology seemed

to him the most pointless and indifferent thing in the world, for another

interest had taken possession of him: the problem of ‘what could be

the nature of the bodily apparition of a being like Gradiva, who was at

once dead and, even though only at the mid-day hour, alive’. (80.) He

was fearful, too, that he might not meet her that day, for perhaps her

return  could  be  permitted  only  at  long  intervals;  and  when  he

perceived  her  once  again  between  the  columns,  he  thought  her

apparition  was  only  a  trick  of  his  imagination,  and  in  his  pain

exclaimed: ‘Oh! if only you still existed and lived!’ This time, however,

he  had  evidently  been  too  critical,  for  the  apparition  possessed  a

voice,  which  asked  him  if  he  was  meaning  to  bring  her  the  white

flower,  and  engaged  him,  disconcerted  once  again,  in  a  long

conversation.

   To his readers, however, to whom Gradiva has already grown of

interest as a living person, the author explains that the displeased and

repelling look which she had given him the day before had yielded to

an expression of searching interest and curiosity. And indeed she now

proceeded to question him, asked for an explanation of his remark on

the previous day and enquired when it was that he had stood beside

her as she lay down to sleep. In this way she learnt of his dream, inwhich she had perished along with her native city, and then of the

marble relief and the posture of the foot which had so much attracted

the archaeologist. And now she showed herself ready to demonstrate

her gait, and this proved that the only divergence from the original

portrait of Gradiva was that her sandals were replaced by light sand-

coloured  shoes  of  fine  leather  -  which  she  explained  as  being  an

adaptation  to  the  present  day.  She  was  evidently  entering  into  his

delusion, the whole compass of which she elicited from him, without

ever contradicting it. Only once did she seem to be distracted from the

part she was playing, by an emotion of her own; and this was when,

with his thoughts on the relief, he declared that he had recognized her

at the first glance. Since at this stage of their conversation she still

knew nothing about the relief, it was natural for her to misunderstand

Hanold’s words; but she quickly recovered herself, and it is only to us

that some of her remarks sound as though they had a double sense,

as though besides their meaning in the context of the delusion they

also meant something real and present-day - for instance, when she

regretted that he had not succeeded in confirming the Gradiva gait in

his experiments in the streets: ‘What a pity! perhaps you would not

have had to make the long journey here!’ (89.) She also learned that

he had given her portrait on the relief the name of ‘Gradiva’, and told

him  her  real  name,  ‘Zoe’.  ‘The  name  suits  you  beautifully,  but  it

sounds to me like a bitter mockery, for Zoe means life.’ ‘One must bow

to the inevitable’, was her reply, ‘and I have long grown used to being

dead.’ Promising to be at the same place again at the mid-day hour

next day, she bade him farewell after once more asking him for the

sprig of asphodel: ‘to those who are more fortunate people give roses

in the spring; but to me it is right that you should give the flower of

forgetfulness.’ No doubt melancholy suited some one who had been

so long dead and had returned to life again for a few short hours.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1825

 

 

   We are beginning to understand now, and to feel some hope. If theyoung lady in whose form Gradiva had come to life again accepted

Hanold’s delusion so fully, she was probably doing so in order to set

him free from it. There was no other way of doing so; to contradict it

would  have  put  an  end  to  any  such  possibility.  Even  the  serious

treatment of a real case of illness of the kind could proceed in no other

way than to begin by taking up the same ground as the delusional

structure and then investigating it as completely as possible. If Zoe

was the right person for the job, we shall soon learn, no doubt, how to

cure a delusion like our hero’s. We should also be glad to know how

such  delusions  arise.  It  would  be  a  strange  coincidence  -  but,

nevertheless, not without an example or parallel - if the treatment of

the  delusion  were  to  coincide  with  its  investigation  and  if  the

explanation  of  its  origin  were  to  be  revealed  precisely  while  it  was

being dissected. We may suspect, of course, that, if so, our case of

illness might end up as a ‘commonplace’ love-story. But the healing

power of love against a delusion is not to be despised - and was not

our hero’s infatuation for his Gradiva sculpture a complete instance of

being in love, though of being in love with something past and lifeless?

 

   After Gradiva’s disappearance, there was only a distant sound, like

the laughing call of a bird flying over the ruined city. The young man,

now by himself, picked up a white object that had been left behind by

Gradiva:  not  a  sheet  of  papyrus,  but  a  sketch-book  with  pencil

drawings  of  various  scenes  in  Pompeii.  We  should  be  inclined  to

regard her having forgotten the book there as a pledge of her return,

for it is our belief that no one forgets anything without some secret

reason or hidden motive.

   The remainder of the day brought Hanold all manner of strange

discoveries  and  confirmations,  which  he  failed  to  synthesize  into  a

whole. He perceived to-day in the wall of the portico where Gradiva

had  vanished  a  narrow  gap,  which  was  wide  enough,  however,  to

allow someone unusually slim to pass through it. He recognized that

Zoe-Gradiva need not have sunk into the earth here - an idea which

now seemed to him so unreasonable that he felt ashamed of having

once believed in it; she might well have used the gap as a way of

reaching her grave. A slight shadow seemed to him to melt away at

the end of the Street of the Tombs in front of what is known as theVilla of Diomedes.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1826

 

   In the same whirl of feeling as on the previous day and deep in the

same problems, he now strolled round the environs of Pompeii. What,

he wondered, might be the bodily nature of Zoe-Gradiva? Would one

feel anything if one touched her hand? A strange urge drove him to a

determination to put this experiment to the test. Yet an equally strong

reluctance held him back even from the very idea.

   On a sun-bathed slope he met an elderly gentleman who, from his

accoutrements, must be a zoologist or botanist and who seemed to be

engaged in a hunt. This individual turned towards him and said: ‘Are

you  interested  in faraglionensis  as  well?  I  should  hardly  have

suspected it, but it seems to be quite probable that it occurs not only

on the Faraglioni Islands off Capri, but has established itself on the

mainland  too.  The  method  prescribed  by  our  colleague  Eimer  is  a

really  good  one;  I  have  made  use  of  it  many  times  already,  with

excellent results. Please keep quite still . . .’ (96.) Here the speaker

broke off and placed a snare made of a long blade of grass in front of

a crack in the rocks out of which the small iridescent blue head of a

lizard was peering. Hanold left the lizard-hunter with a critical feeling

that it was scarcely credible what foolish and strange purposes could

lead people to make the long journey to Pompeii - without, needless to

say, including in his criticism himself and his intention of searching in

the  ashes  of  Pompeii  for  Gradiva’s  footprints.  Moreover,  the

gentleman’s face seemed familiar, as though he had had a glimpse of

it in one of the two hotels; his manner of address, too, had been as

though he were speaking to an acquaintance.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1827

 

   In the course of his further walk, he arrived by a side road at a

house which he had not yet discovered and which turned out to be athird hotel, the ‘Albergo del Sole’. The landlord, with nothing else to

do, took the opportunity of showing off his house and the excavated

treasures it contained to their best advantage. He asserted that he

had been present when the pair of young lovers had been found in the

neighbourhood of the Forum, who, in the knowledge of their inevitable

doom,  had  awaited  death  closely  embraced  in  each  other’s  arms.

Hanold had heard of this before, and had shrugged his shoulders over

it as a fabulous tale invented by some imaginative story-teller; but to-

day the landlord’s words aroused his belief and this was increased

when a metal clasp was produced, covered with a green patina, which

was  said  to  have  been  retrieved  from  the  ashes  beside  the  girl’s

remains. He purchased this clasp without any further critical doubts,

and when, as he left the albergo, he saw in an open window a nodding

sprig of asphodel covered with white blossoms, the sight of the funeral

flowers came over him as a confirmation of the genuineness of his

new possession.

   But with the clasp a new delusion took possession of him, or rather

the old one had a small piece added to it - no very good augury, it

would seem, for the treatment that had been begun. A pair of young

lovers in an embrace had been dug out not far from the Forum, and it

was in that very neighbourhood, by the Temple of Apollo, that in his

dream he had seen Gradiva lie down to sleep. Was it not possible that

in  fact  she  had  gone  further  along  from  the  Forum  and  had  met

someone and that they had then died together? A tormenting feeling,

which we might perhaps liken to jealousy, arose out of this suspicion.

He appeased it by reflecting on the uncertainty of the construction,

and brought himself to his senses far enough to be able to take his

evening meal at the Hotel Diomède. There his attention was drawn by

two newly-arrived visitors, a He and a She, whom he was obliged to

regard as a brother and sister on account of a certain resemblance

between them - in spite of the difference in the colour of their hair.

They were the first people he had met on his journey who made a

sympathetic impression on him. A red Sorrento rose worn by the girl

aroused some kind of memory in him, but he could not think what. At

last he went to bed and had a dream. It was a remarkably senseless

affair,  but  was  obviously  hashed  up  from  his  day’s  experiences.

‘Somewhere in the sun Gradiva was sitting, making a snare out of ablade of grass to catch a lizard in, and said: "Please keep quite still.

Our lady colleague is right; the method is a really good one and she

has made use of it with excellent results."' He fended off this dream

while  he  was  still  asleep,  with  the  critical  thought  that  it  was  utter

madness, and he succeeded in freeing himself from it with the help of

an invisible bird which uttered a short laughing call and carried off the

lizard in its beak.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1828

 

   In spite of all this turmoil, he woke up in a rather clearer and steadier

frame of mind. A branch of a rose-tree bearing flowers of the sort he

had seen the day before on the young lady’s breast reminded him that

during  the  night  someone  had  said  that  people  give  roses  in  the

spring. Without thinking, he picked a few of the roses, and there must

have been something connected with them that had a relaxing effect

on his mind. He felt relieved of his unsociable feelings, and went by

the usual way to Pompeii, burdened with the roses, the metal clasp

and  the  sketch-book,  and  occupied  with  a  number  of  problems

concerning Gradiva. The old delusion had begun to show cracks: he

was beginning to wonder whether she might be in Pompeii, not at the

mid-day hour only, but at other times as well. The stress had shifted,

however,  to  the  latest  addition,  and  the  jealousy  attaching  to  it

tormented him in all sorts of disguises. He could almost have wished

that the apparition might remain visible to his eyes alone, and elude

the perception of others: then, in spite of everything, he could look on

her  as  his  own  exclusive  property.  While  he  was  strolling  about,

waiting for the mid-day hour, he had an unexpected encounter. In the

Casa del Fauno he came upon two figures in a corner in which they

must have thought themselves out of sight, for they were embraced in

each  other’s  arms  and  their  lips  were  pressed  together.  He  was

astonished  to  recognize  in  them  the  sympathetic  couple  from  the

previous evening. But their behaviour now did not seem to fit a brother

and sister: their embrace and their kiss seemed to him to last too long.

So  after  all  they  were  a  pair  of  lovers,  presumably  a  younghoneymoon  couple  -  yet  another  Edwin  and  Angelina.  Curiously

enough,  however,  this  time  the  sight  of  them  caused  him  only

satisfaction; and with a sense of awe, as though he had interrupted

some secret act of devotion, he withdrew unobserved. An attitude of

respectfulness, which he had long been without, had returned to him.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1829

 

      When  he  reached  the  House  of  Meleager,  he  was  once  more

overcome  by  such  a  violent  dread  of  finding  Gradiva  in  someone

else’s company that when she appeared the only words he found to

greet  her  with  were:  ‘Are  you  alone?’  It  was  with  difficulty  that  he

allowed her to bring him to realize that he had picked the roses for

her. He confessed his latest delusion to her - that she was the girl who

had been found in the forum in a lover’s embrace and who had owned

the  green  clasp.  She  enquired,  not  without  a  touch  of  mockery,

whether he had found the thing in the sun perhaps: the sun (and she

used the [Italian] word ‘sole’) produced all kinds of things like that. He

admitted that he was feeling dizzy in his head, and she suggested as

a  cure  that  he  should  share  her  small  picnic  meal  with  her.  She

offered him half of a roll wrapped up in tissue paper and ate the other

half  herself  with  an  obviously  good  appetite.  At  the  same  time  her

perfect teeth flashed between her lips and made a slight crunching

sound as they bit through the crust. ‘I feel as though we had shared a

meal like this once before, two thousand years ago’, she said; ‘can’t

you  remember?’  (118.)  He  could  think  of  no  reply,  but  the

improvement in his head brought about by the food, and the many

indications she gave of her actual presence, were not without their

effect on him. Reason began to rise in him and to throw doubt on the

whole delusion of Gradiva’s being no more than a mid-day ghost -

though no doubt it might be argued on the other hand that she herself

had just said that she had shared a meal with him two thousand years

ago.  As  a  means  of  settling  the  conflict  an  experiment  suggested

itself: and this he carried out craftily and with regained courage. Her

left hand, with its delicate fingers, was resting on her knees, and oneof the house-flies whose impertinence and uselessness had so much

roused  his  indignation  alighted  on  it.  Suddenly  Hanold’s  hand  was

raised in the air and descended with a vigorous slap on the fly and

Gradiva’s hand.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1830

 

   This bold experiment had two results: first, a joyful conviction that he

had without any doubt touched a real, living, warm human hand, but

afterwards a reproof that made him jump up in a fright from his seat on

the steps. For, from Gradiva’s lips, when she had recovered from her

astonishment, there rang out these words: ‘There’s no doubt you’re

out  of  your  mind,  Norbert  Hanold!’  As  everyone  knows,  the  best

method of waking a sleeper or a sleep-walker is to call him by his own

name.  But  unluckily  there  was  no  chance  of  observing  the  effects

produced  on  Norbert  Hanold  by  Gradiva’s  calling  him  by  his  name

(which he had told no one in Pompeii). For at this critical moment the

sympathetic pair of lovers from the Casa del Fauno appeared, and the

young lady exclaimed in a tone of joyful surprise: ‘Zoe! Are you here

too? And on your honeymoon like us? You never wrote me a word

about  it!’  In  face  of  this  new  evidence  of  Gradiva’s  living  reality,

Hanold took flight.

   Nor was Zoe-Gradiva very agreeably surprised by this unexpected

visit, which interrupted her in what was apparently an important task.

But she quickly pulled herself together and made a fluent reply to the

question, in which she explained the situation to her friend - and even

more to us - and which enabled her to get rid of the young couple. She

congratulated them; but she was not on her honeymoon. ‘The young

man who’s just gone off is labouring, like you, under a remarkable

aberration. He seems to think there’s a fly buzzing in his head. Well, I

expect everyone has some sort of insect there. It’s my duty to know

something about entomology, so I can help a little in cases like that.

My father and I are staying at the Sole. Something got into his head

too, and the brilliant idea occurred to him besides of bringing me here

with him on condition that I amused myself on my own at Pompeii andmade no demands of any kind on him. I told myself I should dig out

something interesting here even by myself. Of course I hadn’t counted

on making the find that I have - I mean my luck in meeting you, Gisa.’

(124.) But now, she added, she must hurry off, so as to be company

for her father at his lunch in the ‘Sun’. And she departed, after having

introduced herself to us as the daughter of the zoologist and lizard-

catcher and after having, by all kinds of ambiguous remarks, admitted

her therapeutic intention and other secret designs as well.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1831

 

   The direction she took, however, was not towards the Hotel of the

Sun, where her father was waiting for her. But it seemed to her too as

though  a  shadowy  form  was  seeking  its  grave  near  the  Villa  of

Diomedes, and was vanishing beneath one of the monuments. And for

that reason she directed her steps towards the Street of the Tombs,

with her foot lifted almost perpendicularly at each step. It was to this

same  place  that  Hanold  had  fled  in  his  shame  and  confusion.  He

wandered  ceaselessly  up  and  down  in  the  portico  of  the  garden,

engaged in the task of disposing of the remains of his problem by an

intellectual effort. One thing had become undeniably clear to him: that

he had been totally without sense or reason in believing that he had

been associating with a young Pompeian woman who had come to life

again in a more or less physical shape. It could not be disputed that

this clear insight into his delusion was an essential step forward on his

road back to a sound understanding. But, on the other hand, this living

woman, with whom other people communicated as though she were

as  physically  real  as  themselves,  was  Gradiva,  and  she  knew  his

name; and his scarcely awakened reason was not strong enough to

solve this riddle. He was hardly calm enough emotionally, either, to

show  himself  capable  of  facing  so  hard  a  task,  for  he  would  have

preferred to have been buried along with the rest two thousand years

before  in  the  Villa  of  Diomedes,  so  as  to  be  quite  certain  of  not

meeting Zoe-Gradiva again.

                   Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1832

 

   Nevertheless, a violent desire to see her again struggled against

what was left of the inclination to flight still lingering in him.

   As he turned one of the four corners of the colonnade, he suddenly

recoiled. On a broken fragment of masonry was sitting one of the girls

who had perished here in the Villa of Diomedes. This, however, was a

last attempt, quickly rejected, at taking flight into the realm of delusion.

No,  it  was  Gradiva,  who  had  evidently  come  to  give  him  the  final

portion  of  her  treatment.  She  quite  correctly  interpreted  his  first

instinctive movement as an attempt to leave the building, and showed

him that it was impossible for him to run away, for a terrific downpour

of  rain  had  begun  outside.  She  was  ruthless,  and  began  her

examination by asking him what he had been trying to do with the fly

on  her  hand.  He  had  not  the  courage  to  make  use  of  a  particular

pronoun,¹ but he did have the courage for something more important -

for asking her the decisive question:

   ‘As someone said, I was rather confused in my head, and I must

apologize for treating the hand   . I can’t understand how I could be so

senseless . . . but I can’t understand either how its owner could point

out my . . . my unreasonableness to me by my own name.’ (134.)

   ‘So your understanding has not got as far as that, Norbert Hanold.

But I can’t say I’m surprised at it, you’ve accustomed me to it so long. I

needn’t  have  come  to  Pompeii  to  discover  it  again,  and  you  could

have confirmed it a good hundred miles nearer home.

      ‘A  hundred  miles  nearer’,  she  explained,  as  he  still  failed  to

understand, ‘diagonally across the street from where you live - in the

house at the corner. There’s a cage in my window with a canary in it.’

   These last words, as he heard them, affected him like a distant

memory: that must have been the same bird whose song had given

him the idea of his journey to Italy.

   ‘My father lives in that house: the Professor of Zoology, Richard

Bertgang.’

 

   ¹ [The  pronoun  of  the  second  person  singular.  The  point  of  some  of  what  follows  is

necessarily lost in English. In all his remarks to Gradiva hitherto, Hanold had used the second
person singular, partly, no doubt, because that would be the classical usage. Now, however,that he was beginning to realize that he was talking to a modern German girl, he felt that the
second person singular was far too familiar and affectionate. Gradiva, on the other hand, has
used the second person singular throughout in speaking to him.]
 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1833

 

 

   So, since she was his neighbour, she knew him by sight and by

name. We feel a sense of disillusionment: the solution falls flat and

seems unworthy of our expectations.

 

      Norbert  Hanold  showed  that  he  had  not  yet  regained  his

independence  of  thought  when  he  replied:  ‘So  you¹  .  .  .  you  are

Fräulein Zoe Bertgang? But she looked quite different . . .’

   Fräulein Bertgang’s answer shows us that all the same there had

been  other  relations  between  the  two  of  them  besides  their  simply

being neighbours. She could argue in favour of the familiar ‘du’, which

he had used naturally to the mid-day ghost but had drawn back from

in speaking to the live girl, but on behalf of which she claimed ancient

rights: ‘If you find this formal mode of address more suitable, I can use

it too. But I find the other comes to my lips more naturally. I don’t know

if  I  looked  different  in  the  early  days  when  we  used  to  run  about

together in a friendly way or sometimes, by way of a change, used to

bump and thump each other. But if you² had even once looked at me

attentively  in  recent  years,  it  might  have  dawned  on  you  that  I’ve

looked like this for quite a time.’

 

   ¹ [‘Sie’, the German pronoun of the third person plural, which is always used in formal

speech instead of the ‘du’ of the second person singular.]

   ² [From this point to the middle of her next speech, when, as will be seen, she finally rebels,

Zoe makes a valiant attempt to use the formal ‘Sie’.]
 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1834

 

    So there had been a childhood friendship between them - perhaps a

childhood love - which justified the ‘du’. This solution, it may be, falls

just as flat as the one we first suspected. We are brought to a much

deeper  level,  however,  when  we  realize  that  this  childhood

relationship unexpectedly explains a number of details in what had

happened in their contemporary contact. Consider, for instance, the

slapping  of  Zoe-Gradiva’s  hand.  Norbert  Hanold  found  a  most

convincing reason for it in the necessity for reaching an experimental

answer to the problem of the apparition’s physical reality. But was it

not at the same time remarkably like a revival of the impulse for the

‘bumping  and  thumping’  whose  dominance  in  their  childhood  was

shown by Zoe’s words? And think, again, of how Gradiva asked the

archaeologist whether it did not seem to him that they had shared a

meal like this two thousand years before. This unintelligible question

suddenly  seems  to  have  a  sense,  if  we  once  more  replace  the

historical past by the personal one - childhood -, of which the girl still

had  lively  memories  but  which  the  young  man  appeared  to  have

forgotten.  And  now  the  discovery  dawns  upon  us  that  the  young

archaeologist’s phantasies about his Gradiva may have been an echo

of his forgotten childhood memories. If so, they were not capricious

products of his imagination, but determined, without his knowing it, by

the store of childhood impressions which he had forgotten, but which

were still at work in him. It should be possible for us to show the origin

of the phantasies in detail, even though we can only guess at them.

He imagined, for instance, that Gradiva must be of Greek origin and

that  she  was  the  daughter  of  a  respected  personage  -  a  priest  of

Ceres, perhaps. This seems to fit in pretty well with his knowing that

she bore the Greek name of Zoe and that she belonged to the family

of  a  Professor  of  Zoology.  But  if  Hanold’s  phantasies  were

transformed  memories,  we  may  expect  to  find  an  indication  of  the

source  of  those  phantasies  in  the  information  given  us  by  Zoe

Bertgang. Let us listen to what she has to say. She has told us of their

intimate friendship in their childhood, and we shall now hear of the

further course taken by this childhood relationship.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva                                                                                      1835

 

 

   ‘At that time, as a matter of fact, up to about the age when, I don’t

know why, people begin to call us "Backfisch",¹ I had got accustomed

to being remarkably dependent on you and believed I could never in

the world find a more agreeable friend. I had no mother or sister or

brother,  my  father  found  a  slow-worm  in  spirits  considerably  more

interesting  than  me;  and  everyone  (and  I  include  girls)  must  have

something  to  occupy  their  thoughts  and  whatever  goes  along  with

them. That was what you were then. But when archaeology took hold

of  you  I  discovered  -  you  must  forgive  me,  but  really  your  polite

innovation sounds to me too ridiculous and, besides, it doesn’t fit in

with what I want to express - as I was saying, it turned out that you’d²

become  an  unbearable  person  who  (at  any  rate  so  far  as  I  was

concerned)  no  longer  had  any  eyes  in  his  head  or  tongue  in  his

mouth, or any memory, where my memory had stuck, of our friendship

when we were children. No doubt that was why I looked different from

before. For when from time to time I met you in society - it happened

once as recently as last winter - you didn’t see me, still less did I hear

you say a word. Not that there was any distinction for me in that, for

you treated everyone else alike. I was thin air for you, and you - with

your tuft of fair hair that I’d rumpled for you often enough in the past -

you  were  as  dull,  as  dried-up,  and  as  tongue-tied  as  a  stuffed

cockatoo, and at the same time as grandiose as an - archeopteryx -

yes, that’s right, that’s what they call the antediluvian bird-monstrosity

they’ve  dug  up.  Only  there  was  one  thing  I  hadn’t  suspected:  that

there  was  an  equally  grandiose  phantasy  lodged  in  your  head  of

looking on me too, here in Pompeii, as something that had been dug

up  and  come  to  life  again.  And  when  all  at  once  there  you  were

standing in front of me quite unexpectedly, it took me quite a lot of

trouble  at  first  to  make  out  what  an  incredible  cobweb  your

imagination had spun in your brain. After that, it amused me and quite

pleased me in spite of its lunacy. For, as I told you, I hadn’t suspected

it of you.’

 

   ¹ [Literally  ‘fish  for  frying’.  The  common  German  slang  term  equivalent  to  ‘flapper’  or

‘teenager’.]   ² [From this point onwards she finally reverts to ‘du’.]

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1836

 

 

   Thus she tells us plainly enough what with the years had become of

their childhood friendship. In her it grew until she was thoroughly in

love, for a girl must have something to which she can give her heart.

Fräulein Zoe, the embodiment of cleverness and clarity, makes her

own mind quite transparent to us. While it is in any case the general

rule for a normally constituted girl to turn her affection towards her

father in the first instance, Zoe, who had no one in her family but her

father, was especially ready to do so. But her father had nothing left

over  for  her;  all  his  interest  was  engrossed  by  the  objects  of  his

science.  So  she  was  obliged  to  cast  her  eyes  around  upon  other

people, and became especially attached to her young playmate. When

he too ceased to have any eyes for her, her love was not shaken by it

but rather increased, for he had become like her father, was, like him,

absorbed by science and held apart by it from life and from Zoe. Thus

it was made possible for her to remain faithful in her unfaithfulness - to

find her father once more in her loved one, to include both of them

with the same emotion, or, as we may say, to identify both of them in

her  feeling.  What  is  our  justification  for  this  piece  of  psychological

analysis, which might well seem arbitrary? The author has presented

us  with  it  in  a  single,  but  highly  characteristic,  detail.  When  Zoe

described  the  transformation  in  her  former  playmate  which  had  so

greatly  disturbed  her,  she  abused  him  by  comparing  him  to  an

archaeopteryx,  the  bird-like  monstrosity  which  belongs  to  the

archaeology  of  zoology.  In  that  way  she  found  a  single  concrete

expression of the identity of the two figures. Her complaint applies with

the  same  word  to  the  man  she  loved  and  to  her  father.  The

archaeopteryx is, we might say, a compromise idea or an intermediate

idea  in  which  her  thought  about  the  folly  of  the  man  she  loved

coincided with the analogous thought about her father.

                   Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1837

 

   With the young man, things had taken a different turn. Archaeology

took hold of him and left him with an interest only in women of marble

and bronze. His childhood friendship, instead of being strengthened

into a passion, was dissolved, and his memories of it passed into such

profound forgetfulness that he did not recognize or notice his early

playmate when he met her in society. It is true that when we look

further  we  may  doubt  whether  ‘forgetfulness’  is  the  correct

psychological description of the fate of these memories in our young

archaeologist. There is a kind of forgetting which is distinguished by

the difficulty with which the memory is awakened even by a powerful

external  summons,  as  though  some  internal  resistance  were

struggling against its revival. A forgetting of this kind has been given

the name of ‘repression’ in psychopathology; and the case which our

author has put before us seems to be an example of this repression.

Now  we  do  not  know  in  general  whether  the  forgetting  of  an

impression  is  linked  with  the  dissolution  of  its  memory-trace  in  the

mind; but we can assert quite definitely of ‘repression’ that it does not

coincide  with  the  dissolution  or  extinction  of  the  memory.  What  is

repressed  cannot,  it  is  true,  as  a  rule  make  its  way  into  memory

without more ado; but it retains a capacity for effective action, and,

under  the  influence  of  some  external  event,  it  may  one  day  bring

about psychical consequences which can be regarded as products of

a modification of the forgotten memory and as derivatives of it and

which remain unintelligible unless we take this view of them. We have

already  seemed  to  recognize  in  Norbert  Hanold’s  phantasies  about

Gradiva  derivatives  of  his  repressed  memories  of  his  childhood

friendship  with  Zoe  Bertgang.  A  return  like  this  of  what  has  been

repressed is to be expected with particular regularity when a person’s

erotic feelings are attached to the repressed impressions - when his

erotic life has been attacked by repression. In such cases the old Latin

saying holds true, though it may have been coined first to apply to

expulsion by external influences and not to internal conflicts: ‘Naturam

expelles  furca,  tamen  usque  recurret.’¹  But  it  does  not  tell  us

everything. It only informs us of the fact of the return of the piece ofnature  that  has  been  repressed;  it  does  not  describe  the  highly

remarkable manner  of  that  return,  which  is  accomplished  by  what

seems like a piece of malicious treachery. It is precisely what was

chosen as the instrument of repression - like the ‘furca’ of the Latin

saying - that becomes the vehicle for the return: in and behind the

repressing force, what is repressed proves itself victor in the end. This

fact,  which  has  been  so  little  noticed  and  deserves  so  much

consideration,  is  illustrated  -  more  impressively  than  it  could  be  by

many examples - in a well known etching by Félicien Rops; and it is

illustrated in the typical case of repression in the life of saints and

penitents. An ascetic monk has fled, no doubt from the temptations of

the world, to the image of the crucified Saviour. And now the cross

sinks down like a shadow, and in its place, radiant, there rises instead

the  image  of  a  voluptuous,  naked  woman,  in  the  same  crucified

attitude. Other artists with less psychological insight have, in similar

representations of temptation, shown Sin, insolent and triumphant, in

some position alongside of the Saviour on the cross. Only Rops has

placed Sin in the very place of the Saviour on the cross. He seems to

have known that, when what has been repressed returns, it emerges

from the repressing force itself.

 

   ¹ [‘You may drive out Nature with a pitchfork, but she will always return.’]

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1838

 

      It  is  worth  while  pausing  in  order  to  convince  oneself  from

pathological cases how sensitive a human mind becomes in states of

repression to any approach by what has been repressed, and how

even trivial similarities suffice for the repressed to emerge behind the

repressing  force  and  take  effect  by  means  of  it.  I  once  had  under

medical treatment a young man - he was still almost a boy - who, after

he had first unwillingly become acquainted with the processes of sex,

had taken flight from every sexual desire that arose in him. For that

purpose  he  made  use  of  various  methods  of  repression-:  he

intensified his zeal in learning, exaggerated his dependence on his

mother, and in general assumed a childish character. I will not hereenter into the manner in which his repressed sexuality broke through

once more precisely in his relation to his mother; but I will describe a

rarer and stranger instance of how another of his bulwarks collapsed

on  an  occasion  which  could  scarcely  be  regarded  as  sufficient.

Mathematics  enjoys  the  greatest  reputation  as  a  diversion  from

sexuality.  This  had  been  the  very  advice  to  which  Jean  Jacques

Rousseau was obliged to listen from a lady who was dissatisfied with

him:  ‘Lascia  le  donne  e  studia  la  matematica!’¹  So  too  our  fugitive

threw  himself  with  special  eagerness  into  the  mathematics  and

geometry  which  he  was  taught  at  school,  till  suddenly  one  day  his

powers  of  comprehension  were  paralysed  in  the  face  of  some

apparently  innocent  problems.  It  was  possible  to  establish  two  of

these problems: ‘Two bodies come together, one with a speed of . . .

etc.’ and ‘On a cylinder, the diameter of whose surface is m, describe

a cone . . . etc.’ Other people would certainly not have regarded these

as very striking allusions to sexual events; but he felt that he had been

betrayed by mathematics as well, and took flight from it too.

 

   ¹ [‘Give up women and study mathematics!’]

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1839

 

   If Norbert Hanold were someone in real life who had in this way

banished  love  and  his  childhood  friendship  with  the  help  of

archaeology,  it  would  have  been  logical  and  according  to  rule  that

what revived in him the forgotten memory of the girl he had loved in

his  childhood  should  be  precisely  antique  sculpture.  It  would  have

been his well-deserved fate to fall in love with the marble portrait of

Gradiva, behind which, owing to an unexplained similarity, the living

Zoe whom he had neglected made her influence felt.

 

   Fräulein Zoe seems herself to have shared our view of the young

archaeologist’s delusion, for the satisfaction she expressed at the end

of  her  ‘frank,  detailed  and  instructive  speech  of  castigation’  could

scarcely have been based on anything but a recognition that from the

very  first  his  interest  in  Gradiva  had  related  to  herself.  It  was thiswhich  she  had  not  expected  of  him,  but  which,  in  spite  of  all  its

delusional disguise, she saw for what it was. The psychical treatment

she had carried out, however, had now accomplished its beneficent

effect on him. He felt free, for his delusion had now been replaced by

the thing of which it could only have been a distorted and inadequate

copy.  Nor  did  he  any  longer  hesitate  to  remember  her  and  to

recognize her as the kind, cheerful, clever playmate who in essentials

was  not  in  any  way  changed.  But  he  found  something  else  very

strange-

   ‘You mean’, said the girl, ‘the fact of someone having to die so as to

come alive; but no doubt that must be so for archaeologists.’ (141.)

Evidently she had not forgiven him yet for the roundabout path by way

of archaeology which he had followed from their childhood friendship

to the new relation that was forming.

   ‘No, I mean your name . . . Because "Bertgang" means the same as

"Gradiva" and describes someone "who steps along brilliantly".’¹ (142.)

 

   We ourselves were unprepared for this. Our hero was beginning to

cast  off  his  humility  and  to  play  an  active  part.  Evidently  he  was

completely  cured  of  his  delusion  and  had  risen  above  it;  and  he

proved this by himself tearing the last threads of the cobweb of his

delusion.  This,  too,  is  just  how  patients  behave  when  one  has

loosened the compulsion of their delusional thoughts by revealing the

repressed  material  lying  behind  them.  Once  they  have  understood,

they  themselves  bring  forward  the  solutions  of  the  final  and  most

important riddles of their strange condition in a number of ideas that

suddenly  occur  to  them.  We  had  already  guessed  that  the  Greek

origin of the imaginary Gradiva was an obscure result of the Greek

name ‘Zoe’; but we had not ventured to approach the name ‘Gradiva’

itself,  and  had  let  it  pass  as  the  untrammelled  creation  of  Norbert

Hanold’s imagination. But, to and behold! that very name now turns

out to have been a derivative - indeed a translation - of the repressed

surname  of  the  girl  he  had  loved  in  the  childhood  which  he  was

supposed to have forgotten.

 

   ¹ [The German root ‘bert’ or ‘brecht’ is akin to the English ‘bright’; similarly ‘gang’ is akin to

‘go’ (in Scotland ‘gang’).]
                   Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1840

 

      The  tracing  back  of  the  delusion  and  its  resolution  were  now

complete. What the author now adds is no doubt designed to serve as

a harmonious end to his story. We cannot but feel reassured about the

future  when  we  hear  that  the  young  man,  who  had  earlier  been

obliged  to  play  the  pitiable  part  of  a  person  in  urgent  need  of

treatment,  advanced  still  further  on  the  road  to  recovery  and

succeeded in arousing in her some of the feelings under which he

himself had suffered before. Thus it was that he made her jealous by

mentioning the sympathetic young lady who had previously interrupted

their tête-à-tête in the House of Meleager, and by confessing that she

had been the first woman for whom he had felt a very great liking.

Whereupon Zoe prepared to take a chilly leave of him, remarking that

everything  had  now  returned  to  reason  -  she  herself  not  least;  he

could look up Gisa Hartleben (or whatever she was now called) again

and give her some scientific assistance over the purpose of her visit to

Pompeii; she herself, however, must go back to the Albergo del Sole

where  her  father  was  expecting  her  for  lunch;  perhaps  they  would

meet again some time at a party in Germany or in the moon. But once

more he was able to make the troublesome fly an excuse for taking

possession first of her cheek and then of her lips, and to set in motion

the aggressiveness which is a man’s inevitable duty in love making.

Once  only  a  shadow  seemed  to  fall  on  their  happiness,  when  Zoe

declared  that  now  she  really  must  go  back  to  her  father  or  he  will

starve at the Sole. ‘Your father? . . . what will happen? . . .’ (147.) But

the clever girl was able swiftly to quiet his concern. ‘Probably nothing

will happen. I’m not an indispensable part of his zoological collection.

If I had been, perhaps I shouldn’t have been so foolish as to give my

heart to you.’ In the exceptional event, however, of her father taking a

different  view  from  hers,  there  was  a  safe  expedient.  Hanold  need

only  cross  to  Capri,  catch  a Lacerta faraglionensis  there  (he  could

practise the technique on her little finger), set the creature free over

here, catch it again before the zoologist’s eyes, and let him choose

between  a faraglionensis  on  the  mainland  and  his  daughter.  The

scheme, it is easy to see, was one in which the mockery was tingedwith bitterness; it was a warning, as it were, to her fiancé not to keep

too closely to the model on which she had chosen him. Here again

Norbert Hanold reassures us, by showing by all sorts of apparently

small signs the great transformation that had taken place in him. He

proposed that he and his Zoe should come for their honeymoon to

Italy and Pompeii, just as though he had never been indignant with the

honeymooning Edwins and Angelinas. He had completely lost from his

memory  all  his  feelings  against  those  happy  pairs,  who  had  so

unnecessarily travelled more than a hundred miles from their German

home.  The  author  is  certainly  right  in  bringing  forward  a  loss  of

memory like this as the most trustworthy sign of a change of attitude.

Zoe’s reply to the plan for the scene of their honeymoon suggested by

‘her childhood friend who had also in a sense been dug out of the

ruins again’ (150.) was that she did not feel quite alive enough yet to

make a geographical decision of that sort.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1841

 

   The delusion had now been conquered by a beautiful reality; but

before the two lovers left Pompeii it was still to be honoured once

again.  When  they  reached  the  Herculanean  Gate,  where,  at  the

entrance to the Via Consolare, the street is crossed by some ancient

stepping-stones,  Norbert  Hanold  paused  and  asked  the  girl  to  go

ahead of him. She understood him ‘and, pulling up her dress a little

with her left hand, Zoe Bertgang, Gradiva rediviva, walked past, held

in his eyes, which seemed to gaze as though in a dream; so, with her

quietly  tripping  gait,  she  stepped  through  the  sunlight  over  the

stepping-stones to the other side of the street.’ With the triumph of

love,  what  was  beautiful  and  precious  in  the  delusion  found

recognition as well.

   In his last simile, however, - of the ‘childhood friend who had been

dug out of the ruins’ - the author has presented us with the key to the

symbolism of which the hero’s delusion made use in disguising his

repressed memory. There is, in fact, no better analogy for repression,

by  which  something  in  the  mind  is  at  once  made  inaccessible  andpreserved, than burial of the sort to which Pompeii fell a victim and

from which it could emerge once more through the work of spades.

Thus it was that the young archaeologist was obliged in his phantasy

to transport to Pompeii the original of the relief which reminded him of

the object of his youthful love. The author was well justified, indeed, in

lingering  over  the  valuable  similarity  which  his  delicate  sense  had

perceived between a particular mental process in the individual and an

isolated historical event in the history of mankind.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1842

 

                                            II

 

But  after  all,  what  we  really  intended  to  do  originally  was  only  to

investigate two or three dreams that are to be found here and there in

Gradiva with the help of certain analytic methods. How has it come

about, then, that we have been led into dissecting the whole story and

examining the mental processes in the two chief characters? This has

not in fact been an unnecessary piece of work; it was an essential

preliminary. It is equally the case that when we try to understand the

real dreams of a real person we have to concern ourselves intensively

with his character and his career, and we must get to know not only

his  experiences  shortly  before  the  dream  but  also  those  dating  far

back into the past. It is even my view that we are still not free to turn to

our proper task, but that we must linger a little more over the story

itself and carry out some further preliminary work.

 

   My readers will no doubt have been puzzled to notice that so far I

have  treated  Norbert  Hanold  and  Zoe  Bertgang,  in  all  their  mental

manifestations and activities, as though they were real people and not

the author’s creations, as though the author’s mind were an absolutely

transparent medium and not a refractive or obscuring one. And my

procedure  must  seem  all  the  more  puzzling  since  the  author  has

expressly  renounced  the  portrayal  of  reality  by  calling  his  story  a

‘phantasy’. We have found, however, that all his descriptions are sofaithfully copied from reality that we should not object if Gradiva were

described not as a phantasy but as a psychiatric study. Only at two

points has the author availed himself of the licence open to him of

laying down premisses which do not seem to have their roots in the

laws  of  reality.  The  first  time  is  where  he  makes  the  young

archaeologist  come  upon  what  is  undoubtedly  an  ancient  relief  but

which so closely resembles a person living long afterwards, not only in

the peculiarity of the posture of the foot as it steps along but in every

detail of facial structure and bodily attitude, that the young man is able

to take the physical appearance of that person to be the sculpture

come to life. And the second time is where he makes the young man

meet the living woman precisely in Pompeii; for the dead woman had

been placed there only by his imagination, and the journey to Pompeii

had in fact carried him away from the living woman, whom he had just

seen in the street of the town in which he lived. This second provision

of  the  author’s,  however,  involves  no  violent  departure  from  actual

possibility; it merely makes use of chance, which unquestionably plays

a part in many human histories; and furthermore he uses it to good

purpose, for this chance reflects the fatal truth that has laid it down

that flight is precisely an instrument that delivers one over to what one

is  fleeing  from.  The  first  premiss  seems  to  lean  more  towards

phantasy and to spring entirely from the author’s arbitrary decision -

the  premiss  on  which  all  that  follows  depends,  the  far-reaching

resemblance between the sculpture and the live girl, which a more

sober choice might have restricted to the single feature of the posture

of the foot as it steps along. We might be tempted here to allow the

play  of  our  own  phantasy  to  forge  a  link  with  reality.  The  name  of

‘Bertgang’ might point to the fact that the women of that family had

already been distinguished in ancient days by the peculiarity of their

graceful  gait;  and  we  might  suppose  that  the  Germanic  Bertgangs

were descended from a Roman family one member of which was the

woman who had led the artist to perpetuate the peculiarity of her gait

in the sculpture. Since, however, the different variations of the human

form  are  not  independent  of  one  another,  and  since  in  fact  even

among ourselves the ancient types re-appear again and again (as we

can see in art collections), it would not be totally impossible that a

modern  Bertgang  might  reproduce  the  shape  of  her  ancientancestress in all the other features of her bodily structure as well. But

it would no doubt be wiser, instead of such speculations, to enquire

from the author himself what were the sources from which this part of

his creation was derived; we should then have a good prospect of

showing once again how what was ostensibly an arbitrary decision

rested in fact upon law. But since access to the sources in the author’s

mind is not open to us, we will leave him with an undiminished right to

construct a development that is wholly true to life upon an improbable

premiss - a right of which Shakespeare, for instance, availed himself

in King Lear.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1843

 

   Apart from this, it must be repeated, the author has presented us

with a perfectly correct psychiatric study, on which we may measure

our understanding of the workings of the mind - a case history and the

history  of  a  cure  which  might  have  been  designed  to  emphasize

certain  fundamental  theories  of  medical  psychology.  It  is  strange

enough that the author should have done this. But how if, on being

questioned, he were completely to deny any such purpose? It is so

easy to draw analogies and to read meanings into things. Is it not

rather we who have slipped into this charming poetic story a secret

meaning very far from its author’s intentions? Possibly. We shall come

back to the question later. For the moment, however, we have tried to

save ourselves from making any such tendentious interpretation by

giving the story almost entirely in the author’s own words. Anyone who

compares our reproduction with the actual text of Gradiva will have to

concede us that much.

   Perhaps, too, in most people’s eyes we are doing our author a poor

service in declaring his work to be a psychiatric study. An author, we

hear  them  say,  should  keep  out  of  the  way  of  any  contact  with

psychiatry  and  should  leave  the  description  of  pathological  mental

states to the doctors. The truth is that no truly creative writer has ever

obeyed this injunction. The description of the human mind is indeed

the domain which is most his own; he has from time immemorial beenthe precursor of science, and so too of scientific psychology. But the

frontier between states of mind described as normal and pathological

is in part a conventional one and in part so fluctuating that each of us

probably crosses it many times in the course of a day. On the other

hand,  psychiatry  would  be  doing  wrong  if  it  tried  to  restrict  itself

permanently to the study of the severe and gloomy illnesses that arise

from gross injuries to the delicate apparatus of the mind. Deviations

from health which are slighter and capable of correction, and which to-

day we can trace back no further than to disturbances in the interplay

of mental forces, arouse its interest no less. Indeed, only through the

medium  of  these  can  it  understand  either  normal  states  or  the

phenomena of severe illness. Thus the creative writer cannot evade

the psychiatrist nor the psychiatrist the creative writer, and the poetic

treatment of a psychiatric theme can turn out to be correct without any

sacrifice of its beauty.

   And it is really correct - this imaginative picture of the history of a

case and its treatment. Now that we have finished telling the story and

satisfied our own suspense, we can get a better view of it, and we

shall now reproduce it with the technical terminology of our science,

and in doing so we shall not feel disconcerted at the necessity for

repeating what we have said before.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1844

 

 

   Norbert Hanold’s condition is often spoken of by the author as a

‘delusion’, and we have no reason to reject that designation. We can

state two chief characteristics of a ‘delusion’, which do not, it is true,

describe  it  exhaustively,  but  which  distinguish  it  recognizably  from

other disorders. In the first place it is one of the group of pathological

states  which  do  not  produce  a  direct  effect  upon  the  body  but  are

manifested  only  by  mental  indications.  And  secondly  it  is

characterized by the fact that in it ‘phantasies’ have gained the upper

hand - that is, have obtained belief and have acquired an influence on

action. If we recall Hanold’s journey to Pompeii in order to look forGradiva’s peculiarly formed footprints in the ashes, we shall have a

fine  example  of  an  action  under  the  dominance  of  a  delusion.  A

psychiatrist  would  perhaps  place  Norbert  Hanold’s  delusion  in  the

great  group  of  ‘paranoia’  and  possibly  describe  it  as  ‘fetishistic

erotomania’, because the most striking thing about it was his being in

love with the piece of sculpture and because in the psychiatrist’s view,

with  its  tendency  to  coarsen  everything,  the  young  archaeologist’s

interest in feet and the postures of feet would be bound to suggest

‘fetishism’.  Nevertheless  all  such  systems  of  nomenclature  and

classification  of  the  different  kinds  of  delusion  according  to  their

subject-matter have something precarious and barren about them.¹

   Furthermore, since our hero was a person capable of developing a

delusion on the basis of such a strange preference, a strict psychiatrist

would at once stamp him as a dégénéré and would investigate the

heredity which had remorselessly driven him to this fate. But here the

author  does  not  follow  the  psychiatrist,  and  with  good  reason.  He

wishes to bring the hero closer to us so as to make ‘empathy’ easier;

the diagnosis of ‘dégénéré', whether it is right or wrong, at once puts

the young archaeologist at a distance from us, for we readers are the

normal people and the standard of humanity. Nor is the author greatly

concerned with the hereditary and constitutional preconditions of the

state, but on the other hand he plunges deep into the personal mental

make-up which can give rise to such a delusion.

 

   ¹ In point of fact, the case of N. H. would have to be described as a hysterical delusion, not

a paranoic one. The indications of paranoia are absent from it.
 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1845

 

   In one important respect Norbert Hanold behaved quite differently

from an ordinary human being. He took no interest in living women;

the science of which he was the servant had taken that interest away

from him and displaced it on to women of marble or bronze. This is not

to be regarded as a trivial peculiarity; on the contrary, it was the basic

precondition of the events to be described. For one day it came about

that one particular sculpture of that kind laid claim to the whole of theinterest which is ordinarily directed only to a living woman, and with

that his delusion was there. We then see unrolled before our eyes the

manner in which his delusion is cured through a happy turn of events,

and his interest displaced back from the marble to a living woman.

The author does not let us follow the influences which led our hero to

turn away from women; he only informs us that his attitude was not

explained by his innate disposition, which, on the contrary, included

some amount of imaginative (and, we might add, erotic) needs. And,

as we learn later in the story, he did not avoid other children in his

childhood: he had a friendship at that age with a little girl, was her

inseparable companion, shared his little meals with her, used to thump

her too and let her rumple his hair. It is in attachments such as this, in

combinations  like  this  of  affection  and  aggressiveness,  that  the

immature erotism of childhood finds its expression; its consequences

only emerge later, but then they are irresistible, and during childhood

itself it is as a rule recognized as erotism only by doctors and creative

writers. Our own writer shows us clearly that he too is of the same

opinion; for he makes his hero suddenly develop a lively interest in

women’s feet and their way of placing them. This interest was bound

to bring him a bad reputation both among scientists and among the

women of the town he lived in, a reputation of being a foot-fetishist;

but we cannot avoid tracing the interest back to the memory of his

childhood  playmate.  For  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  even  in  her

childhood the girl showed the same peculiarity of a graceful gait, with

her toes almost perpendicularly raised as she stepped along; and it

was  because  it  represented  that  same  gait  that  an  ancient  marble

relief acquired such great importance for Norbert Hanold. Incidentally

we may add that in his derivation of the remarkable phenomenon of

fetishism the author is in complete agreement with science. Ever since

Binet we have in fact tried to trace fetishism back to erotic impressions

in childhood.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1846

 

   The state of permanently turning away from women produces apersonal  susceptibility,  or,  as  we  are  accustomed  to  say,  a

‘disposition’ to the formation of a delusion. The development of the

mental  disorder  sets  in  at  the  moment  when  a  chance  impression

arouses  the  childhood  experiences  which  have  been  forgotten  and

which have traces, at least, of an erotic colouring. ‘Arouses’, however,

is  certainly  not  the  right  description,  if  we  take  into  account  what

follows.  We  must  repeat  the  author’s  accurate  account  in  correct

psychological technical terms. When Norbert Hanold saw the relief, he

did not remember that he had already seen a similar posture of the

foot in his childhood friend; he remembered nothing at all, but all the

effects brought about by the relief originated from this link that was

made  with  the  impression  of  his  childhood.  Thus  the  childhood

impression  was  stirred  up,  it  became  active,  so  that  it  began  to

produce effects, but it did not come into consciousness - it remained

‘unconscious’, to use a term which has to-day become unavoidable in

psychopathology. We are anxious that this unconscious shall not be

involved  in  any  of  the  disputes  of  philosophers  and  natural

philosophers,  which  have  often  no  more  than  an  etymological

importance.  For  the  time  being  we  possess  no  better  name  for

psychical processes which behave actively but nevertheless do not

reach the consciousness of the person concerned, and that is all we

mean by our ‘unconsciousness’. When some thinkers try to dispute

the existence of an unconscious of this kind, on the ground that it is

nonsensical, we can only suppose that they have never had to do with

the corresponding mental phenomena, that they are under the spell of

the regular experience that everything mental that becomes active and

intense becomes at the same time conscious as well, and that they

have still to learn (what our author knows very well) that there are

most certainly mental processes which, in spite of being intense and

producing effects, none the less remain apart from consciousness.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1847

 

      We  said  a  little  earlier  that  Norbert  Hanold’s  memories  of  his

childhood relations with Zoe were in a state of ‘repression’; and herewe have called them ‘unconscious’ memories. So we must now pay a

little  attention  to  the  relation  between  these  two  technical  terms,

which, indeed, appear to coincide in their meaning. It is not difficult to

make the matter plain. ‘Unconscious’ is the wider concept; ‘repressed’

is the narrower one. Everything that is repressed is unconscious; but

we cannot assert that everything unconscious is repressed. If when

Hanold saw the relief he had remembered his Zoe’s gait, what had

earlier  been  an  unconscious  memory  of  his  would  have  become

simultaneously active and conscious, and this would have shown that

it had not earlier been repressed. ‘Unconscious’ is a purely descriptive

term, one that is indefinite in some respects and, as we might say,

static. ‘Repressed’ is a dynamic expression, which takes account of

the interplay of mental forces; it implies that there is a force present

which is seeking to bring about all kinds of psychical effects, including

that of becoming conscious, but that there is also an opposing force

which is able to obstruct some of these psychical effects, once more

including  that  of  becoming  conscious.  The  mark  of  something

repressed is precisely that in spite of its intensity it is unable to enter

consciousness. In Hanold’s case, therefore, from the moment of the

appearance of the relief onwards, we are concerned with something

unconscious  that  is  repressed,  or,  more  briefly  with  something

repressed.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1848

 

   Norbert Hanold’s memories of his childhood relations with the girl

with the graceful gait were repressed; but this is not yet the correct

view of the psychological situation. We remain on the surface so long

as we are dealing only with memories and ideas. What is alone of

value  in  mental  life  is  rather  the  feelings.  No  mental  forces  are

significant unless they possess the characteristic of arousing feelings.

Ideas  are  only  repressed  because  they  are  associated  with  the

release of feelings which ought not to occur. It would be more correct

to say that repression acts upon feelings, but we can only be aware of

these in their association with ideas. So that it was Norbert Hanold’serotic feelings that were repressed; and since his erotism knew and

had known no other object than Zoe Bertgang in his childhood, his

memories  of  her  were  forgotten.  The  ancient  relief  aroused  the

slumbering erotism in him, and made his childhood memories active.

On account of a resistance to erotism that was present in him, these

memories could only become operative as unconscious ones. What

now took place in him was a struggle between the power of erotism

and that of the forces that were repressing it; the manifestation of this

struggle was a delusion.

      Our  author  has  omitted  to  give  the  reasons  which  led  to  the

repression of the erotic life of his hero; for of course Hanold’s concern

with science was only the instrument which the repression employed.

A doctor would have to dig deeper here, but perhaps without hitting

upon the reason in this case. But, as we have insisted with admiration,

the author has not failed to show us how the arousing of the repressed

erotism came precisely from the field of the instruments that served to

bring about the repression. It was right that an antique, the marble

sculpture of a woman, should have been what tore our archaeologist

away from his retreat from love and warned him to pay off the debt to

life with which we are burdened from our birth.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1849

 

   The first manifestations of the process that had been set going in

Hanold by the relief were phantasies, which played around the figure

represented in it. The figure seemed to him to have something ‘of to-

day’ about her, in the best sense of the words, and it was as though

the artist had captured her ‘from the life’ stepping along the street. He

gave  the  girl  in  the  ancient  relief  the  name  of  ‘Gradiva’,  which  he

constructed on the model of an epithet of the war-god striding into

battle - ‘Mars Gradivus’. He endowed her personality with more and

more characteristics. She may have been the daughter of a respected

personage,  of  a  patrician,  perhaps,  who  was  connected  with  the

temple service of a deity. He thought he could trace a Greek origin in

her features; and finally he felt compelled to remove her from the busylife of a capital and to transport her to the more peaceful Pompeii, and

there he made her step across the lava stepping-stones which made it

possible  to  cross  from  one  side  of  the  street  to  the  other.  These

products of his phantasy seem arbitrary enough, but at the same time

innocently unsuspicious. And, indeed, even when for the first time they

gave  rise  to  an  incitement  to  action  -  when  the  archaeologist,

obsessed  by  the  problem  of  whether  this  posture  of  the  feet

corresponded to reality, began to make observations from life in order

to  examine  the  feet  of  contemporary  women  and  girls  -  even  this

action was screened by conscious scientific motives, as though all his

interest in the sculpture of Gradiva had sprung from the soil of his

professional concern with archaeology. The women and girls in the

street, whom he chose as the subjects of his investigation, must, of

course, have taken another, crudely erotic view of his behaviour, and

we cannot but think them right. We ourselves can be in no doubt that

Hanold was as much in ignorance of the motives of his researches as

he was of the origin of his phantasies about Gradiva. These, as we

learned  later,  were  echoes  of  his  memories  of  his  youthful  love,

derivatives  of  those  memories,  transformations  and  distortions  of

them, after they had failed to make their way into his consciousness in

an  unmodified  form.  The  ostensibly  aesthetic  judgement  that  the

sculpture  had  something  ‘of  to-day’  about  it  took  the  place  of  his

knowledge that a gait of that kind belonged to a girl whom he knew

and who stepped across the street at the present time. Behind the

impression of the sculpture being ‘from the life’ and the phantasy of its

subject being Greek lay his memory of the name Zoe, which means

‘life’ in Greek. ‘Gradiva’, as we learn from our hero himself at the end

of  the  story,  after  he  has  been  cured  of  his  delusion,  is  a  good

translation  of  the  surname  ‘Bertgang’  which  means  something  like

‘someone who steps along brilliantly or splendidly’. The details about

Gradiva’s  father  originated  from  Hanold’s  knowledge  that  Zoe

Bertgang was the daughter of a respected teacher at the University,

which can well be translated into classical terms as ‘temple-service’.

Finally,  his  phantasy  transported  her  to  Pompeii,  not  ‘because  her

quiet,  calm  nature  seemed  to  demand  it’,  but  because  no  other  or

better analogy could be found in his science for his remarkable state,

in which he became aware of his memories of his childhood friendshipthrough obscure channels of information. Once he had made his own

childhood coincide with the classical past (which it was so easy for

him to do), there was a perfect similarity between the burial of Pompeii

- the disappearance of the past combined with its preservation - and

repression, of which he possessed a knowledge through what might

be described as ‘endopsychic’ perception. In this he was employing

the same symbolism that the author makes the girl use consciously

towards the conclusion of the story: ‘I told myself I should be able to

dig out something interesting here even by myself. Of course I hadn’t

counted on making the find that I have . . .’ (124.) And at the very end

she replied to Hanold’s plan for their honeymoon with a reference to

‘her childhood friend who had also in a sense been dug out of the

ruins again’. (150.)

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1850

 

   Thus in the very first products of Hanold’s delusional phantasies and

actions we already find a double set of determinants, a derivation from

two different sources. One of these is the one that was manifest to

Hanold himself, the other is the one which is revealed to us when we

examine his mental processes. One of them, looked at from Hanold’s

point  of  view,  was  conscious  to  him,  the  other  was  completely

unconscious to him. One of them was derived wholly from the circle of

ideas  of  the  science  of  archaeology,  the  other  arose  from  the

repressed  childhood  memories  that  had  become  active  in  him  and

from the emotional instincts attached to them. One might be described

as lying on the surface and covering the other, which was, as it were,

concealed behind it. The scientific motivation might be said to serve

as a pretext for the unconscious erotic one, and science had put itself

completely at the service of the delusion. It should not be forgotten,

however, that the unconscious determinants could not effect anything

that did not simultaneously satisfy the conscious, scientific ones. The

symptoms of a delusion - phantasies and actions alike - are in fact the

products of compromise between the two mental currents, and in a

compromise  account  is  taken  of  the  demands  of  each  of  the  twoparties to it; but each side must also renounce a part of what it wanted

to  achieve.  Where  a  compromise  comes  about  it  must  have  been

preceded  by  a  struggle  -  in  this  case  it  was  the  conflict  we  have

assumed  between  suppressed  erotism  and  the  forces  that  were

keeping it in repression. In the formation of a delusion this struggle is

in  fact  unending.  Assault  and  resistance  are  renewed  after  the

construction of each compromise, which is never, so to speak, entirely

satisfying. Our author too is aware of this, and that is why he makes a

peculiar  unrest  dominate  this  stage  of  his  hero’s  disorder,  as  a

precursor and guarantee of further developments.

   These significant peculiarities - the double motivation of phantasies

and decisions, and the construction of conscious pretexts for actions

to whose motivation the repressed has made the major contribution -

will meet us often, and perhaps more clearly, in the further course of

the  story.  And  this  is  just  as  it  should  be,  for  the  author  has  thus

grasped  and  represented  the  unfailing  chief  characteristic  of

pathological mental processes.

 

   The development of Norbert Hanold’s delusion proceeded with a

dream which, since it was not occasioned by any new event, seems to

have arisen entirely out of his mind, filled as it was by a conflict. But let

us  pause  before  we  enquire  whether,  in  the  construction  of  his

dreams, too, the author meets our expectation that he possesses a

deep understanding. Let us ask first what psychiatric science has to

say to his hypotheses about the origin of a delusion and what attitude

it  takes  to  the  part  played  by  repression  and  the  unconscious,  to

conflict  and  to  the  formation  of  compromises.  In  short,  let  us  ask

whether this imaginative representation of the genesis of a delusion

can hold its own before the judgement of science.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1851

 

   And here we must give what will perhaps be an unexpected answer.

In fact the situation is quite the reverse: it is science that cannot hold

its own before the achievement of the author. Science allows a gulf toyawn  between  the  hereditary  and  constitutional  preconditions  of  a

delusion and its creations, which seem to emerge ready-made - a gulf

which  we  find  that  our  author  has  filled.  Science  does  not  as  yet

suspect the importance of repression, it does not recognize that in

order  to  explain  the  world  of  psychopathological  phenomena  the

unconscious is absolutely essential, it does not look for the basis of

delusions  in  a  psychical  conflict,  and  it  does  not  regard  their

symptoms as compromises. Does our author stand alone, then, in the

face of united science? No, that is not the case (if, that is, I may count

my own works as part of science), since for a number of years - and,

until recently, more or less alone¹ - I myself have supported all the

views that I have here extracted from Jensen’s Gradiva and stated in

technical terms. I indicated, in most detail in connection with the states

known as hysteria and obsessions, that the individual determinant of

these psychical disorders is the suppression of a part of instinctual life

and the repression of the ideas by which the suppressed instinct is

represented,  and  soon  afterwards  I  repeated  the  same  views  in

relation to some forms of delusion.² The question whether the instincts

concerned  in  this  causation  are  always  components  of  the  sexual

instinct or may be of another kind as well is a problem which may be

regarded  as  a  matter  of  indifference  in  the  particular  case  of  the

analysis of Gradiva; for in the instance chosen by our author what was

at  issue  was  quite  certainly  nothing  other  than  the  suppression  of

erotic feelings. The validity of the hypotheses of psychical conflict and

of the formation of symptoms by means of compromises between the

two  mental  currents  struggling  against  each  other  has  been

demonstrated by me in the case of patients observed and medically

treated in real life, just as I have been able to in the imaginary case of

Norbert Hanold.³ Even before me, Pierre Janet, a pupil of the great

Charcot, and Josef Breuer, in collaboration with me, had traced back

the  products  of  neurotic,  and  especially  of  hysterical,  illness  to  the

                                        4
power of unconscious thoughts.

   When, from the year 1893 onwards, I plunged into investigations

such as these of the origin of mental disturbances, it would certainly

never have occurred to me to look for a confirmation of my findings in

imaginative writings. I was thus more than a little surprised to find that

the author of Gradiva, which was published in 1903, had taken as thebasis  of  its  creation  the  very  thing  that  I  believed  myself  to  have

freshly discovered from the sources of my medical experience. How

was it that the author arrived at the same knowledge as the doctor - or

at least behaved as though he possessed the same knowledge?

 

   ¹ See Bleuler’s important work, Affektivität, Suggestibilität, Paranoia  and  C.  G.  Jung’s

Diagnostische Assoziationsstudien, both published in Zurich in 1906. - [Added 1912:] To-day,
in 1912, I am able to retract what is said above as being no longer true. Since it was written,
the  ‘psycho-analytic  movement’  started  by  me  has  become  widely  extended,  and  it  is
constantly growing.

   ² See the author’s Sammlung Kleiner Schriften zur Neurosenlehre, 1906.

   ³ Cf. ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ (1905e).

4
    Cf. Studies on Hysteria (Freud, 1895d, with Breuer).

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1852

 

 

      Norbert  Hanold’s  delusion,  as  I  was  saying,  was  carried  a  step

further  by  a  dream  which  occurred  in  the  middle  of  his  efforts  to

discover a gait like Gradiva’s in the streets of the town where he lived.

It is easy to give the content of this dream in brief. The dreamer found

himself  in  Pompeii  on  the  day  on  which  that  unhappy  city  was

destroyed,  and  experienced  its  horrors  without  being  in  danger

himself;  he  suddenly  saw  Gradiva  stepping  along  there,  and

understood all at once, as though it was something quite natural, that

since she was a Pompeian, she was living in her native town, and

‘without his having suspected it, living as his contemporary’. He was

seized with fear on her account and gave a warning cry, whereupon

she turned her face towards him for a moment. But she proceeded on

her way without paying any attention to him, lay down on the steps of

the Temple of Apollo, and was buried in the rain of ashes after her

face had lost its colour, as though it were turning into white marble,

until it had become just like a piece of sculpture. As he was waking up,

he interpreted the noises of a big city penetrating into his bedroom as

the  cries  for  help  of  the  despairing  inhabitants  of  Pompeii  and  the

thunder of the wildly agitated sea. The feeling that what he had dreamt

had really happened to him would not leave him for some time after hehad awoken, and a conviction that Gradiva had lived in Pompeii and

had  perished  there  on  the  fatal  day  was  left  over  with  him  by  the

dream as a fresh starting-point for his delusion.

   It is not so easy for us to say what the author intended with this

dream and what caused him to link the development of the delusion

precisely to a dream. Zealous investigators, it is true, have collected

plenty of examples of the way in which mental disturbances are linked

to dreams and arise out of dreams.¹ It appears, too, that in the lives of

a few eminent men impulses to important actions and decisions have

originated from dreams. But these analogies are not of much help to

our understanding; so let us keep to our present case, our author’s

imaginary case of Norbert Hanold the archaeologist. By which end are

we  to  take  hold  of  a  dream  like  this  so  as  to  fit  it  into  the  whole

context, if it is not to remain no more than an unnecessary decoration

of the story?

 

   ¹ Sante de Sanctis (1899).

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1853

 

   I can well imagine that at this point a reader may exclaim: ‘The

dream  is  quite  easily  explained  -  it  is  a  simple  anxiety  dream,

occasioned by the noises of the city, which were misinterpreted into

the  destruction  of  Pompeii  by  the  archaeologist,  whose  mind  was

occupied with his Pompeian girl.’ In view of the low opinion generally

prevailing  of  the  performances  of  dreams,  all  that  is  usually  asked

from an explanation of one is that some external stimulus shall be

found that more or less coincides with a piece of the dream’s content.

This external stimulus to dreaming would be supplied by the noise

which woke the sleeper; and with this, interest in the dream would be

exhausted. If only we had some reason for supposing that the town

was noisier than usual that morning! If only, for instance, the author

had not omitted to tell us that Hanold, against his usual practice, had

slept that night with his windows open! What a pity the author did not

take the trouble to do that! And if only anxiety-dreams were as simple

as that! But no, interest in the dream is not so easily exhausted.   There is nothing essential for the construction of a dream in a link

with an external sensory stimulus. A sleeper can disregard a stimulus

of  this  kind  from  the  external  world,  or  he  can  allow  himself  to  be

awakened by it without constructing a dream, or, as happened here,

he can weave it into his dream if that suits him for some other reason;

and there are numerous dreams of which it is impossible to show that

their content was determined in this way by a stimulus impinging on

the sleeper’s senses. No, we must try another path.

   We may perhaps find a starting-point in the after-effects left by the

dream in Hanold’s waking life. Up to then he had had a phantasy that

Gradiva  had  been  a  Pompeian.  This  hypothesis  now  became  a

certainty  for  him,  and  a  second  certainty  followed  -  that  she  was

buried along with the rest in the year 79 A.D.¹ Melancholy feelings

accompanied this extension of the delusional structure, like an echo of

the anxiety which had filled the dream. This fresh pain about Gradiva

does not seem very intelligible to us; Gradiva would have been dead

for many centuries even if she had been saved from destruction in the

year 79 A.D. Or ought we not to argue in this kind of way either with

Norbert Hanold or with the author himself? Here again there seems no

path to an understanding. Nevertheless it is worth remarking that the

increment  which  the  delusion  acquired  from  this  dream  was

accompanied by a feeling with a highly painful colouring.

 

   ¹ See the text of Gradiva (15).

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1854

 

   Apart from that, however, we are as much at a loss as before. This

dream is not self-explanatory, and we must resolve to borrow from my

Interpretation of Dreams and apply to the present example a few of

the rules to be found in it for the solution of dreams.

   One of these rules is to the effect that a dream is invariably related

to the events of the day before the dream. Our author seems to be

wishing to show that he has followed this rule, for he attaches the

dream  immediately  to  Hanold’s  ‘pedestrian  researches’.  Now  these

had no meaning other than a search for Gradiva, whose characteristicgait he was trying to recognize. So the dream ought to have contained

an indication of where Gradiva was to be found. And it does so, by

showing her in Pompeii; but that is no novelty to us.

   Another rule tells as that, if a belief in the reality of the dream-

images persists unusually long, so that one cannot tear oneself out of

the dream, this is not a mistaken judgement provoked by the vividness

of  the  dream-images,  but  is  a  psychical  act  on  its  own:  it  is  an

assurance, relating to the content of the dream, that something in it is

really  as  one  has  dreamt  it;  and  it  is  right  to  have  faith  in  this

assurance. If we keep to these two rules, we must conclude that the

dream gave some information as to the whereabouts of the Gradiva

he was in search of, and that that information tallied with the real state

of things. We know Hanold’s dream: does the application of these two

rules to it yield any reasonable sense?

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1855

 

   Strange to say, it does. The sense is merely disguised in a particular

way so that it is not immediately recognizable. Hanold learned in the

dream  that  the  girl  he  was  looking  for  was  living  in  a  town  and

contemporaneously with him. Now this was true of Zoe Bertgang; only

in  the  dream  the  town  was  not  the  German  university  town  but

Pompeii, and the time was not the present but the year 79 A.D. It is,

as it were, a distortion by displacement: what we have is not Gradiva

in the present but the dreamer transported into the past. Nevertheless,

in this manner, the essential and new fact is stated: he is in the same

place and time as the girl he is looking for. But whence come this

displacement and disguise which were bound to deceive both us and

the dreamer over the true meaning and content of the dream? Well,

we already have the means at our disposal for giving a satisfactory

answer to that question.

   Let us recall all that we have heard about the nature and origin of

the  phantasies  which  are  the  precursors  of  delusions.  They  are

substitutes  for  and  derivatives  of  repressed  memories  which  a

resistance will not allow to enter consciousness unaltered, but whichcan purchase the possibility of becoming conscious by taking account,

by means of changes and distortions, of the resistance’s censorship.

When this compromise has been accomplished, the memories have

turned into the phantasies, which can easily be misunderstood by the

conscious  personality  -  that  is,  understood  so  as  to  fit  in  with  the

dominant psychical current. Now let us suppose that dream-images

are what might be described as the creations of people’s physiological

delusions - the products of the compromise in the struggle between

what is repressed and what is dominant which is probably present in

every human being, including those who in the day-time are perfectly

sound in mind. We shall then understand that dream-images have to

be  regarded  as  something  distorted,  behind  which  something  else

must  be  looked  for,  something not  distorted,  but  in  some  sense

objectionable,  like  Hanold’s  repressed  memories  behind  his

phantasies. We can give expression to the contrast which we have

thus recognized, by distinguishing what the dreamer remembers when

he  wakes  up  as  the manifest  content  of  the  dream  from  what

constituted the basis of the dream before the distortion imposed by the

censorship - namely, the latent dream-thoughts. Thus, interpreting a

dream consists in translating the manifest content of the dream into

the latent dream-thoughts, in undoing the distortion which the dream-

thoughts have had to submit to from the censorship of the resistance.

If we apply these notions to the dream we are concerned with, we

shall find that its latent dream-thoughts can only have been: ‘the girl

you are looking for with the graceful gait is really living in this town

with you.’ But in that form the thought could not become conscious. It

was obstructed by the fact that a phantasy had laid it down, as the

result  of  an  earlier  compromise,  that  Gradiva  was  a  Pompeian;

consequently, if the real fact that she was living in the same place and

at the same time was to be affirmed, there was no choice but to adopt

the distortion: ‘You are living at Pompeii at the time of Gradiva.’ This

then was the idea which was realized by the manifest content of the

dream,  and  was  represented  as  a  present  event  actually  being

experienced.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva                                                                                      1856

 

      It  is  only  rarely  that  a  dream  represents,  or,  as  we  might  say,

‘stages’, a single thought: there are usually a number of them, a tissue

of thoughts. Another component of the content of Hanold’s dream can

be detached, the distortion of which can easily be got rid of, so that

the latent idea represented by it can be detected. This is a piece of the

dream to which once again it is possible to extend the assurance of

reality  with  which  the  dream  ended.  In  the  dream  Gradiva  as  she

steps along is transformed into a marble sculpture. This is no more

than  an  ingenious  and  poetical  representation  of  the  real  event.

Hanold had in fact transferred his interest from the living girl to the

sculpture: the girl he loved had been transformed for him into a marble

relief.  The  latent  dream-thoughts,  which  were  bound  to  remain

unconscious, sought to change the sculpture back into the living girl;

what they were saying to him accordingly was something like: ‘After

all, you’re only interested in the statue of Gradiva because it reminds

you of Zoe, who is living here and now.’ But if this discovery could

have become conscious, it would have meant the end of the delusion.

   Are we perhaps under an obligation to replace in this way each

separate piece of the manifest content of the dream by unconscious

thoughts? Strictly speaking, yes; if we were interpreting a dream that

had really been dreamt, we could not avoid that duty. But in that case,

too,  the  dreamer  would  have  to  give  us  the  most  copious

explanations. Clearly, we cannot carry out this requirement in the case

of the author’s creation; nevertheless, we shall not overlook the fact

that we have not yet submitted the main content of the dream to the

process of interpretation or translation.

      For  Hanold’s  dream  was  an  anxiety-dream.  Its  content  was

frightening, the dreamer felt anxiety while he slept and he was left with

painful  feelings  afterwards.  Now  this  is  far  from  convenient  for  our

attempt at an explanation; and we must once again borrow heavily

from the theory of dream-interpretation. We are warned by that theory

not to fall into the error of tracing the anxiety that may be felt in a

dream to the content of the dream, and not to treat the content of the

dream as though it were the content of an idea occurring in waking

life. It points out to us how often we dream the most ghastly thingswithout feeling a trace of anxiety. The true situation, we learn, is quite

a different one, which cannot be easily guessed, but which can be

proved  with  certainty.  The  anxiety  in  anxiety-dreams,  like  neurotic

anxiety in general, corresponds to a sexual affect, a libidinal feeling,

and  arises  out  of  libido  by  the  process  of  repression.¹    When  we

interpret  a  dream,  therefore,  we  must  replace  anxiety  by  sexual

excitement. The anxiety that originates in this way has - not invariably,

but frequently - a selective influence on the content of the dream and

introduces into it ideational elements which seem, when the dream is

looked  at  from  a  conscious  and  mistaken  point  of  view,  to  be

appropriate  to  the  affect  of  anxiety.  As  I  have  said,  this  is  not

invariably  so,  for  there  are  plenty  of  anxiety-dreams  in  which  the

content  is  not  in  the  least  frightening  and  where  it  is  therefore

impossible to give an explanation on conscious lines of the anxiety

that is felt.

 

   ¹ Cf. my first paper on the anxiety neurosis (1895b) and The Interpretation of Dreams.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1857

 

   I am aware that this explanation of anxiety in dreams sounds very

strange and is not easy to credit; but I can only advise the reader to

come to terms with it. Moreover it would be a very remarkable thing if

Norbert Hanold’s dream could be reconciled with this view of anxiety

and could be explained in that way. On that basis, we should say that

the  dreamer’s  erotic  longings  were  stirred  up  during  the  night  and

made a powerful effort to make conscious his memory of the girl he

loved and so to tear him out of his delusion, but that those longings

met with a fresh repudiation and were transformed into anxiety, which

in  its  turn  introduced  into  the  content  of  the  dream  the  terrifying

pictures from the memories of his schooldays. In this manner the true

unconscious content of the dream, his passionate longing for the Zoe

he had once known, became transformed into its manifest content of

the destruction of Pompeii and the loss of Gradiva.

   So far, I think, it sounds plausible. But it might justly be insisted that,

if  erotic  wishes  constitute  the  undistorted  content  of  the  dream,  itought  also  to  be  possible  to  point  at  least  to  some  recognizable

residue  of  those  wishes  concealed  somewhere  in  the  transformed

dream. Well, even that may be possible, with the help of a hint from a

later  part  of  the  story.  When  Hanold  had  his  first  meeting  with  the

supposed  Gradiva,  he  recollected  the  dream  and  begged  the

apparition to lie down again as he had seen her do then.¹ Thereupon,

however,  the  young  lady  rose  indignantly  and  left  her  strange

companion, for she had detected the improper erotic wish behind what

he had said under the domination of his delusion. We must, I think,

accept  Gradiva’s  interpretation;  even  in  a  real  dream  we  cannot

always expect to find a more definite expression of an erotic wish.

 

   ¹ ‘No, I didn’t hear you speak. But I called to you when you lay down to sleep, and I stood

beside you then - your face was as peaceful and beautiful as marble. May I beg of you - lie
down once more on the step as you did then.’ (70.)
 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1858

 

      The  application  of  a  few  of  the  rules  of  dream-interpretation  to

Hanold’s first dream has thus resulted in making it intelligible to us in

its main features and in inserting it into the nexus of the story. Surely,

then, the author must have observed these rules in creating it? We

might ask another question, too: why did the author introduce a dream

at all to bring about the further development of the delusion? In my

opinion it was an ingenious notion and once again true to reality. We

have already heard that in real illnesses a delusion very often arises in

connection with a dream, and, after what we have learnt about the

nature of dreams, there is no need to see a fresh riddle in this fact.

Dreams  and  delusions  arise  from  the  same  source  -  from  what  is

repressed. Dreams are, as one might say, the physiological delusions

of  normal  people.  Before  what  is  repressed  has  become  strong

enough to break through into waking life as a delusion, it may easily

have achieved a first success, under the more favourable conditions

of the state of sleep, in the form of a dream with persisting effects. For

during sleep, along with a general lowering of mental activity, there is

a relaxation in the strength of the resistance with which the dominantpsychical forces oppose what is repressed. It is this relaxation that

makes the formation of dreams possible, and that is why dreams give

us our best access to a knowledge of the unconscious part of the mind

-  except  that,  as  a  rule,  with  the  re-establishment  of  the  psychical

cathexes of waking life, the dream once more takes to flight and the

ground  that  had  been  won  by  the  unconscious  is  evacuated  once

again.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1859

 

                                            III

 

In the further course of the story there is yet another dream, which

may perhaps tempt us even more than the first to try to translate it and

insert it into the train of events in the hero’s mind. But we should save

very  little  by  diverging  from  the  author’s  account  and  hurrying  on

immediately to this second dream; for no one who wishes to analyse

some one else’s dream can avoid turning his attention in the greatest

detail to all the dreamer’s experiences, both external and internal. It

will probably be best, therefore, to keep close to the thread of the story

and to intersperse it with our glosses as we proceed.

 

   The construction of the fresh delusion about Gradiva’s death during

the destruction of Pompeii in the year 79 A.D. was not the only result

of the first dream, which we have already analysed. Immediately after

it Hanold decided on his journey to Italy, which eventually brought him

to Pompeii. But, before that, something else happened to him. As he

was leaning out of the window, he thought he saw a figure in the street

with the bearing and gait of his Gradiva. In spite of being insufficiently

dressed,  he  hurried  after  her,  but  failed  to  overtake  her,  and  was

driven back into the house by the jeers of the passers-by. When he

was in his room once more, the song of a canary from its cage in the

window of a house opposite stirred up in him a mood in which he too

seemed  to  be  a  prisoner  longing  for  freedom;  and  his  spring-time

journey was no sooner decided on than it was carried out. 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1860

 

   The author has thrown a particularly clear light on this journey of

Hanold’s and has allotted him to have a partial insight into his own

internal processes. Hanold of course found himself a scientific pretext

for his journey, but this did not last long. After all, he was in fact aware

that ‘the impulse to make this journey had arisen from a feeling he

could not name’. A strange restlessness made him dissatisfied with

everything he came across, and drove him from Rome to Naples and

from there to Pompeii; but even at this last halting-place he was still

uneasy  in  his  mood.  He  was  annoyed  at  the  folly  of  the

honeymooners,  and  enraged  at  the  impertinence  of  the  house-flies

which inhabit Pompeii’s hotels. But at last he could no longer disguise

from  himself  ‘that  his  dissatisfaction  could  not  be  caused  solely  by

what was around him but that there was something that sprang from

himself  as  well’.  He  thought  he  was  over-excited,  felt  ‘that  he  was

discontented because he lacked something, but he had no idea what.

And this ill-humour followed him about everywhere.’ In this frame of

mind he was even furious with his mistress - with Science. When in

the heat of the mid-day sun he wandered for the first time through

Pompeii, ‘the whole of his science had not merely abandoned him, but

had  left  him  without  the  slightest  desire  to  find  her  again.  He

remembered her only as something in the far distance, and he felt that

she  had  been  an  old,  dried-up,  tedious  aunt,  the  dullest  and  most

unwanted creature in the world.’ (55.)

   And then, while he was in this disagreeable and confused state of

feeling, one of the problems attaching to his journey was solved for

him  -  at  the  moment  when  he  first  saw  Gradiva  stepping  through

Pompeii. Something ‘came into his consciousness for the first time:

without being aware himself of the impulse within him, he had come to

Italy and had travelled on to Pompeii, without stopping in Rome or

Naples, in order to see whether he could find any traces of her. And

"traces" literally; for with her peculiar gait she must have left behind an

imprint of her toes in the ashes distinct from all the rest.’ (58.) 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1861

 

   Since the author has taken so much trouble over describing the

journey, it must be worth while too to discuss its relation to Hanold’s

delusion  and  its  position  in  the  chain  of  events.  The  journey  was

undertaken for reasons which its subject did not recognize at first and

only admitted to himself later on, reasons which the author describes

in so many words as ‘unconscious’. This is certainly taken from the

life. One does not need to be suffering from a delusion in order to

behave like this. On the contrary, it is an event of daily occurrence for

a person - even a healthy person - to deceive himself over the motives

for an action and to become conscious of them only after the event,

provided  only  that  a  conflict  between  several  currents  of  feeling

furnishes the necessary condition for such a confusion. Accordingly,

Hanold’s journey was from the first calculated to serve the delusion,

and was intended to take him to Pompeii, where he could proceed

further with his search for Gradiva. It will be recalled that his mind was

occupied  with  that  search  both  before  and  immediately  after  the

dream, and that the dream itself was simply an answer to the question

of Gradiva’s whereabouts, though an answer which was stifled by his

consciousness.  Some  power  which  we  do  not  recognize  was,

however, also inhibiting him to begin with from becoming aware of his

delusional intention; so that, for the conscious reasons for his journey,

he was left only with insufficient pretexts which had to be renewed

from place to place. The author presents us with a further puzzle by

making  the  dream,  the  discovery  of  the  supposed  Gradiva  in  the

street, and the decision to undertake the journey as a result of the

singing  canary  succeed  one  another  as  a  series  of  chance  events

without any internal connection with one another.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1862

 

   This obscure region of the story is made intelligible to us by someexplanations which we derive from the later remarks of Zoe Bertgang.

It  was  in  fact  the  original  of  Gradiva,  Fräulein  Zoe  herself,  whom

Hanold  saw  out  of  his  window  walking  past  in  the  street  (89.)  and

whom he nearly overtook. If this had happened, the information given

him by the dream - that she was in fact living at the same time and in

the same town as he was - would by a lucky chance have received an

irresistible confirmation, which would have brought about the collapse

of his internal struggle. But the canary, whose singing sent Hanold off

on  his  distant  journey,  belonged  to  Zoe,  and  its  cage  stood  in  her

window  diagonally  across  the  street  from  Hanold’s  house.  (135.)

Hanold,  who,  according  to  the  girl’s  accusation,  had  the  gift  of

‘negative hallucination’, who possessed the art of not seeing and not

recognizing  people  who  were  actually  present,  must  from  the  first

have had an unconscious knowledge of what we only learned later.

The indications of Zoe’s proximity (her appearance in the street and

her  bird’s  singing  so  near  his  window)  intensified  the  effect  of  the

dream, and in this position, so perilous for his resistance to his erotic

feelings, he took to flight. His journey was a result of his resistance

gathering new strength after the surge forward of his erotic desires in

the dream; it was an attempt at flight from the physical presence of the

girl he loved. In a practical sense it meant a victory for repression, just

as his earlier activity, his ‘pedestrian researches’ upon women and

girls,  had  meant  a  victory  for  erotism.  But  everywhere  in  these

oscillations in the struggle the compromise character of the outcome

was preserved: the journey to Pompeii, which was supposed to lead

him away from the living Zoe, led him at least to her surrogate, to

Gradiva. The journey which was undertaken in defiance of the latent

dream-thoughts, was nevertheless following the path to Pompeii that

was pointed out by the manifest content of the dream. Thus at every

fresh struggle between erotism and resistance we find the delusion

triumphant.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1863

 

   This view of Hanold’s journey as a flight from his awakening eroticlonging for the girl whom he loved and who was so close to him is the

only one which will fit in with the description of his emotional states

during his stay in Italy. The repudiation of erotism which dominated

him was expressed there in his disgust at the honeymooners. A short

dream  which  he  had  in  his albergo  in  Rome,  and  which  was

occasioned by the proximity of a German loving couple, ‘Edwin and

Angelina’,  whose  evening  conversation  he  could  not  help  hearing

through the thin partition-wall, throws a retrospective light, as it were,

on the erotic drift of his first major dream. In the new dream he was

once again in Pompeii and Vesuvius was once again erupting, and it

was thus linked to the earlier dream whose effects persisted during

the journey. This time, however, among the people imperilled were -

not, as on the former occasion, himself and Gradiva but - the Apollo

Belvedere and the Capitoline Venus, no doubt by way of an ironical

exaltation  of  the  couple  in  the  next  room.  Apollo  lifted  Venus  up,

carried her out, and laid her down on some object in the dark which

seemed to be a carriage or cart, since it emitted ‘a creaking noise’.

Apart from this, the interpretation of the dream calls for no special skill.

(31.)

   Our author, who, as we have long since realized, never introduces a

single idle or unintentional feature into history, has given us another

piece  of  evidence  of  the  asexual  current  which  dominated  Hanold

during  his  journey.  As  he  roamed  about  for  hours  in  Pompeii,

‘strangely enough it never once recurred to his memory that a short

time before he had dreamt of being present at the burial of Pompeii in

the  eruption  of  79  A.D.’  (47.)  It  was  only  when  he  caught  sight  of

Gradiva  that  he  suddenly  remembered  the  dream  and  became

conscious at the same time of the delusional reason for his puzzling

journey.  How  could  this  forgetting  of  the  dream,  this  barrier  of

repression  between  the  dream  and  his  mental  state  during  the

journey,  be  explained,  except  by  supposing  that  the  journey  was

undertaken not at the direct inspiration of the dream but as a revolt

against it, as an emanation of a mental power that refused to know

anything of the secret meaning of the dream?

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva                                                                                      1864

 

   But on the other hand Hanold did not enjoy this victory over his

erotism. The suppressed mental impulse remained powerful enough

to revenge itself on the suppressing one with discontent and inhibition.

His longings turned into restlessness and dissatisfaction, which made

his journey seem pointless to him. His insight into his reasons for the

journey at the bidding of the delusion was inhibited and his relations

with  his  science,  which  in  such  a  spot  should  have  stirred  all  his

interest, were interfered with. So the author shows us his hero after

his flight from love in a kind of crisis, in a state of complete confusion

and distraction, in a turmoil such as we usually find at the climax of an

illness, when neither of the two conflicting powers has any longer a

sufficiently superior strength over the other for the margin between

them to make it possible to establish a vigorous mental régime. But

here  the  author  intervenes  helpfully,  and  smoothes  things  out  by

making Gradiva appear at this juncture and undertake the cure of the

delusion.  By  the  power  he  possesses  of  guiding  the  people  of  his

creation towards a happy destiny, in spite of all the laws of necessity

which he makes them obey, he arranges that the girl, to avoid whom

Hanold had fled to Pompeii, shall be transported to that very place. In

this way he corrects the folly to which the young man was led by his

delusion - the folly of exchanging the home of the living girl whom he

loved for the burial-place of her imaginary substitute.

   With the appearance of Zoe Bertgang as Gradiva, which marks the

climax  of  tension  in  the  story,  our  interest,  too,  soon  takes  a  new

direction.  So  far  we  have  been  assisting  at  the  development  of  a

delusion; now we are to witness its cure. And we may ask whether the

author has given a purely fanciful account of the course of this cure or

whether he his constructed it in accordance with possibilities actually

present.  Zoe’s  own  words  during  her  conversation  with  her  newly-

married friend give us a definite right to ascribe to her an intention to

bring about the cure. (124.) But how did she set about it? When she

had got over the indignation aroused in her by his suggestion that she

should lie down to sleep again as she had ‘then’, she returned next

day at the same mid-day hour to the same spot, and proceeded to

entice out of Hanold all the secret knowledge her ignorance of whichhad prevented her from understanding his behaviour the day before.

She learnt about his dream, about the sculpture of Gradiva, and about

the peculiarity of gait which she herself shared with it. She accepted

the role of the ghost awakened to life for a brief hour, a role for which,

as she perceived, his delusion had cast her, and, by accepting the

flowers of the dead which he had brought without conscious purpose,

and by expressing a regret that he had not given her roses, she gently

hinted in ambiguous words at the possibility of his taking up a new

position. (90.)

      This  unusually  clever  girl,  then,  was  determined  to  win  her

childhood’s friend for her husband, after she had recognized that the

young man’s love for her was the motive force behind the delusion.

Our  interest  in  her  behaviour,  however,  will  probably  yield  for  the

moment to the surprise which we may feel at the delusion itself. The

last form taken by it was that Gradiva, who had been buried in 79

A.D., was now able, as a mid-day ghost, to exchange words with him

for an hour, at the end of which she must sink into the ground or seek

her grave once more. This mental cobweb, which was not brushed

away either by his perceiving that the apparition was wearing modern

shoes or by her ignorance of the ancient languages and her command

of German, which was not in existence in her day, certainly seems to

justify the author’s description of his story as a ‘Pompeian phantasy’,

but  it  seems  also  to  exclude  any  possibility  of  measuring  it  by  the

standards of clinical reality.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1865

 

      Nevertheless,  on  closer  consideration  this  delusion  of  Hanold’s

seems to me to lose the greater part of its improbability. The author,

indeed, has made himself responsible for one part of it by basing his

story on the premiss that Zoe was in every detail a duplicate of the

relief.  We  must  therefore  avoid  shifting  the  improbability  of  this

premiss on to its consequence - that Hanold took the girl for Gradiva

come to life. Greater value is given to the delusional explanation by

the  fact  that  the  author  has  put  no  rational  one  at  our  disposal.Moreover  the  author  has  adduced  contributory  and  mitigating

circumstances on behalf of his hero’s excesses in the shape of the

glare of the campagna sunlight and the intoxicating magic of the wine

grown on the slopes of Vesuvius. But the most important of all the

explanatory and exculpatory factors remains the ease with which our

intellect is prepared to accept something absurd provided it satisfies

powerful emotional impulses. It is an astonishing fact, and one that is

too  generally  overlooked,  how  readily  and  frequently  under  these

psychological conditions people of even the most powerful intelligence

react as though they were feeble-minded; and anyone who is not too

conceited may see this happening in himself as often as he pleases.

And this is far more so if some of the mental processes concerned are

linked with unconscious or repressed motives. In this connection I am

happy to quote the words of a philosopher, who writes to me: ‘I have

been  noting  down  the  instances  I  myself  experience  of  striking

mistakes  and  unthinking  actions,  for  which  one  finds  motives

afterwards (in a most unreasonable way). It is an alarming thing, but

typical,  to  find  how  much  folly  this  brings  to  light.’  It  must  be

remembered, too, that the belief in spirits and ghosts and the return of

the dead, which finds so much support in the religions to which we

have all been attached, at least in our childhood, is far from having

disappeared among educated people, and that many who are sensible

in other respects find it possible to combine spiritualism with reason. A

man who has grown rational and sceptical, even, may be ashamed to

discover how easily he may for a moment return to a belief in spirits

under the combined impact of strong emotion and perplexity. I know of

a doctor who had once lost one of his women patients suffering from

Graves’ disease, and who could not get rid of a faint suspicion that he

might  perhaps  have  contributed  to  the  unhappy  outcome  by  a

thoughtless prescription. One day, several years later, a girl entered

his consulting-room, who, in spite of all his efforts, he could not help

recognizing as the dead one. He could frame only a single thought:

‘So after all it’s true that the dead can come back to life.’ His dread did

not give way to shame till the girl introduced herself as the sister of the

one who had died of the same disease as she herself was suffering

from. The victims of Graves’ disease, as has often been observed,

have a marked facial resemblance to one another; and in this casethis  typical  likeness  was  reinforced  by  a  family  one.  The  doctor  to

whom this occurred was, however, none other than myself; so I have

a personal reason for not disputing the clinical possibility of Norbert

Hanold’s temporary delusion that Gradiva had come back to life. The

fact,  finally,  is  familiar  to  every  psychiatrist  that  in  severe  cases  of

chronic delusions (in paranoia) the most extreme examples occur of

ingeniously elaborated and well-supported absurdities.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1866

 

   After his first meeting with Gradiva, Norbert Hanold had drunk his

wine first in one and then in the other of the two restaurants that he

knew in Pompeii, while the other visitors were engaged in eating the

main meal of the day. ‘Of course it never came into his head to think

of the nonsensical idea’ that he was doing it in order to discover in

which of the hotels Gradiva was living and taking her meals. But it is

difficult to say what other sense his actions could have had. On the

day after their second meeting in the House of Meleager, he had all

kinds of strange and apparently unconnected experiences. He found a

narrow gap in the wall of the portico, at the point where Gradiva had

disappeared. He met a foolish lizard-catcher who addressed him as

though he were an acquaintance. He discovered a third hotel, in an

out-of-the-way  situation,  the  ‘Albergo  del  Sole’,  whose  proprietor

palmed off on him a metal clasp with a green patina as a find from

beside the remains of a Pompeian girl. And, lastly, in his own hotel he

noticed  a  newly-arrived  young  couple  whom  he  diagnosed  as  a

brother  and  sister  and  whom  he  found  sympathetic.  All  these

impressions  were  afterwards  woven  together  into  a  ‘remarkably

senseless’ dream, which ran as follows:

   ‘Somewhere in the sun Gradiva was sitting, making a snare out of a

blade of grass to catch a lizard in, and said: "Please keep quite still.

Our lady colleague is right; the method is a really good one and she

has made use of it with excellent results."'

   He fended off this dream while he was still asleep, with the critical

thought that it was utter madness, and cast around in all directions toget free from it. He succeeded in doing so with the help of an invisible

bird, which uttered a short laughing call and carried off the lizard in its

beak.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1867

 

 

   Are we to venture on an attempt at interpreting this dream too - that

is, at replacing it by the latent thoughts from whose distortion it must

have arisen? It is as senseless as only a dream can be expected to

be; and this absurdity of dreams is the mainstay of the view which

refuses to characterize dreams as completely valid psychical acts and

maintains  that  they  arise  out  of  a  purposeless  excitation  of  the

elements of the mind.

   We are able to apply to this dream the technique which may be

described as the regular procedure for interpreting dreams. It consists

in  paying  no  attention  to  the  apparent  connections  in  the  manifest

dream  but  in  fixing  our  eyes  upon  each  portion  of  its  content

independently,  and  in  looking  for  its  origin  in  the  dreamer’s

impressions,  memories,  and  free  associations.  Since,  however,  we

cannot  question  Hanold,  we  shall  have  to  content  ourselves  with

referring to his impressions, and we may very tentatively put our own

association in place of his.

   ‘Somewhere in the sun Gradiva was sitting, catching lizards and

speaking.’ What impression of the previous day finds an echo in this

part  of  the  dream?  Undoubtedly  the  encounter  with  the  elderly

gentleman, the lizard-catcher, who was thus replaced in the dream by

Gradiva. He sat or lay ‘on a sun-bathed slope’ and he, too, spoke to

Hanold.  Furthermore,  Gradiva’s  remarks  in  the  dream  were  copied

from this man’s remarks: viz. ‘The method prescribed by our colleague

Eimer is a really good one; I have made use of it many times already

with excellent results. Please keep quite still.’ Gradiva used much the

same  words  in  the  dream,  except  that    ‘our  colleague  Eimer’  was

replaced by an unnamed ‘lady colleague’; moreover, the ‘many times’

in the zoologist’s speech was omitted in the dream and the order ofthe sentences was somewhat altered. It seems, therefore, that this

experience of the previous day was transformed into the dream with

the  help  of  a  few  changes  and  distortions.  Why  this  particular

experience?  And  what  is  the  meaning  of  the  changes  -  the

replacement of the elderly gentleman by Gradiva and the introduction

of the enigmatic ‘lady colleague’?

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1868

 

      There  is  a  rule  in  interpreting  dreams  which  runs  as  follows:  ‘A

speech heard in a dream is always derived from one that has been

heard or made by the dreamer in waking life.’ This rule seems to have

been observed here: Gradiva’s speech is only a modification of the old

zoologist’s speech which Hanold had heard the day before. Another

rule  in  dream-interpretation  would  tell  us  that  when  one  person  is

replaced by another or when two people are mixed up together (for

instance,  by  one  of  them  being  shown  in  a  situation  that  is

characteristic of the other), it means that the two people are being

equated, that there is a similarity between them. If we venture to apply

this rule too to our dream, we should arrive at this translation: ‘Gradiva

catches lizards just like the old man; she is skilled in lizard-catching

just as he is.’ This result cannot exactly be said to be intelligible as

yet; but we have yet another puzzle to solve. To what impression of

the  previous  day  are  we  to  relate  the  ‘lady  colleague’  who  in  the

dream  replaces  the  famous  zoologist  Eimer?  Fortunately  we  have

very little choice here. A ‘lady colleague’ can only mean another girl -

that  is  to  say,  represents/represented  the  sympathetic  young  lady

whom Hanold had taken for a sister travelling with her brother. ‘She

was  wearing  a  red  Sorrento  rose  in  her  dress,  the  sight  of  which

reminded him of something as he looked across from his corner of the

dining-room, but he could not think what.’ This remark of the author’s

gives us a right to regard her as the ‘lady colleague’ in the dream.

What Hanold could not recall were, it cannot be doubted, the words

spoken by the supposed Gradiva, who had told him, as she asked him

for the white flowers of the dead, that in the spring people give happiergirls roses. But behind those words there had lain a hint of wooing. So

what sort of lizard-catching was it that the happier ‘lady colleague’ had

carried out so successfully?

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1869

 

   Next day Hanold came upon the supposed brother and sister in an

affectionate embrace, and was thus able to correct his earlier mistake.

They were in fact a pair of lovers, and moreover on their honeymoon,

as  we  discovered  later  when  they  so  unexpectedly  interrupted

Hanold’s third interview with Zoe. If now we are willing to assume that

Hanold, though consciously taking them for a brother and sister, had

immediately  recognized  their  true  relationship  (which  was

unambiguously  betrayed  next  day)  in  his  unconscious,  Gradiva’s

speech  in  the  dream  acquires  a  clear  meaning.  The  red  rose  had

become  the  symbol  of  a  love-relation.  Hanold  understood  that  the

couple  were  already  what  he  and  Gradiva  had  yet  to  become;  the

lizard-catching  had  come  to  signify  man-catching;  and  Gradiva’s

speech meant something like: ‘Only let me alone: I know how to win a

man just as well as the other girl does.’

   But why was it necessary for this penetration of Zoe’s intentions to

appear in the dream in the form of the old zoologist’s speech?   the old

gentleman’s skill in lizard-catching? Well, we can have no difficulty in

answering that question. We guessed long ago that the lizard-catcher

was none other than Bertgang, the professor of Zoology and Zoe’s

father,  who,  incidentally,  must  have  known  Hanold  too  -  which

explains  how  he  came  to  address  him  as  an  acquaintance.  Let  us

assume,  once  again,  that  in  his  unconscious  Hanold  at  once

recognized the Professor. ‘He had a vague notion that he had already

had a passing glimpse of the lizard hunter’s face, probably in one of

the two hotels.’ This, then, is the explanation of the strange disguise

under which the intention attributed to Zoe made its appearance: she

was the lizard-catcher’s daughter and had acquired her skill from him.

                   Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1870

 

   The replacement of the lizard-catcher by Gradiva in the content of

the dream is accordingly a representation of the relation between the

two  figures  which  was  known  to  Hanold  in  his  unconscious;  the

introduction  of  the  ‘lady  colleague’  instead  of  ‘our  colleague  Eimer’

allowed  the  dream  to  express  Hanold’s  realization  that  she  was

wooing a man. So far the dream welded together (‘condensed’, as we

say) two experiences of the previous day into one situation, in order to

bring to expression (in a very obscure way, it is true) two discoveries

which were not allotted to become conscious. But we can go further,

we can diminish the strangeness of the dream still more and we can

demonstrate the influence of his other experiences of the previous day

on the form taken by the manifest dream.

   We may declare ourselves dissatisfied with the explanation that has

hitherto been given of why it was that precisely the scene of the lizard-

catching  was  made  into  the  nucleus  of  the  dream,  and  we  may

suspect that still other elements of the dream-thoughts were bringing

their influence to bear in the emphasis that was laid on the ‘lizard’ in

the  manifest  dream.  Indeed,  it  may  easily  have  been  so.  It  will  be

recalled  that  Hanold  had  discovered  a  gap  in  the  wall  at  the  point

where Gradiva had seemed to vanish - a gap ‘which was nevertheless

wide enough to allow a form that was unusually slim’ to slip through.

This  observation  led  him  in  daytime  to  make  an  alteration  in  his

delusion - an alteration to the effect that when Gradiva disappeared

from his sight she did not sink into the earth but used the gap as a

way of reaching her grave. In his unconscious thoughts he may have

told himself that he had now discovered the natural explanation of the

girl’s  surprising  disappearance.  But  must  not  the  idea  of  slipping

through  narrow  gaps  and  disappearing  in  them  have  recalled  the

behaviour of lizards? Was not Gradiva herself in this way behaving

like an agile little lizard? In our view, then, the discovery of the gap in

the wall contributed to determining the choice of the element ‘lizard’ in

the manifest content of the dream. The lizard situation in the dream

represented  this  impression  of  the  previous  day  as  well  as  the

encounter with Zoe’s father, the zoologist. 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1871

 

      And  what  if  now,  growing  bold,  we  were  to  try  to  find  a

representation in the content of the dream of the one experience of

the previous day which has not yet been exploited - the discovery of

the  third  inn,  the  Albergo  del  Sole?  The  author  has  treated  this

episode  at  such  length  and  has  linked  so  many  things  to  it  that  it

would  surprise  us  if  it  alone  had  made  no  contribution  to  the

construction of the dream. Hanold went into this inn, which, owing to

its out-of-the-way situation and its distance from the railway station,

had remained unknown to him, to purchase a bottle of soda-water to

cool his heated blood. The landlord took the opportunity of displaying

his  antiquities,  and  showed  him  a  clasp  which  the  pretended  had

belonged  to  the  Pompeian  girl  who  had  been  found  in  the

neighbourhood of the Forum closely embraced by her lover. Hanold,

who  had  never  hitherto  believed  this  often-repeated  tale,  was  now

compelled by a power unknown to him to believe in the truth of this

moving story and in the genuineness of the find; he purchased the

brooch and left the inn with his acquisition. As he was going out, he

saw,  standing  in  a  glass  of  water  in  a  window,  a  nodding  sprig  of

asphodel covered with white blossoms, and took the sight of it as a

confirmation of the genuineness of his new possession. He now felt a

positive conviction that the green clasp had belonged to Gradiva and

that  she  had  been  the  girl  who  had  died  in  her  lover’s  arms.  He

quieted  the  jealousy  which  thereupon  seized  him,  by  deciding  that

next day he would show the clasp to Gradiva herself and arrive at

certainty  about  his  suspicion.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  this  was  a

curious new piece of delusion; yet are we to suppose that no trace of it

was to be found in his dream of the same night?

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1872

 

   It will certainly be worth while to explain the origin of this addition tothe delusion and to look for the fresh piece of unconscious discovery

which  was  replaced  by  the  fresh  piece  of  delusion.  The  delusion

appeared  under  the  influence  of  the  landlord  of  the  ‘Sun  Hotel’  to

whom Hanold behaved in such a remarkably credulous fashion that it

was almost as though he had been given a hypnotic suggestion by

him.  The  landlord  showed  him  a  metal  clasp  for  a  garment,

represented it as genuine and as having belonged to the girl who had

been  found  buried  in  the  arms  of  her  lover;  and  Hanold,  who  was

capable of being sufficiently critical to doubt both the truth of the story

and  the  genuineness  of  the  clasp,  was  at  once  taken  in,  and

purchased the highly dubious antique. Why he should have behaved

in this way is quite incomprehensible, and there is nothing to suggest

that the landlord’s personality might offer us a solution. But there is yet

another  riddle  about  the  incident,  and  two  riddles  often  solve  each

other.  As  he  was  leaving  the albergo  he  saw  a  sprig  of  asphodel

standing in a glass in a window and took it as a confirmation of the

genuineness of the metal clasp. How could that have come about?

But fortunately this last point is easy to solve. The white flower was no

doubt the one which he had given to Gradiva at mid-day, and it is

perfectly true that something was confirmed by the sight of it in the

window of the inn. Not, it is true, the genuineness of the clasp, but

something  else  that  had  already  become  clear  to  him  when  he

discovered this albergo after having previously overlooked it. Already

on the day before he had behaved as though he was searching in the

two  Pompeii  hotels  to  find  the  person  who  appeared  to  him  as

Gradiva. And now, since he had so unexpectedly come upon a third

one, he must have said to himself in his unconscious: ‘So this is where

she is staying!’ And added, as he was going out: ‘Yes, that’s right!

There’s the asphodel that I gave her! So that’s her window!’ This then

was the new discovery which was replaced by the delusion, and which

could  not  become  conscious  because  its  underlying  postulate  that

Gradiva  was  a  living  person  whom  he  had  once  known  could  not

become conscious.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1873 

   But how did the replacement of the new discovery by the delusion

take place? What happened, I think, was that the sense of conviction

attaching to the discovery was able to persist and was retained, while

the  discovery  itself,  which  was  inadmissible  to  consciousness,  was

replaced  by  another  ideational  content  connected  with  it  by

associations  of  thought.  Thus  the  sense  of  conviction  became

attached to a content which was in fact foreign to it and this, in the

form of a delusion, won a recognition which did not apply to it. Hanold

transferred  his  conviction  that  Gradiva  lived  in  the  house  to  other

impressions  which  he  had  received  in  the  house;  this  led  to  his

credulity in regard to the landlord’s remarks, the genuineness of the

metal clasp and the truth of the anecdote about the discovery of the

embracing lovers - but only through his linking what he heard in the

house  with  Gradiva.  The  jealousy  which  was  already  latent  in  him

seized  upon  this  material  and  the  consequence  was  the  delusion

(though it contradicted his first dream) that Gradiva was the girl who

had died in her lover’s arms and that the clasp he had bought had

belonged to her.

   It will be observed that his conversation with Gradiva and her hint at

wooing him (her ‘saying it with flowers’) had already brought about

important changes in Hanold. Traits of masculine desire - components

of the libido - had awakened in him, though it is true that they could

not  yet  dispense  with  the  disguise  of  conscious  pretexts.  But  the

problem of the ‘bodily nature’ of Gradiva, which pursued him all that

day, cannot disavow its origin in a young man’s erotic curiosity about a

woman’s  body,  even  if  it  is  involved  in  a  scientific  question  by  the

conscious insistence on Gradiva’s peculiar oscillation between death

and  life.  His  jealousy  was  a  further  sign  of  the  increasingly  active

aspect of Hanold’s love; he expressed this jealousy at the beginning of

their conversation the next day and with the help of a fresh pretext

proceeded to touch the girl’s body and, as he used to do in the far-off

past, to hit her.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1874 

 

      But  it  is  now  time  to  ask  ourselves  whether  the  method  of

constructing  a  delusion  which  we  have  inferred  from  our  author’s

account is one that is known from other sources, or whether, indeed, it

is possible at all. From our medical knowledge we can only reply that it

is  certainly  the  correct  method,  and  perhaps  the  sole  method,  by

which a delusion acquires the unshakable conviction which is one of

its clinical characteristics. If a patient believes in his delusion so firmly,

this is not because his faculty of judgement has been overturned and

does not arise from what is false in the delusion. On the contrary,

there  is  a  grain  of  truth  concealed  in  every  delusion,  there  is

something in it that really deserves belief, and this is the source of the

patient’s conviction, which is therefore to that extent justified. This true

element, however, has long been repressed. If eventually it is able to

penetrate into consciousness, this time in a distorted form, the sense

of conviction attaching to it is over-intensified as though by way of

compensation and is now attached to the distorted substitute of the

repressed  truth,  and  protects  it  from  any  critical  attacks.  The

conviction is displaced, as it were, from the unconscious truth on to

the  conscious  error  that  is  linked  to  it,  and  remains  fixated  there

precisely  as  a  result  of  this  displacement.  The  instance  of  the

formation of a delusion which arose from Hanold’s first dream is no

more  than  a  similar,  though  not  identical,  example  of  such  a

displacement. Indeed, the method described here by which conviction

arises in the case of a delusion does not differ fundamentally from the

method  by  which  a  conviction  is  formed  in  normal  cases,  where

repression does not come into the picture. We all attach our conviction

to thought-contents in which truth is combined with error, and let it

extend from the former over the latter. It becomes diffused, as it were,

from the truth over the error associated with it and protects the latter,

though  not  so  unalterably  as  in  the  case  of  a  delusion,  against

deserved criticism. In normal psychology, too, being well-connected -

‘having influence’, so to speak - can take the place of true worth.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva                                                                                      1875

 

 

      I  will  now  return  to  the  dream  and  bring  out  a  small  but  not

uninteresting feature in it, which forms a connection between two of its

provoking causes. Gradiva had drawn a kind of contrast between the

white asphodel blossoms and the red rose. Seeing the asphodel again

in the window of the Albergo del Sole became an important piece of

evidence  in  support  of  Hanold’s  unconscious  discovery,  which  was

expressed in the new delusion; and alongside this was the fact that

the red rose in the dress of the sympathetic girl helped Hanold in his

unconscious to a correct view of her relation to her companion, so that

he was able to make her appear in the dream as the ‘lady colleague’.

   But where in the manifest content of the dream, it will be asked, do

we find anything to indicate and replace the discovery for which, as we

have seen, Hanold’s new delusion was a substitute - the discovery

that  Gradiva  was  staying  with  her  father  in  the  third,  concealed

Pompeii hotel, the Albergo del Sole? Nevertheless it is all there in the

dream, and not even very much distorted, and I merely hesitate to

point to it because I know that even those of my readers who have

followed me patiently so far will begin to rebel strongly against my

attempts  at  interpretation.  Hanold’s  discovery,  I  repeat,  is  fully

announced in the dream, but so cleverly concealed that it is bound to

be overlooked. It is hidden behind a play upon words, an ambiguity.

‘Somewhere in the sun Gradiva was sitting.’ We have quite correctly

related this to the spot where Hanold met her father, the zoologist. But

could it not also mean in the ‘Sun’ - that is, Gradiva is staying in the

Albergo del Sole, the Sun Hotel? And was not the ‘somewhere’, which

had no bearing on the encounter with her father, made to sound so

hypocritically indefinite precisely because it introduced a definite piece

of information about the place where Gradiva was staying? From my

experience elsewhere of real dreams, I myself am perfectly certain

that this is how the ambiguity is to be understood. But I should not in

fact have ventured to present this piece of interpretative work to my

readers,  if  the  author  had  not  at  this  point  lent  me  his  powerful

assistance.  He  puts  the  very  same  play  upon  words  into  the  girl’s

mouth when next day she saw the metal clasp: ‘Did you find it in thesun, perhaps, which produces things of this kind?’ And since Hanold

failed to understand what she had said, she explained that she meant

the Sun Hotel, which they call ‘Sole’ here, and where she had already

seen the supposititious antique.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1876

 

      And  now  let  us  make  a  bold  attempt  at  replacing  Hanold’s

‘remarkably senseless’ dream by the unconscious thoughts that lay

behind  it  and  were  as  unlike  it  as  possible.  They  ran,  perhaps,  as

follows: ‘She is staying in the "Sun" with her father. Why is she playing

this game with me? Does she want to make fun of me? Or can it

possibly be that she loves me and wants to have me as her husband?’

-  And  no  doubt  while  he  was  still  asleep  there  came  an  answer

dismissing this last possibility as ‘the merest madness’, a comment

which was ostensibly directed against the whole manifest dream.

      Critical  readers  will  now  justly  enquire  about  the  origin  of  the

interpolation  (for  which  I  have  so  far  given  no  grounds)  of  the

reference to being ridiculed by Gradiva. The answer to this is given in

The Interpretation of Dreams, which explains that if ridicule, derision,

or  embittered  contradiction  occurs  in  the  dream-thoughts,  this  is

expressed by the manifest dream being given a senseless form, by

absurdity in the dream. This absurdity does not mean, therefore, that

there  is  any  paralysis  of  psychical  activity:  it  is  a  method  of

representation employed by the dream-work. As always happens at

specially difficult points, the author once more comes to our help here.

The senseless dream had a short epilogue, in which a bird uttered a

laughing call and carried the lizard away in its beak. But Hanold had

heard a similar laughing call after Gradiva’s disappearance. It had in

fact come from Zoe, who with this laugh was shaking off the gloomy

seriousness of her underworld role. Gradiva had really laughed at him.

But the dream-image of the bird carrying off the lizard may have been

a  recollection  of  the  earlier  dream,  in  which  the  Apollo  Belvedere

carried off the Capitoline Venus.

                   Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1877

 

   There may still be some readers who feel that the translation of the

situation  of  lizard-catching  by  the  idea  of  wooing  has  not  been

sufficiently  well  established.  Some  further  support  for  it  may  be

afforded by the consideration that Zoe in her conversation with her

newly-married friend admitted precisely what Hanold’s thoughts about

her suspected - when she told her she had felt sure that she would

‘dig out’ something interesting in Pompeii. Here she was trespassing

into the field of archaeology, just as he had trespassed, with his simile

of lizard-catching, into the field of zoology; it was as though they were

struggling towards each other and each were trying to assume the

other’s character.

 

   Here then we seem to have finished off the interpretation of this

second dream as well. Both of them have been made intelligible to us

on  the  presupposition  that  a  dreamer  knows  in  his  unconscious

thoughts all that he has forgotten in his conscious ones, and that in

the former he judges correctly what in the latter he misunderstands in

a delusion. In the course of our arguments we have no doubt been

obliged to make some assertions which have seemed strange to the

reader  because  of  their  unfamiliarity;  and  we  have  probably  often

roused a suspicion that what we pretended was the author’s meaning

was in fact only our own. I am anxious to do all I can to dissipate this

suspicion, and for that reason I will gladly enter into more detail over

one of the most delicate points - I mean the use of ambiguous words

and phrases, such as: ‘Somewhere in the Sun Gradiva was sitting.’

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1878

 

   Anyone who reads Gradiva must be struck by the frequency with

which the author puts ambiguous remarks into the mouths of his two

principal characters. In Hanold’s case these remarks are intended by

him unambiguously and it is only the heroine, Gradiva, who is struck

by their second meaning. Thus, for instance, when in reply to her firstanswer he exclaimed ‘I knew your voice sounded like that’, Zoe, who

was still in ignorance, could not but ask how that could be, since he

had not heard her speak before. In their second conversation the girl

was for a moment thrown into doubt about his delusion, when he told

her that he had recognized her at once. She could not help taking

these  words  in  the  sense  (correct  so  far  as  his  unconscious  was

concerned) of being a recognition that their acquaintance went back to

their  childhood;  whereas  he,  of  course,  knew  nothing  of  this

implication  of  his  remark  and  explained  it  only  by  reference  to  his

dominant delusion. On the other hand, the remarks made by the girl,

whose personality shows the most lucid clarity of mind in contrast to

Hanold’s  delusion,  exhibit  an intentional  ambiguity.  One  of  their

meanings  chimes  in  with  Hanold’s  delusion,  so  as  to  be  able  to

penetrate into his conscious understanding, but the other rises above

the delusion and gives us as a rule its translation into the unconscious

truth for which it stands. It is a triumph of ingenuity and wit to be able

to express the delusion and the truth in the same turn of words.

   Zoe’s speech in which she explains the situation to her friend and at

the  same  time  succeeds  in  getting  rid  of  the  interrupter  is  full  of

ambiguities of this kind. It is in reality a speech made by the author

and aimed more at the reader than at Zoe’s newly-married ‘colleague’.

In her conversations with Hanold the ambiguity is usually effected by

Zoe’s using the same symbolism that we found in Hanold’s first dream

- the equation of repression and burial, and of Pompeii and childhood.

Thus she is able in her speeches on the one hand to remain in the

role for which Hanold’s delusion has cast her, and on the other hand

to  make  contact  with  the  real  circumstances  and  awaken  an

understanding of them in Hanold’s unconscious.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1879

 

   ‘I have long grown used to being dead.’ (90.) ‘To me it is right that

you should give the flower of forgetfulness.’ [Ibid.] In these sentences

there was a faint foretaste of the reproaches which broke out clearly

enough later on in her final lecture to him, in which she compared himto an archaeopteryx. ‘The fact of someone having to die so as to come

alive; but no doubt that must be so for archaeologists.’ She made this

last remark after the delusion had been cleared up, as though to give

a key to her ambiguous speeches. But she made her neatest use of

her symbolism when she asked: ‘I feel as though we had shared a

meal  like  this  once  before,  two  thousand  years  ago;  can’t  you

remember?’  (118.)  Here  the  substitution  of  the  historical  past  for

childhood and the effort to awaken the memory of the latter are quite

unmistakable.

   But whence comes this striking preference for ambiguous speeches

in Gradiva? It is no chance event, so it seems to us, but a necessary

consequence of the premisses of the story. It is nothing other than a

counterpart  to  the  twofold  determination  of  symptoms,  in  so  far  as

speeches  are  themselves  symptoms  and,  like  them,  arise  from

compromises between the conscious and the unconscious. It is simply

that  this  double  origin  is  more  easily  noticed  in  speeches  than,  for

instance,  in  actions.  And  when,  as  is  often  made  possible  by  the

malleable nature of the material of speech, each of the two intentions

lying behind the speech can be successfully expressed in the same

turn of words, we have before us what we call an ‘ambiguity’.

   In the course of the psychotherapeutic treatment of a delusion or of

an  analogous  disorder,  ambiguous  speeches  of  this  kind  are  often

produced by the patient, as new symptoms of the briefest duration;

and it can happen that the doctor finds himself too in the position of

making use of them. In that way it not infrequently happens that with

the meaning that is intended for the patient’s conscious he stirs up an

understanding of the meaning that applies to his unconscious. I know

from experience that the part thus played by ambiguity is apt to raise

the greatest objection in the uninitiated and to give rise to the greatest

misunderstandings. But in any case our author was right in giving a

place in his creation to a picture of this characteristic feature of what

takes place in the formation of dreams and delusions.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1880

                                             IV

 

The emergence of Zoe as a physician, as I have already remarked,

arouses a new interest in us. We shall be anxious to learn whether a

cure of the kind she performed upon Hanold is conceivable or even

possible, and whether the author has taken as correct a view of the

conditions for the disappearance of a delusion as he has of those for

its genesis.

   We shall unquestionably be met at this point by an opinion which

denies  that  the  case  presented  by  the  author  possesses  any  such

general interest and disputes the existence of any problem requiring

solution. Hanold, it will be said, had no alternative but to abandon his

delusion, after its subject, the supposed ‘Gradiva’ herself, had shown

him that all his hypotheses were incorrect and after she had given him

the most natural explanations of everything puzzling - for instance, of

how it was that she had known his name. This would be the logical

end of the matter; but since the girl had incidentally revealed her love

to him, the author, no doubt to the satisfaction of his female readers,

arranged that his story, a not uninteresting one otherwise, should have

the  usual  happy  ending  in  marriage.  It  would  have  been  more

consistent  and  equally  possible,  the  argument  will  proceed,  if  the

young scientist, after his error had been pointed out, had taken his

leave  of  the  lady  with  polite  thanks  and  given  as  the  reason  for

refusing her love the fact that he was able to feel an intense interest in

antique women made of bronze or marble, and in their originals if they

were accessible to contact, but that he did not know what to do with

contemporary girls of flesh and blood. The author, in short, had quite

arbitrarily tacked a love story on to his archaeological phantasy.

   In rejecting this view as an impossible one, we observe in the first

place that the beginnings of a change in Hanold were not shown only

in his abandoning his delusion. Simultaneously, and indeed before his

delusion was cleared up, an unmistakable craving for love awakened

in him, which found its outcome, naturally as it were, in his courting

the girl who had freed him from his delusion. We have already laid

emphasis  on  the  pretexts  and  disguises  under  which  his  curiosity

about her ‘bodily nature’, his jealousy, and his brutal masculine instinct

for  mastery  were  expressed  in  the  midst  of  his  delusion,  after  hisrepressed erotic desire had led to his first dream. As further evidence

of this we may recall that on the evening after his second interview

with Gradiva a live woman for the first time struck him as sympathetic,

though  he  still  made  a  concession  to  his  earlier  horror  of

honeymooning  couples  by  not  recognizing  her  as  being  newly

married.  Next  morning,  however,  he  was  a  chance  witness  of  an

exchange of endearments between the girl and her supposed brother,

and he withdrew with a sense of awe as though he had interrupted

some sacred act. His derision of ‘ Edwin and Angelina’ was forgotten,

and he had acquired a sense of respect for the erotic side of life.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1881

 

   Thus the author has drawn the closest link between the clearing up

of the delusion and the outbreak of a craving for love, and he has

paved the way for the inevitable outcome in a courtship. He knows the

essential nature of the delusion better than his critics: he knows that a

component  of  loving  desire  had  combined  with  a  component  of

resistance to it in bringing about the delusion, and he makes the girl

who undertakes the cure sensitive to the element in Hanold’s delusion

which  is  agreeable  to  her.  It  was  only  this  knowledge  which  could

decide her to devote herself to the treatment; it was only the certainty

of being loved by him that could induce her to admit her love to him.

The treatment consisted in giving him back from outside the repressed

memories which he could not set free from inside; but it would have

had  no  effect  if  in  the  course  of  it  the  therapist  had  not  taken  his

feelings into account and if her ultimate translation of the delusion had

not been: ‘Look, all this only means that you love me.

   The procedure which the author makes his Zoe adopt for curing her

childhood  friend’s  delusion  shows  a  far-reaching  similarity  -  no,  a

complete agreement in its essence - with a therapeutic method which

was introduced into medical practice in 1895 by Dr. Josef Breuer and

myself,  and  to  the  perfecting  of  which  I  have  since  then  devoted

myself. This method of treatment, to which Breuer first gave the name

of ‘cathartic’ but which I prefer to describe as ‘analytic’, consists, asapplied  to  patients  suffering  from  disorders  analogous  to  Hanold’s

delusion, in bringing to their consciousness, to some extent forcibly,

the unconscious whose repression led to their falling ill - exactly as

Gradiva did with the repressed memories of their childhood relations.

Gradiva, it is true, could carry out this task more easily than a doctor:

in several respects she was in what may be described as an ideal

position for it. The doctor, who has no pre-existing knowledge of his

patient and possesses no conscious memory of what is unconsciously

at work in him, must call a complicated technique to his help in order

to  make  up  for  this  disadvantage.  He  must  learn  how  to  infer  with

great certainty from the conscious associations and communications

of  the  patient  what  is  repressed  in  him,  how  to  discover  his

unconscious as it betrays itself behind his conscious words and acts.

He then brings about something like what Norbert Hanold grasped at

the end of the story when he translated back the name ‘Gradiva’ into

‘Bertgang’. The disorder vanishes while being traced back to its origin;

analysis, too, brings simultaneous cure.

      But  the  similarity  between  Gradiva’s  procedure  and  the  analytic

method  of  psychotherapy  is  not  limited  to  these  two  points  -  the

making conscious of what has been repressed and the coinciding of

explanation  with  cure.  It  also  extends  to  what  turns  out  to  be  the

essence of the whole change - to the awakening of feelings. Every

disorder analogous to Hanold’s delusion, what in scientific terms we

are in the habit of calling ‘psychoneuroses’, has as its precondition the

repression of a portion of instinctual life, or, as we can safely say, of

the sexual instinct. At every attempt to introduce the unconscious and

repressed  causes  of  the  illness  into  consciousness,  the  instinctual

component concerned is necessarily aroused to a renewed struggle

with the repressing powers, only to come to terms with them in the

final outcome, often to the accompaniment of violent manifestations of

reaction. The process of cure is accomplished in a relapse into love, if

we combine all the many components of the sexual instinct under the

term ‘love’; and such a relapse is indispensable, for the symptoms on

account of which the treatment has been undertaken are nothing other

than precipitates of earlier struggles connected with repression or the

return of the repressed, and they can only be resolved and washed

away by a fresh high tide of the same passions. Every psycho-analytictreatment is an attempt at liberating repressed love which has found a

meagre  outlet  in  the  compromise  of  a  symptom.  Indeed,  the

agreement  between  such  treatments  and  the  process  of  cure

described by the author of Gradiva reaches its climax in the further

fact  that  in  analytic  psychotherapy  too  the  re-awakened  passion,

whether it is love or hate, invariably chooses as its object the figure of

the doctor.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1882

 

   It is here that the differences begin, which made the case of Gradiva

an ideal one which medical technique cannot attain. Gradiva was able

to return the love which was making its way from the unconscious into

consciousness, but the doctor cannot. Gradiva had herself been the

object of the earlier, repressed love; her figure at once offered the

liberated  current  of  love  a  desirable  aim.  The  doctor  has  been  a

stranger, and must endeavour to become a stranger once more after

the cure; he is often at a loss what advice to give the patients he has

cured as to how in real life they can use their recovered capacity to

love. To indicate the expedients and substitutes of which the doctor

therefore makes use to help him to approximate with more or less

success to the model of a cure by love which has been shown us by

our author - all this would take us much too far away from the task

before us.

 

      And  now  for  the  final  question,  whose  answer  we  have  already

evaded more than once. Our views on repression, on the genesis of

delusions  and  allied  disorders,  on  the  formation  and  solution  of

dreams, on the part played by erotic life, and on the method by which

such disorders are cured, are far from being the common property of

science, let alone the assured possession of educated people. If the

insight  which  has  enabled  the  author  to  construct  his  ‘phantasy’  in

such a way that we have been able to dissect it like a real case history

is in the nature of knowledge, we should be curious to learn what were

the sources of that knowledge. One of our circle - the one who, as Isaid at the beginning, was interested in the dreams in Gradiva and

their possible interpretation - approached the author with the direct

question  whether  he  knew  anything  of  such  scientific  theories  as

these. The author replied, as was to be expected, in the negative, and,

indeed, somewhat brusquely. His imagination, he said, had inspired

Gradiva, and he had enjoyed it; if there was anyone whom it did not

please,  let  him  simply  leave  it  alone.  He  had  no  suspicion  of  how

greatly it had in fact pleased his readers.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1883

 

   It is quite possible that the author’s disavowal does not stop at this.

He may perhaps altogether deny any knowledge of the rules which we

have  shown  that  he  has  followed,  and  he  may  repudiate  all  the

purposes  we  have  recognized  in  his  work.  I  do  not  regard  this  as

improbable; but if it is so, there are only two possible explanations. It

may  be  that  we  have  produced  a  complete  caricature  of  an

interpretation by introducing into an innocent work of art purposes of

which its creator had no notion, and by so doing have shown once

more  how  easy  it  is  to  find  what  one  is  looking  for  and  what  is

occupying  one’s  own  mind  -  a  possibility  of  which  the  strangest

examples are to be found in the history of literature. Let every reader

now make up his mind whether he is able to accept this explanation.

We  ourselves,  of  course,  hold  to  the  other  view,  the  remaining

alternative. Our opinion is that the author need have known nothing of

these  rules  and  purposes,  so  that  he  could  disavow  them  in  good

faith, but that nevertheless we have not discovered anything in his

work that is not already in it. We probably draw from the same source

and work upon the same object, each of us by another method. And

the agreement of our results seems to guarantee that we have both

worked correctly. Our procedure consists in the conscious observation

of abnormal mental processes in other people so as to be able to elicit

and announce their laws. The author no doubt proceeds differently.

He directs his attention to the unconscious in his own mind, he listens

to  its  possible  developments  and  lends  them  artistic  expressioninstead  of  suppressing  them  by  conscious  criticism.  Thus  he

experiences from himself what we learn from others - the laws which

the activities of this unconscious must obey. But he need not state

these  laws,  nor  even  be  clearly  aware  of  them;  as  a  result  of  the

tolerance of his intelligence, they are incorporated within his creations.

We discover these laws by analysing his writings just as we find them

from cases of real illness; but the conclusion seems inescapable that

either both of us, the writer and the doctor, have misunderstood the

unconscious in the same way, or we have both understood it correctly.

This conclusion is of great value to us, and it is on its account that it

has  been  worth  while  to  investigate  by  the  methods  of  medical

psycho-analysis the way in which the formation and the cure of the

delusions as well as the dreams are represented in Jensen’s Gradiva.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1884

 

 

   We would seem to have reached the end. But an attentive reader

might remind us that at the beginning we threw out an assertion that

dreams are wishes represented as fulfilled and that we gave no proof

of  this.  Well,  is  our  reply,  what  we  have  described  in  these  pages

might  show  how  little  justification  there  is  for  trying  to  cover  the

explanations we have to give of dreams with the single formula that

dreams  are  wish-fulfilments.  Nevertheless  the  assertion  stands  and

can easily be proved too for the dreams in Gradiva. The latent dream-

thoughts - we know now what is meant by them - may be of the most

various kinds; in Gradiva they are  ‘days’ residues’, thoughts that have

been left over unnoticed and undealt-with from the mental activities of

waking life. But in order for a dream to develop out of them, the co-

operation  of  a  wish  (usually  an  unconscious  one)  is  required;  this

contributes  the  motive  force  for  constructing  the  dream,  while  the

day’s residues provide the material. In Norbert Hanold’s first dream

two wishes competed with each other in making the dream; one of

them  was  actually  admissible  to  consciousness,  while  the  other

belonged to the unconscious and operated from out of repression. Thefirst was a wish, understandable in any archaeologist, to have been

present as an eye-witness at the catastrophe in the year 79 A.D. What

sacrifice would an archaeologist think too great if this wish could be

realized in any way other than in a dream! The other wish, the other

constructor of the dream, was of an erotic nature: it might be crudely

and also incompletely stated as a wish to be there when the girl he

loved  lay  down  to  sleep.  This  was  the  wish  the  rejection  of  which

caused the dream to become an anxiety-dream. The wishes that were

the motive forces of the second dream are perhaps less conspicuous;

but if we recall its translation we shall not hesitate to describe them

too as erotic. The wish to be taken captive by the girl he loved, to fall

in with her wishes and to be subjected to her - for so we may construe

the wish behind the situation of the lizard-catching - was in fact of a

passive, masochistic character. Next day the dreamer hit the girl, as

though he was dominated by the contrary erotic current . . . But we

must stop here, or we may really forget that Hanold and Gradiva are

only creatures of their author’s mind.

 


                  Delusions And Dreams In Jensen's Gradiva

                                                                                      1885

 

                  POSTSCRIPT TO THE SECOND EDITION

                                        (1912)

 

In the five years that have passed since this study was completed,

psycho-analytic research has summoned up the courage to approach

the creations of imaginative writers with yet another purpose in view. It

no longer merely seeks in them for confirmations of the findings it has

made from unpoetic, neurotic human beings; it also demands to know

the material of impressions and memories from which the author has

built  the  work,  and  the  methods  and  processes  by  which  he  has

converted this material into a work of art. It has turned out that these

questions can be most easily answered in the case of writers who (like

our Wilhelm Jensen, who died in 1911) were in the habit of giving

themselves  over  to  their  imagination  in  a  simple-minded  joy  in

creating.  Soon  after  the  publication  of  my  analytic  examination  ofGradiva I attempted to interest the elderly author in these new tasks of

psycho-analytic research. But he refused his co-operation.

   A friend of mine has since then drawn my attention to two other of

the author’s short stories, which might stand in a genetic relation to

Gradiva,  as  preliminary  studies  or  earlier  attempts  at  a  satisfactory

poetical solution of the same problem in the psychology of love. The

first  of  these  stories,  ‘Der  rote  Schirm’,¹  recalls Gradiva  by  the

recurrence in it of a number of small motifs, such as white flowers of

the dead, a forgotten object (Gradiva’s sketch-book), and a significant

small  animal  (the  butterfly  and  the  lizard  in Gradiva),  but  more

especially by the repetition of the main situation - the apparition in the

mid-day  glare  of  a  summer’s  day  of  a  girl  who  had  died  (or  was

believed to have died). In ‘Der rote Schirm’ the scene of the apparition

is a ruined castle, just as are the ruins of the excavated Pompeii in

Gradiva.  The  other  story,  ‘Im  gotischen  Hause’,²  shows  no  such

resemblances either to Gradiva or to ‘Der rote Schirm’ in its manifest

content. But the fact that it was given an external unity with the latter

story  by  being  published  with  it  under  a  common  title³  points

unmistakably  to  their  having  a  closely  related  latent  meaning.  It  is

easy  to  see  that  all  three  stories  treat  of  the  same  theme:  the

development of a love (in ‘Der rote Schirm’ the inhibition of a love) as

an  after-effect  of  an  intimate  association  in  childhood  of  a

brother‑and‑sister  kind.  I  gather  further  from  a  review  by  Eva,

Countess Baudissin (in the Vienna daily paper Die Zeit of February

                                                                                          4
11, 1912) that Jensen’s last novel Fremdlinge unter den Menschen,

which  contains  much  material  from  the  author’s  own  childhood,

describes the history of a man who ‘sees a sister in the woman he

loves’. In neither of the two earlier stories is there a trace of the main

motif  of Gradiva:  the  girl’s  peculiarly  charming  gait  with  the  nearly

perpendicular posture of her foot.

   The relief of the girl who steps along in this way, which Jensen

describes  as  being  Roman,  and  to  which  he  gives  the  name  of

‘Gradiva’, is in fact derived from the zenith of Greek art. It is in the

Museo Chiaramonti in the Vatican (No. 644), and has been restored

and interpreted by Hauser. By the combination of ‘Gradiva’ and some

other fragments, in Florence and Munich, two reliefs were obtained,

each  representing  three  figures,  who  seem  to  be  identified  as  theHorae, the goddesses of vegetation, and the deities of the fertilizing

dew who are allied to them.

 

   ¹ [‘The Red Parasol.’]

   ² [‘In the Gothic House.’]

   ³ Übermächte. Two short stories by Wilhelm Jensen, Berlin, Emil Felber, 1892.

4
    [Strangers among Men.]

                                                                                       1886

 

          PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE

                                        FACTS

                            IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

                                        (1906)

 


                                                                                      1887

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1888

 

          PSYCHO-ANALYSIS AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE

                                        FACTS

                            IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS

 

Gentlemen, -There is a growing recognition of the untrustworthiness of

statements  made  by  witnesses,  on  which,  nevertheless,  so  many

convictions are based to-day in court cases; and this has quickened in

all of you, future judges and defending counsel, an interest in a new

method of investigation, the aim of which is to compel the accused

person himself to establish his own guilt or innocence by objective

signs.  This  method  consists  in  a  psychological  experiment  and  is

based on psychological research. It is closely connected with certain

views  which  have  only  recently  come  to  the  notice  of  medical

psychology. I understand that you are already engaged in testing the

use and possibilities of this new method by means of what might be

called ‘dummy exercises’, and I have gladly accepted the invitation of

your  President,  Professor  Löffler,  to  explain  to  you  more  fully  the

relation of this method to psychology.

 

   You are all acquainted with the game played at parties or among

children in which a word is called out at random and someone has to

add a second word, which, when it is added to the first, results in acompound word being formed. For instance, ‘steam’ - ‘ship’, making

‘steam-ship’. The ‘association experiment’ introduced into psychology

by the school of Wundt is nothing more than a modification of this

children’s game, merely omitting one rule of the game.

   The experiment is as follows: a word (termed the ‘stimulus word’) is

called out to the subject and he replies as quickly as possible with

some  other  word  that  occurs  to  him  (the  so  called  ‘reaction’),  his

choice of this reaction not being restricted by anything. The points to

be observed are the time required for the reaction and the relation -

which may be of many different kinds - between the stimulus-word and

the reaction-word. It cannot be claimed that in the first instance very

much came of these experiments. This was to be expected, however,

since they were carried out without framing any definite question and

without  any  guiding  idea  which  could  be  brought  to  bear  on  the

results.  They  only  became  significant  and  fruitful  when  Bleuler  in

Zurich and his pupils, especially Jung, began to turn their attention to

these ‘association experiments’. The experiments which they carried

out  acquired  their  value  from  the  fact  that  they  assumed  that  the

reaction to the stimulus-word could not be a chance one but must be

determined  by  an  ideational  content  present  in  the  mind  of  the

reacting subject.

 


      Psycho-Analysis And The Establishment Of The Facts In Legal

                                      Proceedings

                                                                                      1889

 

   It has become customary to speak of an ideational content of this

kind, which is able to influence the reaction to the stimulus-word, as a

‘complex’. This influence works either by the stimulus-word touching

the  complex  directly  or  by  the  complex  succeeding  in  making  a

connection  with  the  word  through  intermediate  links.  Such  a

determination of the reaction is a very remarkable fact; you will find

undisguised  astonishment  expressed  at  it  in  the  literature  of  the

subject. But its truth admits of no doubt. For as a rule you can lay bare

the particular complex at work, and so explain reactions which could

not otherwise be understood, by asking the subject himself to give thereasons for his reaction. Examples like those given by Jung (1906, 6

and  8-9)  are  well  calculated  to  make  us  doubt  the  occurrence  of

chance or of what is alleged to be arbitrary in mental events.

   Let us now glance at the earlier history of this view of Bleuler and

Jung that the reaction of the subject under examination is determined

by his complex. In 19011 published a work¹ in which I demonstrated

that a whole number of actions which were held to be unmotivated are

on  the  contrary  strictly  determined,  and  to  that  extent  I  contributed

towards  restricting  the  arbitrary  factor  in  psychology.  I  took  as

examples slight failures of memory, slips of the tongue or pen, and the

mislaying of objects. I showed that when someone makes a slip of the

tongue it is not chance, nor simply difficulty in articulation or similarity

in  sound,  that  is  responsible,  but  that  in  every  case  a  disturbing

ideational content - a complex - can be brought to light which has

altered the sense of the intended speech under the apparent form of a

slip of the tongue. Furthermore, I examined the small actions which

are performed apparently by chance and without any purpose - habits

of playing or fiddling with things, and so on - and revealed them as

‘symptomatic actions’ linked with a hidden meaning and intended to

give unobtrusive expression to it. I found, moreover, that not even a

first  name  can  occur  arbitrarily  to  the  mind,  without  having  been

determined by some powerful ideational complex. Even arithmetical

numbers that one believes one has chosen at random can be traced

to the influence of a hidden complex of this kind. A few years after

this, a colleague of mine, Dr. Alfred Adler, was able to substantiate

this most astonishing of my assertions by some very striking examples

(Adler,  1905).  Once  one  has  accustomed  oneself  to  this  view  of

determinism  in  psychical  life,  one  is  justified  in  inferring  from  the

findings in the psychopathology of everyday life that the ideas which

occur to the subject in an association experiment may not be arbitrary

either, but determined by an ideational content that is operative in him.

 

   ¹ The Psychopathology of Everyday Life.

 


      Psycho-Analysis And The Establishment Of The Facts In Legal

                                      Proceedings

                                                                                      1890 

   And now, Gentlemen, let us return to the association experiment. In

the kind of experiment we have referred to so far, it was the person

under examination who explained to us the origin of his reactions, and

the  experiments,  if  they  are  subject  to  this  condition,  will  be  of  no

interest from the point of view of judicial procedure. But how would it

be if we were to make a change in our planning of the experiment?

Might  we  not  proceed  as  one  does  in  solving  an  equation  which

involves several quantities, where one can take any one of them as

the starting-point - by making either the a or the b into the x we are

looking for? Up to now in our experiments it has been the complex

that has been unknown to us. We have used stimulus-words selected

at random, and the subject under examination has revealed to us the

complex  brought  to  expression  by  those  stimulus-words.  But  let  us

now set about it differently. Let us take a complex that is known to us

and ourselves react to it with stimulus-words deliberately chosen; and

let us then transfer the x to the person who is reacting. Will it then be

possible  to  decide,  from  the  way  in  which  he  reacts,  whether  the

complex we have chosen is also present in him?  You can see that

this  way  of  planning  the  experiment  corresponds  exactly  to  the

method adopted by an examining magistrate who is trying to find out

whether something of which he is aware is also known to the accused

as an agent. Wertheimer and Klein, two pupils of Hans Gross, the

Professor of Criminal Law in Prague, seem to have been the first to

adopt this change, which is of such importance for your purposes, in

the planning of the experiment.¹

 

   ¹ Cf. Jung, 1906.

 


      Psycho-Analysis And The Establishment Of The Facts In Legal

                                      Proceedings

                                                                                      1891

 

   You already know from your own experiments that in this question of

the subject’s reactions, several points are to be taken into account in

deciding whether he possesses the complex to which you are reacting

with your stimulus-words. I will enumerate these points for you one byone. (1) The content of the reaction may be unusual, which requires

explanation. (2) The reaction-time may be prolonged; for it appears

that  stimulus-words  which  have  touched  the  complex  produce  a

reaction only after a considerable delay (a delay which may be several

times  as  long  as  the  ordinary  reaction-time).  (3)  There  may  be  a

mistake in reproducing  the  reaction.  You  know  the  remarkable  fact

that is meant by this. If the subject has been given an association

experiment consisting of a comparatively long list of stimulus-words,

and if a short time after the end of the experiment the stimulus words

are once more presented to him, he will produce the same reactions

as on the first occasion except when the stimulus-word has touched a

complex, in which case he is very liable to replace his first reaction by

another  one.  (4)  The  phenomenon  of perseveration  (or  it  might  be

better to use the term ‘after-effect’) may occur. When a complex is

aroused by a stimulus-word which touches it - by a ‘critical’ stimulus-

word  -  it  often  happens  that  the  effects  of  this  (for  instance,  a

prolonging  of  the  reaction-time)  persist  and  alter  the  subject’s

reactions to the next, non-critical words as well. When all or several of

these  indications  are  present  together,  it  proves  that  the  complex

which is known to us is present as a disturbing factor in the person

who is being questioned. This disturbance is taken by you to mean

that the complex in his mind is cathected with affect and is able to

distract his attention from the task of reacting; thus you see in the

disturbance a ‘psychical self-betrayal’.

   I know that you are at the moment concerned with the potentialities

and difficulties of this procedure, whose aim is to lead the accused

into an objective self-betrayal. I should therefore like to bring to your

notice the fact that an exactly similar method of disclosing psychical

material which is buried away or kept secret has been practised for

more than a decade in another field. My purpose is to lay before you

the  resemblances  and  differences  between  conditions  in  the  two

fields.

 


      Psycho-Analysis And The Establishment Of The Facts In Legal

                                      Proceedings

                                                                                      1892 

   The field I have in mind is indeed very different from yours. I am

referring to the therapy employed for certain ‘nervous diseases’ - what

are known as the psychoneuroses - of which hysteria and obsessional

ideas  may  be  taken  as  samples.  The  method  is  called  ‘psycho-

analysis’; it was evolved by me from the ‘cathartic’ method of therapy

first practised by Josef Breuer in Vienna.¹ To combat your surprise, I

must draw an analogy between the criminal and the hysteric. In both

we are concerned with a secret, with something hidden. But in order

not to be paradoxical I must at once point out the difference. In the

case of the criminal it is a secret which he knows and hides from you,

whereas in the case of the hysteric it is a secret which he himself does

not  know  either,  which  is  hidden  even  from  himself.  How  is  this

possible?  Now  we  know,  through  laborious  research,  that  all  these

illnesses are the result of the patient’s having succeeded in repressing

certain ideas and memories that are strongly cathected with affect,

together with the wishes that arise from them, in such a way that they

play no part in his thinking - do not enter into his consciousness - and

thus  remain  unknown  to  him.  But  from  this  repressed  psychical

material (these ‘complexes’) are generated the somatic and psychical

symptoms which plague the patient in just the same way as a guilty

conscience  does.  In  this  one  respect,  therefore,  the  difference

between the criminal and the hysteric is fundamental.

      The  task  of  the  therapist,  however,  is  the  same  as  that  of  the

examining  magistrate.  We  have  to  uncover  the  hidden  psychical

material;  and  in  order  to  do  this  we  have  invented  a  number  of

detective devices, some of which it seems that you gentlemen of the

law are now about to copy from us.

 

   ¹ Cf. Breuer and Freud, Studies on Hysteria, 1895.

 


      Psycho-Analysis And The Establishment Of The Facts In Legal

                                      Proceedings

                                                                                      1893

 

   It will interest you, from the point of view of your own profession, to

hear how we doctors proceed in psycho-analysis. After the patient hasgiven us a first account of his history, we ask him to give himself up to

the thoughts that occur to him spontaneously and to say without any

critical reserve whatever comes into his head. We start, as you see,

on the assumption, which he does not share in the least, that these

spontaneous  thoughts  will  not  be  arbitrarily  chosen  but  will  be

determined by their relation to his secret - to his ‘complex’ - and may,

as it were, be regarded as derivatives of that complex. You will note

that this is the same assumption as the one with the help of which you

were able to interpret the association experiments. But although we

have instructed the patient to follow the rule of communicating all the

thoughts that occur to him, he seems to be unable to do so. He soon

begins  to  hold  back  first  one  thought  and  then  another.  He  gives

various  reasons  to  account  for  this:  either  the  thought  was  quite

unimportant,  or  it  was  irrelevant  or  it  was  totally  meaningless.  We

thereupon demand that he shall tell us the thought in spite of these

objections and shall follow it up; for the very fact of his criticism proves

to us that the thought belongs to the ‘complex’ which we are seeking

to  uncover.  We  recognize  in  this  behaviour  of  the  patient’s  a

manifestation of the ‘resistance’ present in him, which we are never

free from through the whole duration of the treatment. I will merely

indicate briefly that this concept of resistance has acquired the highest

importance for us in understanding the origin of an illness as well as

the mechanism of its cure.

   In your experiments you do not directly observe criticisms like these

of his spontaneous ideas by the subject; while we, on the other hand,

are  able  in  our  psycho-analyses  to  observe  all  the  indications  of  a

complex  which  come  to  your  notice.  When  the  patient  no  longer

ventures  to  evade  the  rule  which  has  been  laid  down  for  him,  we

nevertheless  note  that  he  stops  or  hesitates  from  time  to  time  or

pauses in the reproduction of his ideas. Every hesitation of this kind is,

as  we  see  it,  an  expression  of  his  resistance  and  serves  as  an

indication of a connection with the ‘complex’. Indeed, we regard it as

the most important sign of such a connection, just as is in your case

the analogous prolongation of the reaction-time. We are accustomed

to interpret hesitation in this sense even when the content of the idea

that is being held back does not seem to be at all objectionable and

when  the  patient  assures  us  he  cannot  imagine  why  he  shouldhesitate to tell it to us. The pauses which occur in psycho-analysis are

as a rule many times longer than the delays that you observe in the

reaction experiments.

 


      Psycho-Analysis And The Establishment Of The Facts In Legal

                                      Proceedings

                                                                                      1894

 

   Another of your indications of a complex - the change in the content

of the reaction - also plays its part in the technique of psycho-analysis.

We quite generally regard even slight deviations in our patients from

the ordinary forms of expression as a sign of some hidden meaning,

and we are quite willing to expose ourselves for a while to the patient’s

ridicule by making interpretations in that sense., all that we require in

order to uncover the complex.

      The  third  of  your  indications  of  a  complex  (mistakes  -  that  is,

changes - in the reproduction) is also employed, though in a more

restricted field, in the technique of psycho-analysis. One task which

often faces us is the interpretation of dreams - that is, the translation

of  the  remembered  content  of  a  dream  into  its  hidden  meaning.  It

sometimes happens that we are uncertain at which point to set about

the task, and in that case we may make use of a rule, discovered

empirically, which recommends us to get the dreamer to tell us his

dream  once  more.  In  doing  so,  he  usually  alters  his  modes  of

expression in some parts of it while repeating the rest accurately. The

points at which his reproduction is defective owing to changes, and

often owing to omissions as well, are the points which we fasten upon,

because  the  inaccuracy  guarantees  a  connection  with  the  complex

and promises the best approach to the secret meaning of the dream.¹

 

   ¹ See my Interpretation of Dreams (1900a).

 


      Psycho-Analysis And The Establishment Of The Facts In Legal

                                      Proceedings

                                                                                      1895

    You must not get the impression that we have come to an end of the

points of agreement which I have been following up, if I admit to you

that no phenomenon similar to perseveration is manifested in psycho-

analysis.  This  apparent  difference  only  arises  from  the  special

conditions of your experiments. For you do not allow the effect of the

complex  time  to  develop.  Scarcely  has  it  begun  to  act  than  you

distract  the  subject’s  attention  by  a  new  and  probably  innocent

stimulus  word;  and  then  you  may  observe  that  he  sometimes

continues  to  be  occupied  with  the  complex  in  spite  of  your

interference.  In  psycho-analysis,  on  the  other  hand,  we  avoid  such

interferences and keep the patient occupied with the complex. Since

in our procedure everything, so to speak, is perseveration, we cannot

observe that phenomenon as an isolated occurrence.

   We may justly claim that, in principle, techniques of the kind I have

described  enable  us  to  make  the  patient  conscious  of  what  is

repressed in him - of his secret - and thus to remove the psychological

causation of the symptoms from which he is suffering. But before you

draw  any  conclusions  from  these  successful  results  as  to  the

possibilities  of  your  own  work,  we  will  examine  some  points  of

difference between the psychological situations in the two cases.

   The chief difference has already been named. In the neurotic the

secret  is  hidden  from  his  own  consciousness;  in  the  criminal  it  is

hidden  only  from  you.  In  the  former  there  is  a  genuine  ignorance,

though not an ignorance in every sense, while in the latter there is

nothing but a pretence of ignorance. Connected with this is another

difference, which is in practice of importance. In psycho-analysis the

patient  assists  with  his  conscious  efforts  to  combat  his  resistance,

because he expects to gain something from the investigation, namely,

his recovery. The criminal, on the other hand, does not work with you;

if he did, he would be working against his whole ego. As though to

make up for this, however, all you are endeavouring to arrive at in

your investigation is an objective certainty on your part, whereas our

therapy  demands  that  the  patient  himself  should  also  arrive  at  the

same certainty. But it remains to be seen how far your procedure will

be rendered more difficult or be altered by the lack of co-operation on

the part of the subject of your examination. This is a situation which

you  can  never  create  in  your  experiments  in  seminars,  since  thecolleague  who  is  playing  the  part  of  the  accused  man  remains  a

fellow-worker  after  all,  and  assists  you  in  spite  of  his  conscious

determination not to betray himself.

 


      Psycho-Analysis And The Establishment Of The Facts In Legal

                                      Proceedings

                                                                                      1896

 

      If  you  look  more  deeply  into  the  comparison  between  the  two

situations it will become clear to you in general that psycho-analysis is

concerned with a simpler, special, form of the task of uncovering what

is  hidden  in  the  mind;  whereas  in  your  work  the  task  is  a  more

comprehensive one. That the case of the psychoneurotic is invariably

concerned with a repressed sexual complex (in the widest sense) is a

difference  which  you  need  not  take  into  account.  But  there  is

something  else  that  you  must.  The  aim  of  psycho-analysis  is

absolutely uniform in every case: complexes have to be uncovered

which have been repressed because of feelings of unpleasure and

which produce signs of resistance if an attempt is made to bring them

into consciousness. This resistance is as it were localized; it arises at

the frontier between unconscious and conscious. In your cases what

is  concerned  is  a  resistance  which  comes  entirely  from

consciousness. You cannot dismiss this difference out of hand. You

will  first  have  to  determine  experimentally  whether  conscious

resistance is betrayed by exactly the same indications as unconscious

resistance. Further, you cannot yet be certain, in my opinion, whether

you  may  interpret  your  objective  indications  of  a  complex  as  a

‘resistance’,  as  we  psycho-therapists  do.  It  may  happen  with  your

experimental subjects - even though not very frequently with criminals

- that the complex you touch on is pleasurably toned; and the question

then arises whether such a complex will produce the same reaction as

a complex that is unpleasurably toned.

 


      Psycho-Analysis And The Establishment Of The Facts In Legal

                                      Proceedings

                                                                                      1897 

   I should also like to point out that your test may possibly be subject

to a complication which does not, by its very nature, arise in psycho-

analysis.  In  your  examination  you  may  be  led  astray  by  a  neurotic

who, although he is innocent, reacts as if he were guilty, because a

lurking  sense  of  guilt  that  already  exists  in  him  seizes  upon  the

accusation made in the particular instance. You must not regard this

possibility  as  an  idle  fiction;  you  have  only  to  think  of  life  in  the

nursery, where such events can often enough be observed. It some

times  happens  that  a  child  who  has  been  accused  of  a  misdeed

strongly denies the charge but at the same time weeps like a detected

sinner. You may perhaps think that the child is lying when he asserts

his innocence; but this is not necessarily so. It can be that he has in

fact not committed the particular crime with which you have charged

him but that he has committed one of which you know nothing and of

which you are not accusing him. He therefore quite truthfully denies

being guilty of the one misdeed, while at the same time betraying his

sense of guilt on account of the other. In this respect - as in so many

others - the adult neurotic behaves just like a child. Many people are

like this, and it is still open to question whether your technique will

succeed  in  distinguishing  self-accusing  individuals  of  this  kind  from

those who are really guilty. Finally, one more point. You know that,

according to the rules governing criminal proceedings, you may not

subject the accused to any procedure which takes him by surprise. He

will therefore have been made aware that in this experiment it is a

matter for him of not betraying himself. It must then be asked whether

one  can  expect  the  same  reactions  when  the  subject’s  attention  is

directed towards the complex as when it is directed away from it, and

how  far  the  intention  to  conceal  something  may  affect  modes  of

reaction in different people.

 


      Psycho-Analysis And The Establishment Of The Facts In Legal

                                      Proceedings

                                                                                      1898

 

      It  is  precisely  because  the  situations  which  underlie  yourinvestigation are so various that psychology takes a very lively interest

in  its  results,  and  I  should  like  to  beg  you  not  to  despair  of  their

practical utility too soon. Although my work is so far removed from the

practical administration of justice, perhaps you will allow me to make

one  further  suggestion.  However  indispensable  experiments  in

seminars may be for preparatory purposes and for the formulation of

problems,  you  will  never  be  able  to  reproduce  in  them  the  same

psychological  situation  as  in  the  examination  of  a  defendant  in  a

criminal  case.  The  experiments  remain  dummy  exercises  and  they

can never afford a basis for practical application in criminal trials. If we

do not want to abandon such an application of them, the following

expedient suggests itself. You might be allowed - indeed, it might be

made your duty - to undertake such examinations over a number of

years in every actual instance of a criminal prosecution, without their

results being allowed to influence the verdict of the Court. It would,

indeed, be best if the Court were never informed of the conclusion

which you had drawn from your examination on the question of the

defendant’s guilt. After years of collecting and comparing the results

so obtained, all doubts about the serviceability of this psychological

method of investigation would surely be resolved. I know, of course,

that the realization of a proposal such as this does not rest only with

you and your valued teachers.

                                                                                       1899

 

            OBSESSIVE ACTIONS AND RELIGIOUS PRACTICES

                                        (1907)

 


                                                                                      1900

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1901

 

            OBSESSIVE ACTIONS AND RELIGIOUS PRACTICES

 

I  am  certainly  not  the  first  person  to  have  been  struck  by  the

resemblance between what are called obsessive actions in sufferers

from  nervous  affections  and  the  observances  by  means  of  which

believers give expression to their piety. The term ‘ceremonial’, which

has been applied to some of these obsessive actions, is evidence of

this.  The  resemblance,  however,  seems  to  me  to  be  more  than  a

superficial  one,  so  that  an  insight  into  the  origin  of  neurotic

ceremonials may embolden us to draw inferences by analogy about

the psychological processes of religious life.

   People who carry out obsessive actions or ceremonials belong to

the  same  class  as  those  who  suffer  from  obsessive  thinking,

obsessive  ideas,  obsessive  impulses  and  the  like.  Taken  together,

these  form  a  particular  clinical  entity,  to  which  the  name  of

‘obsessional neurosis’ [‘Zwangsneurose’] is customarily applied.¹ But

one should not attempt to deduce the character of the illness from its

name; for, strictly speaking, other kinds of morbid mental phenomena

have  an  equal  claim  to  possessing  what  are  spoken  of  as

‘obsessional’ characteristics. In place of a definition we must for the

time being be content with obtaining a detailed knowledge of these

states,  since  we  have  not  yet  been  able  to  arrive  at  a  criterion  of

obsessional neuroses; it probably lies very deep, although we seem to

sense its presence everywhere in the manifestations of the illness. 

   ¹ See Löwenfeld (1904).

 


                    Obsessive Actions And Religious Practices

                                                                                      1902

 

      Neurotic  ceremonials  consist  in  making  small  adjustments  to

particular  everyday  actions,  small  additions  or  restrictions  or

arrangements, which have always to be carried out in the same, or in

a methodically varied, manner. These activities give the impression of

being mere formalities, and they seem quite meaningless to us. Nor

do they appear otherwise to the patient himself; yet he is incapable of

giving  them  up,  for  any  deviation  from  the  ceremonial  is  visited  by

intolerable anxiety, which obliges him at once to make his omission

good.  Just  as  trivial  as  the  ceremonial  actions  themselves  are  the

occasions and activities which are embellished, encumbered and in

any case prolonged by the ceremonial - for instance, dressing and

undressing, going to bed or satisfying bodily needs. The performance

of  a  ceremonial  can  be  described  by  replacing  it,  as  it  were,  by  a

series of unwritten laws. For instance, to take the case of the bed

ceremonial: the chair must stand in a particular place beside the bed;

the clothes must lie upon it folded in a particular order; the blanket

must  be  tucked  in  at  the  bottom  and  the  sheet  smoothed  out;  the

pillows  must  be  arranged  in  such  and  such  a  manner,  and  the

subject’s own body must lie in a precisely defined position. Only after

all this may he go to sleep. Thus in slight cases the ceremonial seems

to be no more than an exaggeration of an orderly procedure that is

customary  and  justifiable;  but  the  special  conscientiousness  with

which it is carried out and the anxiety which follows upon its neglect

stamp the ceremonial as a ‘sacred act’. Any interruption of it is for the

most part badly tolerated, and the presence of other people during its

performance is almost always ruled out.

   Any activities whatever may become obsessive actions in the wider

sense of the term if they are elaborated by small additions or given a

rhythmic character by means of pauses and repetitions. We shall not

expect  to  find  a  sharp  distinction  between  ‘ceremonials’  and

‘obsessive actions’. As a rule obsessive actions have grown out ofceremonials. Besides these two, prohibitions and hindrances (abulias)

make up the content of the disorder; these, in fact, only continue the

work  of  the  obsessive  actions,  inasmuch  as  some  things  are

completely forbidden to the patient and others only allowed subject to

his following a prescribed ceremonial.

 


                    Obsessive Actions And Religious Practices

                                                                                      1903

 

   It is remarkable that both compulsions and prohibitions (having to do

something and having not to do something) apply in the first instance

only to the subject’s solitary activities and for a long time leave his

social  behaviour  unaffected.  Sufferers  from  this  illness  are

consequently able to treat their affliction as a private matter and keep

it concealed for many years. And, indeed, many more people suffer

from these forms of obsessional neurosis than doctors hear of. For

many sufferers, too, concealment is made easier from the fact that

they are quite well able to fulfil their social duties during a part of the

day, once they have devoted a number of hours to their secret doings,

hidden from view like Mélusine.

      It  is  easy  to  see  where  the  resemblances  lie  between  neurotic

ceremonials and the sacred acts of religious ritual: in the qualms of

conscience  brought  on  by  their  neglect,  in  their  complete  isolation

from all other actions (shown in the prohibition against interruption)

and in the conscientiousness with which they are carried out in every

detail. But the differences are equally obvious, and a few of them are

so  glaring  that  they  make  the  comparison  a  sacrilege:  the  greater

individual  variability  of  ceremonial  actions  in  contrast  to  the

stereotyped character of rituals (prayer, turning to the East, etc.), their

private nature as opposed to the public and communal character of

religious  observances,  above  all,  however,  the  fact  that,  while  the

minutiae of religious ceremonial are full of significance and have a

symbolic meaning, those of neurotics seem foolish and senseless. In

this respect an obsessional neurosis presents a travesty, half comic

and half tragic, of a private religion. But it is precisely this sharpest

difference  between  neurotic  and  religious  ceremonial  whichdisappears when, with the help of the psycho-analytic technique of

investigation,  one  penetrates  to  the  true  meaning  of  obsessive

actions.¹ In the course of such an investigation the appearance which

obsessive actions afford of being foolish and senseless is completely

effaced, and the reason for their having that appearance is explained.

It is found that the obsessive actions are perfectly significant in every

detail, that they serve important interests of the personality and that

they  give  expression  to  experiences  that  are  still  operative  and  to

thoughts  that  are  cathected  with  affect.  They  do  this  in  two  ways,

either  by  direct  or  by  symbolic  representation;  and  they  are

consequently to be interpreted either historically or symbolically.

 

   ¹ See the collection of my shorter papers on the theory of the neuroses published in 1906.

 


                    Obsessive Actions And Religious Practices

                                                                                      1904

 

   I must give a few examples to illustrate my point. Those who are

familiar  with  the  findings  of  psycho-analytic  investigation  into  the

psychoneuroses  will  not  be  surprised  to  learn  that  what  is  being

represented in obsessive actions or in ceremonials is derived from the

most intimate, and for the most part from the sexual, experiences of

the patient.

   (a) A girl whom I was able to observe was under a compulsion to

rinse  round  her  wash-basin  several  times  after  washing.  The

significance  of  this  ceremonial  action  lay  in  the  proverbial  saying:

‘Don’t  throw  away  dirty  water  till  you  have  clean.’  Her  action  was

intended to give a warning to her sister, of whom she was very fond,

and  to  restrain  her  from  getting  divorced  from  her  unsatisfactory

husband until she had established a relationship with a better man.

   (b) A woman who was living apart from her husband was subject to

a compulsion, whenever she ate anything, to leave what was the best

of it behind: for example, she would only take the outside of a piece of

roast meat. This renunciation was explained by the date of its origin. It

appeared on the day after she had refused marital relations with her

husband - that is to say, after she had given up what was the best.

   (c) The same patient could only sit on one particular chair and couldonly get up from it with difficulty. In regard to certain details of her

married life, the chair symbolized her husband, to whom she remained

faithful. She found an explanation of her compulsion in this sentence:

‘It is so hard to part from anything (a husband, a chair) upon which

one has once settled.’

 


                    Obsessive Actions And Religious Practices

                                                                                      1905

 

   (d) Over a period of time she used to repeat an especially noticeable

and senseless obsessive action. She would run out of her room into

another room in the middle of which there was a table. She would

straighten the table-cloth on it in a particular manner and ring for the

housemaid. The latter had to come up to the table, and the patient

would then dismiss her on some indifferent errand. In the attempts to

explain this compulsion, it occurred to her that at one place on the

table-cloth there was a stain, and that she always arranged the cloth

in such a way that the housemaid was bound to see the stain. The

whole  scene  proved  to  be  a  reproduction  of  an  experience  in  her

married life which had later on given her thoughts a problem to solve.

On  the  wedding-night  her  husband  had  met  with  a  not  unusual

mishap. He found himself impotent, and ‘many times in the course of

the night he came hurrying from his room into hers’ to try once more

whether  he  could  succeed.  In  the  morning  he  said  he  would  feel

ashamed in front of the hotel housemaid who made the beds, and he

took a bottle of red ink and poured its contents over the sheet; but he

did it so clumsily that the red stain came in a place that was very

unsuitable for his purpose. With her obsessive action, therefore, she

was representing the wedding-night. ‘Bed and board’ between them

make up marriage.

   (e)  Another  compulsion  which  she  started  -  of  writing  down  the

number  of  every  bank-note  before  parting  with  it  -  had  also  to  be

interpreted historically. At a time when she was still intending to leave

her  husband  if  she  could  find  another  more  trustworthy  man,  she

allowed herself to receive advances from a man whom she met at a

watering-place, but she was in doubt as to whether his intentions wereserious.  One  day,  being  short  of  small  change,  she  asked  him  to

change a five kronen piece for her. He did so, pocketed the large coin

and declared with a gallant air that he would never part with it, since it

had  passed  through  her  hands.  At  their  later  meetings  she  was

frequently tempted to challenge him to show her the five-kronen piece,

as though she wanted to convince herself that she could believe in his

intentions. But she refrained, for the good reason that it is impossible

to  distinguish  between  coins  of  the  same  value.  Thus  her  doubt

remained unresolved; and it left her with the compulsion to write down

the number of each bank-note, by which it can be distinguished from

all others of the same value.

 


                    Obsessive Actions And Religious Practices

                                                                                      1906

 

   These few examples, selected from the great number I have met

with, are merely intended to illustrate my assertion that in obsessive

actions everything has its meaning and can be interpreted. The same

is true of ceremonials in the strict sense, only that the evidence for this

would require a more circumstantial presentation. I am quite aware of

how far our explanations of obsessive actions are apparently taking us

from the sphere of religious thought.

      It  is  one  of  the  conditions  of  the  illness  that  the  person  who  is

obeying a compulsion carries it out without understanding its meaning

- or at any rate its chief meaning. It is only thanks to the efforts of

psycho-analytic treatment that he becomes conscious of the meaning

of his obsessive action and, with it, of the motives that are impelling

him to it. We express this important fact by saying that the obsessive

action serves to express unconscious motives and ideas. In this, we

seem to find a further departure from religious practices; but we must

remember that as a rule the ordinary pious individual, too, performs a

ceremonial without concerning himself with its significance, although

priests and scientific investigators may be familiar with the - mostly

symbolic - meaning of the ritual. In all believers, however, the motives

which impel them to religious practices are unknown to them or are

represented in consciousness by others which are advanced in theirplace.

   Analysis of obsessive actions has already given us some sort of an

insight  into  their  causes  and  into  the  chain  of  motives  which  bring

them into effect. We may say that the sufferer from compulsions and

prohibitions behaves as if he were dominated by a sense of guilt, of

which,  however,  he  knows  nothing,  so  that  we  must  call  it  an

unconscious sense of guilt, in spite of the apparent contradiction in

terms. This sense of guilt has its source in certain early mental events,

but it is constantly being revived by renewed temptations which arise

whenever there is a contemporary provocation. Moreover, it occasions

a  lurking  sense  of  expectant  anxiety,  an  expectation  of  misfortune,

which  is  linked,  through  the  idea  of  punishment,  with  the  internal

perception  of  the  temptation.  When  the  ceremonial  is  first  being

constructed, the patient is still conscious that he must do this or that

lest some ill should befall, and as a rule the nature of the ill that is to

be expected is still known to his consciousness. But what is already

hidden from him is the connection - which is always demonstrable -

between the occasion on which this expectant anxiety arises and the

danger which it conjures up. Thus a ceremonial starts as an action for

defence or insurance, a protective measure.

   The sense of guilt of obsessional neurotics finds its counterpart in

the protestations of pious people that they know that at heart they are

miserable  sinners;  and  the  pious  observances  (such  as  prayers,

invocations, etc.) with which such people preface every daily act, and

in  especial  every  unusual  undertaking,  seem  to  have  the  value  of

defensive or protective measures.

 


                    Obsessive Actions And Religious Practices

                                                                                      1907

 

      A  deeper  insight  into  the  mechanism  of  obsessional  neurosis  is

gained if we take into account the primary fact which lies at the bottom

of  it.  This  is  always the  repression  of  an  instinctual  impulse  (a

component of the sexual instinct) which was present in the subject’s

constitution  and  which  was  allowed  to  find  expression  for  a  while

during  his  childhood  but  later  succumbed  to  suppression.  In  thecourse of the repression of this instinct a special conscientiousness is

created which is directed against the instinct’s aims; but this psychical

reaction-formation  feels  insecure  and  constantly  threatened  by  the

instinct  which  is  lurking  in  the  unconscious.  The  influence  of  the

repressed instinct is felt as a temptation, and during the process of

repression  itself  anxiety  is  generated,  which  gains  control  over  the

future  in  the  form  of expectant  anxiety.  The  process  of  repression

which leads to obsessional neurosis must be considered as one which

is  only  partly  successful  and  which  increasingly  threatens  to  fail.  It

may thus be compared to an unending conflict; fresh psychical efforts

are continually required to counterbalance the forward pressure of the

instinct. Thus the ceremonial and obsessive actions arise partly as a

defence against the temptation and partly as a protection against the

ill which is expected. Against the temptation the protective measures

seem  soon  to  become  inadequate;  then  the  prohibitions  come  into

play, with the purpose of keeping at a distance situations that give rise

to temptation. Prohibitions take the place of obsessive actions, it will

be  seen,  just  as  a  phobia  is  designed  to  avert  a  hysterical  attack.

Again, a ceremonial represents the sum of the conditions subject to

which something that is not yet absolutely forbidden is permitted, just

as  the  Church’s  marriage  ceremony  signifies  for  the  believer  a

sanctioning of sexual enjoyment which would otherwise be sinful. A

further  characteristic  of  obsessional  neurosis,  as  of  all  similar

affections,  is  that  its  manifestations  (its  symptoms,  including  the

obsessive actions)  fulfil the condition of being a compromise between

the warring forces of the mind. They thus always reproduce something

of the pleasure which they are designed to prevent; they serve the

repressed instinct no less than the agencies which are repressing it.

As the illness progresses, indeed, actions which were originally mostly

concerned with maintaining the defence come to approximate more

and more to the proscribed actions through which the instinct was able

to find expression in childhood.

 


                    Obsessive Actions And Religious Practices

                                                                                      1908

    Some features of this state of affairs may be seen in the sphere of

religious  life  as  well.  The  formation  of  a  religion,  too,  seems  to  be

based  on  the  suppression,  the  renunciation,  of  certain  instinctual

impulses.  These  impulses,  however,  are  not,  as  in  the  neuroses,

exclusively components of the sexual instinct; they are self-seeking,

socially harmful instincts, though, even so, they are usually not without

a  sexual  component.  A  sense  of  guilt  following  upon  continual

temptation  and  an  expectant  anxiety  in  the  form  of  fear  of  divine

punishment have, after all, been familiar to us in the field of religion

longer than in that of neurosis. Perhaps because of the admixture of

sexual components, perhaps because of some general characteristics

of the instincts, the suppression of instinct proves to be an inadequate

and  interminable  process  in  religious  life  also.  Indeed,  complete

backslidings  into  sin  are  more  common  among  pious  people  than

among neurotics and these give rise to a new form of religious activity,

namely acts of penance, which have their counterpart in obsessional

neurosis.

      We  have  noted  as  a  curious  and  derogatory  characteristic  of

obsessional  neurosis  that  its  ceremonials  are  concerned  with  the

small actions of daily life and are expressed in foolish regulations and

restrictions  in  connection  with  them.  We  cannot  understand  this

remarkable feature of the clinical picture until we have realized that

the mechanism of psychical displacement, which was first discovered

by me in the construction of dreams,¹ dominates the mental processes

of obsessional neurosis. It is already clear from the few examples of

obsessive actions given above that their symbolism and the detail of

their execution are brought about by a displacement from the actual,

important thing on to a small one which takes its place - for instance,

from a husband on to a chair. It is this tendency to displacement which

progressively changes the clinical picture and eventually succeeds in

turning what is apparently the most trivial matter into something of the

utmost  importance  and  urgency.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  in  the

religious field as well there is a similar tendency to a displacement of

psychical  values,  and  in  the  same  direction,  so  that  the  petty

ceremonials of religious practice gradually become the essential thing

and  push  aside  the  underlying  thoughts.  That  is  why  religions  are

subject  to  reforms  which  work  retroactively  and  aim  at  a  re-establishment of the original balance of values.

 

   ¹ See The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a), Chapter VI, Section B.

 


                    Obsessive Actions And Religious Practices

                                                                                      1909

 

   The character of compromise which obsessive actions possess in

their  capacity  as  neurotic  symptoms  is  the  character  least  easily

detected in corresponding religious observances. Yet here, too, one is

reminded  of  this  feature  of  neuroses  when  one  remembers  how

commonly all the acts which religion forbids - the expressions of the

instincts it has suppressed - are committed precisely in the name of,

and ostensibly for the sake of, religion.

   In view of these similarities and analogies one might venture to

regard  obsessional  neurosis  as  a  pathological  counterpart  of  the

formation of a religion, and to describe that neurosis as an individual

religiosity and religion as a universal obsessional neurosis. The most

essential similarity would reside in the underlying renunciation of the

activation of instincts that are constitutionally present; and the chief

difference  would  lie  in  the  nature  of  those  instincts,  which  in  the

neurosis are exclusively sexual in their origin, while in religion they

spring from egoistic sources.

      A  progressive  renunciation  of  constitutional  instincts,  whose

activation might afford the ego primary pleasure, appears to be one of

the foundations of the development of human civilization. Some part of

this  instinctual  repression  is  effected  by  its  religions,  in  that  they

require the individual to sacrifice his instinctual pleasure to the Deity:

‘Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord.’ In the development of the ancient

religions one seems to discern that many things which man kind had

renounced as ‘iniquities’ had been surrendered to the Deity and were

still permitted in his name, so that the handing over to him of bad and

socially harmful instincts was the means by which man freed himself

from their domination. For this reason, it is surely no accident that all

the attributes of man, along with the misdeeds that follow from them,

were to an unlimited amount ascribed to the ancient gods. Nor is it a

contradiction of this that nevertheless man was not permitted to justifyhis own iniquities by appealing to divine example.

 

VIENNA, February 1907

                                                                                       1910

 

              THE SEXUAL ENLIGHTENMENT OF CHILDREN

                    (AN OPEN LETTER TO DR. M. FÜRST)

                                        (1907)

 


                                                                                      1911

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1912

 

              THE SEXUAL ENLIGHTENMENT OF CHILDREN

                    (AN OPEN LETTER TO DR. M. FÜRST)

 

Dear Dr. Fürst,

      When  you  ask  me  for  an  expression  of  opinion  on  ‘the  sexual

enlightenment  of  children’,  I  assume  that  what  you  want  is  not  a

regular, formal treatise on the subject which shall take into account the

excessive  mass  of  literature  that  has  grown  up  around  it,  but  the

independent  judgement  of  an  individual  doctor  whose  professional

activities have offered him special opportunities for concerning himself

with  sexual  problems.  I  know  that  you  have  followed  my  scientific

efforts with interest and that, unlike many of our colleagues, you do

not dismiss my ideas without examining them because I regard the

psychosexual constitution and certain noxae of sexual life as the most

important causes of the neurotic disorders that are so common. My

Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, too, where I have described

the  way  in  which  the  sexual  instinct  is  compounded  and  the

disturbances which may occur in its development into the function of

sexuality, have recently had a friendly reception in your journal.

      I  am  expected,  therefore,  to  answer  questions  on  the  following

points: whether children ought to be given any enlightenment at all

about the facts of sexual life, at what age this ought to happen and in

what manner it should be carried out. Let me admit to you at once thatI find a discussion of the second and third points perfectly reasonable,

but that to my mind it is quite incomprehensible how there could be a

difference of opinion on the first point. What can be the purpose of

withholding  from  children  -  or,  let  us  say,  from  young  people  -

enlightenment of this kind about the sexual life of human beings? Is it

from  a  fear  of  arousing  their  interest  in  these  matters  prematurely,

before it awakens in them spontaneously? Is it from a hope that a

concealment of this kind may retard the sexual instinct altogether until

such time as it can find its way into the only channels open to it in our

middle-class social order? Is it supposed that children would show no

interest or understanding for the facts and riddles of sexual life if they

were  not  prompted  to  do  so  by  outside  influences?  Is  it  thought

possible that the knowledge which is withheld from them will not reach

them in other ways?  Or is it genuinely and seriously intended that

later on they should regard everything to do with sex as something

degraded  and  detestable  from  which  their  parents  and  teachers

wished to keep them away as long as possible?

 


    The Sexual Enlightenment Of Children (An Open Letter To Dr. M.

                                        Furst)

                                                                                      1913

 

   I really do not know in which of these purposes to look for the motive

for  the  concealment  of  what  is  sexual  from  children  that  is  in  fact

carried out. I only know that they are all equally absurd and that I find

it  difficult  to  honour  them  with  a  serious  refutation.  I  remember,

however,  that  in  the  family  letters  of  that  great  thinker  and

humanitarian Multatuli, I once found a few lines which are a more than

adequate answer:

   ‘To my mind, certain things are in general too much wrapped in a

veil. It is right to keep a child’s imagination pure, but this purity will not

be preserved by ignorance. On the contrary, I think that concealment

leads a boy or girl to suspect the truth more than ever. Curiosity leads

us to pry into things which, if they had been told us without any great

to do, would have aroused little or no interest in us. If this ignorance

could be maintained even, I might become reconciled to it, but that isimpossible. The child comes into contact with other children, books

come his way which lead him to reflect, and the mystery-making with

which his parents treat what he has nevertheless discovered actually

increases his desire to know more. This desire, which is only partly

satisfied  and  only  in  secret,  excites  his  feeling  and  corrupts  his

imagination, so that the child already sins while his parents still believe

that he does not know what sin is.’¹

 

   ¹ Multatuli, 1906, 1, 26.

 


    The Sexual Enlightenment Of Children (An Open Letter To Dr. M.

                                        Furst)

                                                                                      1914

 

   I do not know how the case could be better stated, but perhaps I

may  add  a  few  remarks.  It  is  undoubtedly  nothing  else  but  the

customary  prudishness  and  their  own  bad  conscience  over  sexual

matters that causes adults to adopt this attitude of ‘mystery-making’ in

front  of  children;  but  possibly  a  part  is  also  played  by  a  piece  of

theoretical ignorance on their part, which we can counteract by giving

the  adults  some  enlightenment.  It  is  commonly  believed  that  the

sexual instinct is absent in children and only begins to emerge in them

at  puberty  when  the  sexual  organs  mature.  This  is  a  gross  error,

equally serious in its effects both on knowledge and on practice; and it

is so easily corrected by observation that one wonders how it could

ever have been made. As a matter of fact, the new-born baby brings

sexuality with it into the world, certain sexual sensations accompany

its development as a suckling and during early childhood, and only

very  few  children  would  seem  to  escape  sexual  activities  and

sensations before puberty. Anyone who would like to find a detailed

exposition of these statements can do so in my Three Essays on the

Theory of Sexuality,  to  which  I  have  referred  above.  There  he  will

learn that the organs of reproduction proper are not the only parts of

the body which provide sexual sensations of pleasure, and that nature

has even so ordered matters that actual stimulations of the genitals

are  unavoidable  during  early  childhood.  This  period  of  life,  during

which  a  certain  quota  of  what  is  undoubtedly  sexual  pleasure  isproduced  by  the  excitation  of  various  parts  of  the  skin  (erotogenic

zones),  by  the  activity  of  certain  biological  instincts  and  as  an

accompanying excitation in many affective states, is called the period

of auto-erotism, to use a term introduced by Havelock Ellis. All that

puberty does is to give the genitals primacy among all the other zones

and sources which produce pleasure, and thus to force erotism into

the service of the function of reproduction. This process can naturally

undergo  certain  inhibitions,  and  in  many  people  (those  who  later

become perverts and neurotics) it is only incompletely accomplished.

On the other hand, the child is capable long before puberty of most of

the psychical manifestations of love-tenderness, for example, devotion

and jealousy. Often enough, too, an irruption of these mental states is

associated with the physical sensations of sexual excitation, so that

the child cannot remain in doubt as to the connection between the

two. In short, except for his reproductive power, a child has a fully-

developed  capacity  for  love  long  before  puberty;  and  it  may  be

asserted  that  the  ‘mystery-making’  merely  prevents  him  from  being

able  to  gain  an  intellectual  grasp  of  activities  for  which  he  is

psychically prepared and physically adjusted.

 


    The Sexual Enlightenment Of Children (An Open Letter To Dr. M.

                                        Furst)

                                                                                      1915

 

      A  child’s  intellectual  interest  in  the  riddles  of  sex,  his  desire  for

sexual knowledge, shows itself accordingly at an unexpectedly early

age. If it has not been possible to make observations such as I am

now  going  to  put  before  you  more  frequently,  that  can  only  be

because parents are either afflicted with blindness in regard to this

interest  on  the  part  of  their  children,  or,  because,  if  they  cannot

overlook it, they at once take steps to stifle it. I know a delightful little

boy, now four years old, whose understanding parents abstain from

forcibly suppressing one part of the child’s development. Little Hans

has certainly not been exposed to anything in the nature of seduction

by  a  nurse,  yet  he  has  already  for  some  time  shown  the  liveliest

interest in the part of the body which he calls his ‘widdler’. When hewas only three he asked his mother: ‘ Mummy, have you got a widdler

too?’ His mother answered: ‘Of course. What did you think?’ He also

asked his father the same question repeatedly. At the same age he

was  taken  to  a  cow-shed  for  the  first  time  and  saw  a  cow  being

milked. ‘Oh look!’ he said, in surprise, ‘there’s milk coming out of its

widdler!’ At the age of three and three quarters he was on the way to

making an independent discovery of correct categories by means of

his observations. He saw some water being let out of an engine and

said, ‘Oh, look, the engine’s widdling. Where’s it got its widdler?’ He

added  afterwards  in  reflective  tones:  ‘A  dog  and  a  horse  have

widdlers; a table and a chair haven’t.’ Recently he was watching his

seven-day-old little sister being given a bath. ‘But her widdler’s still

quite small’, he remarked; ‘when she grows up it’ll get bigger all right.’

(I have been told of this same attitude towards the problem of sex

distinction in other boys of similar age.) I should like to say explicitly

that little Hans is not a sensual child or at all pathologically disposed.

The  fact  is  simply,  I  think,  that,  not  having  been  intimidated  or

oppressed with a sense of guilt, he gives expression quite ingenuously

to what he thinks.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] The history of little Hans’s later illness and recovery is described

in my ‘Analysis of a Phobia in a Five-Year-Old Boy’ (1909b).
 


    The Sexual Enlightenment Of Children (An Open Letter To Dr. M.

                                        Furst)

                                                                                      1916

 

   The second great problem which exercises a child’s mind - only at a

somewhat later age, no doubt - is the question of the origin of babies.

This is usually started by the unwelcome arrival of a small brother or

sister.  It  is  the  oldest  and  most  burning  question  that  confronts

immature  humanity.  Those  who  understand  how  to  interpret  myths

and legends can detect it in the riddle which the Theban Sphinx set to

Oedipus.  The  customary  answers  given  to  the  child  in  the  nursery

damage his genuine instinct of research and as a rule deal the first

blow,  too,  at  his  confidence  in  his  parents.  From  that  time  on  he

usually  begins  to  mistrust  grown-up  people,  and  to  keep  his  mostintimate  interests  secret  from  them.  The  following  little  document

shows how tormenting this curiosity can become in older children. It is

a letter written by a motherless girl of eleven and a half who had been

speculating on the problem with her younger sister.

 

‘Dear Aunt Mali,

   ‘Will you please be so kind as to tell me how you got Christel and

Paul.  You  must  know  because  you  are  married.  We  were  arguing

about it yesterday evening and we want to know the truth. We have

nobody else to ask. When are you coming to Salzburg? You know,

Aunt Mali, we simply can’t understand how the stork brings babies.

Trudel thought the stork brings them in a shirt. Then we want to know

as well if the stork gets them out of the pond and why one never sees

babies  in  ponds.  And  will  you  please  tell  me,  too,  how  one  knows

beforehand  when  one  is  going  to  have  one.  Write  and  tell  me

everything about it.

      ‘With thousands of greetings and kisses from us all,

                                                ‘Your inquisitive niece,

                                                            Lili.’

 

   I do not believe that this touching letter brought the two sisters the

enlightenment  they  wanted.  Later  on  the  writer  of  it  fell  ill  of  the

neurosis  that  arises  from  unanswered  unconscious  questions  -  of

obsessional brooding.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1924:] After some years, however, her obsessional brooding gave way to

a dementia praecox.
 


    The Sexual Enlightenment Of Children (An Open Letter To Dr. M.

                                        Furst)

                                                                                      1917

 

   There does not seem to me to be a single good reason for denying

children the enlightenment which their thirst for knowledge demands.

To be sure, if it is the purpose of educators to stifle the child’s power

of  independent  thought  as  early  as  possible,  in  favour  of  the

‘goodness’ which they think so much of, they cannot set about thisbetter than by deceiving him in sexual matters and intimidating him in

matters of religion. The stronger natures will, it is true, withstand these

influences and become rebels against the authority of their parents

and later against every other authority. If children are not given the

explanations for which they turn to their elders, they go on tormenting

themselves  with  the  problem  in  secret  and  produce  attempts  at

solution in which the truth they have guessed is mingled in the most

extraordinary way with grotesque untruths; or they whisper information

to one another in which, because of the young enquirers’ sense of

guilt, everything sexual is stamped as being horrible and disgusting.

These  infantile  sexual  theories  would  be  well  worth  collecting  and

examining. From this time on, children usually lose the only proper

attitude to sexual questions, and many of them never regain it.

   It seems that the large majority of authors, both men and women,

who  have  written  about  the  sexual  enlightenment  of  youth  have

concluded in favour of it. But the clumsiness of most of their proposals

as to when and how this enlightenment is to take place tempts one to

think that they have not found it easy to arrive at this conclusion. So

far  as  my  knowledge  of  the  literature  goes,  a  single  outstanding

exception is provided by the charming letter of explanation which a

certain Frau Emma Eckstein quotes as having been written by her to

her son when he was about ten years old.¹ The customary method is

obviously not quite the right one: all sexual knowledge is kept from

children  as  long  as  possible,  and  then  on  one  single  occasion  a

disclosure is made to them in solemn and turgid language, and even

so  is  only  half  the  truth  and  generally  comes  too  late.  Most  of  the

answers to the question ‘How am I to tell my children?’ make such a

miserable impression, on me at least, that I should prefer parents not

to  embark  on  the  business  of  enlightenment  at  all.  What  is  really

important is that children should never get the idea that one wants to

make more of a secret of the facts of sexual life than of any other

matter  which  is  not  yet  accessible  to  their  understanding;  and  to

ensure this it is necessary that from the very first what has to do with

sexuality should be treated like anything else that is worth knowing

about. Above all, it is the duty of schools not to evade the mention of

sexual matters. The main facts of reproduction and their significance

should be included in lessons about the animal kingdom, and at thesame time stress should be laid on the fact that man shares every

essential in his organization with the higher animals. Then, provided

that the child’s home environment does not aim directly at frightening

him  off  thinking,  something  that  I  once  overheard  in  a  nursery  will

probably happen more often. I heard a boy saying to his little sister:

‘How can you think babies are brought by the stork! You know man’s a

mammal; d’you think storks bring other mammals their babies too?’

 

   ¹ Emma Eckstein, 1904.

 


    The Sexual Enlightenment Of Children (An Open Letter To Dr. M.

                                        Furst)

                                                                                      1918

 

   The child’s curiosity will never reach a very high degree of intensity

provided it finds appropriate satisfaction at each stage of his learning.

Enlightenment  about  the  specific  facts  of  human  sexuality  and  an

indication of its social significance should, therefore, be given to the

child at the end of his time at his elementary school [Volksschule] and

before he enters his intermediate school [Mittelschule] - that is to say,

before he is ten years old. The period of confirmation would be a more

suitable time than any other at which to instruct the child, who will by

that time have a full knowledge of all the physical facts, in the moral

obligations which are attached to the actual satisfaction of the instinct.

Enlightenment about sexual life carried out along such lines as this,

proceeding  step  by  step  and  without  any  real  interruption,  and  in

which the school takes the initiative, seems to me to be the only kind

which  takes  into  account  the  child’s  development  and  thus

successfully avoids the dangers involved.

   I consider it the most significant advance in child education that in

France the State should have introduced, in place of the catechism, a

primer which gives the child his first instruction in his position as a

citizen and in the ethical duties which will later devolve on him. But

such elementary instruction is seriously deficient, so long as it does

not include the field of sexuality. Here is the gap which educators and

reformers should set about filling. In countries which have placed the

education of children wholly or in part in the hands of the clergy, it will,of course, be impossible to ask for this. A priest will never admit that

men and animals have the same nature, since he cannot do without

the immortality of the soul, which he requires as the basis for moral

precepts. Here, once again, we see the unwisdom of sewing a single

silk patch on to a tattered coat - the impossibility of carrying out an

isolated reform without altering the foundations of the whole system.

                                                                                       1919

 

                  CREATIVE WRITERS AND DAY-DREAMING

                                        (1908)

 


                                                                                      1920

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1921

 

                  CREATIVE WRITERS AND DAY-DREAMING

 

We  laymen  have  always  been  intensely  curious  to  know  like  the

Cardinal who put a similar question to Ariosto - from what sources that

strange  being,  the  creative  writer,  draws  his  material,  and  how  he

manages to make such an impression on us with it and to arouse in us

emotions  of  which,  perhaps,  we  had  not  even  thought  ourselves

capable. Our interest is only heightened the more by the fact that, if

we ask him, the writer himself gives us no explanation, or none that is

satisfactory; and it is not at all weakened by our knowledge that not

even the clearest insight into the determinants of his choice of material

and into the nature of the art of creating imaginative form will ever help

to make creative writers of us.

   If we could at least discover in ourselves or in people like ourselves

an  activity  which  was  in  some  way  akin  to  creative  writing!  An

examination  of  it  would  then  give  us  a  hope  of  obtaining  the

beginnings  of  an  explanation  of  the  creative  work  of  writers.  And,

indeed,  there  is  some  prospect  of  this  being  possible.  After  all,

creative writers themselves like to lessen the distance between their

kind and the common run of humanity; they so often assure us that

every man is a poet at heart and that the last poet will not perish till

the last man does.

   Should we not look for the first traces of imaginative activity as early

as in childhood The child’s best-loved and most intense occupation iswith  his  play  or  games.  Might  we  not  say  that  every  child  at  play

behaves like a creative writer, in that he creates a world of his own, or,

rather, re-arranges the things of his world in a new way which pleases

him? It would be wrong to think he does not take that world seriously;

on the contrary, he takes his play very seriously and he expends large

amounts of emotion on it. The opposite of play is not what is serious

but what is real. In spite of all the emotion with which he cathects his

world of play, the child distinguishes it quite well from reality; and he

likes to link his imagined objects and situations to the tangible and

visible things of the real world. This linking is all that differentiates the

child’s ‘play’ from ‘phantasying’.

 


                        Creative Writers And Day-Dreaming

                                                                                      1922

 

   The creative writer does the same as the child at play. He creates a

world of phantasy which he takes very seriously - that is, which he

invests with large amounts of emotion while separating it sharply from

reality. Language has preserved this relationship between children’s

play  and  poetic  creation.  It  gives  [in  German]  the  name  of  ‘Spiel’

[‘play’] to those forms of imaginative writing which require to be linked

to tangible objects and which are capable of representation. It speaks

of  a  ‘Lustspiel’  or  ‘Trauerspiel’  [‘comedy’  or  ‘tragedy’:  literally,

‘pleasure play’ or ‘mourning play’] and describes those who carry out

the representation as ‘Schauspieler’ [‘players’: literally ‘show-players’].

The  unreality  of  the  writer’s  imaginative  world,  however,  has  very

important consequences for the technique of his art; for many things

which, if they were real, could give no enjoyment, can do so in the

play  of  phantasy,  and  many  excitements  which,  in  themselves,  are

actually distressing, can become a source of pleasure for the hearers

and spectators at the performance of a writer’s work.

   There is another consideration for the sake of which we will dwell a

moment longer on this contrast between reality and play. When the

child has grown up and has ceased to play, and after he has been

labouring  for  decades  to  envisage  the  realities  of  life  with  proper

seriousness, he may one day find himself in a mental situation whichonce more undoes the contrast between play and reality. As an adult

he  can  look  back  on  the  intense  seriousness  with  which  he  once

carried  on  his  games  in  childhood;  and,  by  equating  his  ostensibly

serious occupations of to-day with his childhood games, he can throw

off the too heavy burden imposed on him by life and win the high yield

of pleasure afforded by humour.

 


                        Creative Writers And Day-Dreaming

                                                                                      1923

 

   As people grow up, then, they cease to play, and they seem to give

up the yield of pleasure which they gained from playing. But whoever

understands the human mind knows that hardly anything is harder for

a man than to give up a pleasure which he has once experienced.

Actually, we can never give anything up; we only exchange one thing

for another. What appears to be a renunciation is really the formation

of a substitute or surrogate. In the same way, the growing child, when

he  stops  playing,  gives  up  nothing  but  the  link  with  real  objects;

instead playing, he now phantasies. He builds castles in the air and

creates  what  are  called day-dreams.  I  believe  that  most  people

construct phantasies at times in their lives. This is a fact which has

long been overlooked and whose importance has therefore not been

sufficiently appreciated.

      People’s  phantasies  are  less  easy  to  observe  than  the  play  of

children.  The  child,  it  is  true,  plays  by  himself  or  forms  a  closed

psychical system with other children for the purposes of a game; but

even though he may not play his game in front of the grown-ups, he

does not, on the other hand, conceal it from them. The adult, on the

contrary,  is  ashamed  of  his  phantasies  and  hides  them  from  other

people.  He  cherishes  his  phantasies  as  his  most  intimate

possessions, and as a rule he would rather confess his misdeeds than

tell anyone his phantasies. It may come about that for that reason he

believes he is the only person who invents such phantasies and has

no idea that creations of this kind are widespread among other people.

This difference in the behaviour of a person who plays and a person

who phantasies is accounted for by the motives of these two activities,which are nevertheless adjuncts to each other.

 


                        Creative Writers And Day-Dreaming

                                                                                      1924

 

   A child’s play is determined by wishes: in point of fact by a single

wish-one that helps in his upbringing - the wish to be big and grown

up. He is always playing at being ‘grown up’, and in his games he

imitates what he knows about the lives of his elders. He has no reason

to conceal this wish. With the adult, the case is different. On the one

hand,  he  knows  that  he  is  expected  not  to  go  on  playing  or

phantasying any longer, but to act in the real world; on the other hand,

some of the wishes which give rise to his phantasies are of a kind

which it is essential to conceal. Thus he is ashamed of his phantasies

as being childish and as being unpermissible.

      But,  you  will  ask,  if  people  make  such  a  mystery  of  their

phantasying, how is it that we know such a lot about it? Well, there is

a class of human beings upon whom, not a god, indeed, but a stern

goddess - Necessity - has allotted the task of telling what they suffer

and  what  things  give  them  happiness.  These  are  the  victims  of

nervous illness, who are obliged to tell their phantasies, among other

things,  to  the  doctor  by  whom  they  expect  to  be  cured  by  mental

treatment. This is our best source of knowledge, and we have since

found good reason to suppose that our patients tell us nothing that we

might not also hear from healthy people.

      Let  us  now  make  ourselves  acquainted  with  a  few  of  the

characteristics  of  phantasying.  We  may  lay  it  down  that  a  happy

person never phantasies, only an unsatisfied one. The motive forces

of phantasies are unsatisfied wishes, and every single phantasy is the

fulfilment  of  a  wish,  a  correction  of  unsatisfying  reality.  These

motivating  wishes  vary  according  to  the  sex,  character  and

circumstances of the person who is having the phantasy; but they fall

naturally  into  two  main  groups.  They  are  either  ambitious  wishes,

which  serve  to  elevate  the  subject’s  personality;  or  they  are  erotic

ones.  In  young  women  the  erotic  wishes  predominate  almost

exclusively, for their ambition is as a rule absorbed by erotic trends. Inyoung  men  egoistic  and  ambitious  wishes  come  to  the  fore  clearly

enough  alongside  of  erotic  ones.  But  we  will  not  lay  stress  on  the

opposition between the two trends; we would rather emphasize the

fact  that  they  are  often  united.  Just  as,  in  many  altar-pieces,  the

portrait of the donor is to be seen in a corner of the picture, so, in the

majority of ambitious phantasies, we can discover in some corner or

other the lady for whom the creator of the phantasy performs all his

heroic deeds and at whose feet all his triumphs are laid. Here, as you

see,  there  are  strong  enough  motives  for  concealment;  the  well-

brought-up young woman is only allowed a minimum of erotic desire,

and the young man has to learn to suppress the excess of self-regard

which he brings with him from the spoilt days of his childhood, so that

he may find his place in a society which is full of other individuals

making equally strong demands.

 


                        Creative Writers And Day-Dreaming

                                                                                      1925

 

   We must not suppose that the products of this imaginative activity -

the  various  phantasies,  castles  in  the  air  and  day-dreams  -  are

stereotyped or unalterable. On the contrary, they fit themselves in to

the subject’s shifting impressions of life, change with every change in

his  situation,  and  receive  from  every  fresh  active  impression  what

might be called a ‘date-mark’. The relation of a phantasy to time is in

general very important. We may say that it hovers, as it were, between

three times - the three moments of time which our ideation involves.

Mental  work  is  linked  to  some  current  impression,  some  provoking

occasion in the present which has been able to arouse one of the

subject’s major wishes. From there it harks back to a memory of an

earlier  experience  (usually  an  infantile  one)  in  which  this  wish  was

fulfilled;  and  it  now  creates  a  situation  relating  to  the  future  which

represents a fulfilment of the wish. What it thus creates is a day-dream

or  phantasy,  which  carries  about  it  traces  of  its  origin  from  the

occasion which provoked it and from the memory. Thus past, present

and future are strung together, as it were, on the thread of the wish

that runs through them.   A very ordinary example may serve to make what I have said clear.

Let us take the case of a poor orphan boy to whom you have given the

address of some employer where he may perhaps find a job. On his

way there he may indulge in a day-dream appropriate to the situation

from  which  it  arises.  The  content  of  his  phantasy  will  perhaps  be

something  like  this.  He  is  given  a  job,  finds  favour  with  his  new

employer, makes himself indispensable in the business, is taken into

his  employer’s  family,  marries  the  charming  young  daughter  of  the

house, and then himself becomes a director of the business, first as

his employer’s partner and then as his successor. In this phantasy, the

dreamer has regained what he possessed in his happy childhood - the

protecting  house,  the  loving  parents  and  the  first  objects  of  his

affectionate feelings. You will see from this example the way in which

the wish makes use of an occasion in the present to construct, on the

pattern of the past, a picture of the future.

   There is a great deal more that could be said about phantasies; but I

will only allude as briefly as possible to certain points. If phantasies

become over-luxuriant and over-powerful, the conditions are laid for

an  onset  of  neurosis  or  psychosis.  Phantasies,  moreover,  are  the

immediate mental precursors of the distressing symptoms complained

of by our patients. Here a broad by-path branches off into pathology.

   I cannot pass over the relation of phantasies to dreams. Our dreams

at  night  are  nothing  else  than  phantasies  like  these,  as  we  can

demonstrate  from  the  interpretation  of  dreams.¹  Language,  in  its

unrivalled  wisdom,  long  ago  decided  the  question  of  the  essential

nature  of  dreams  by  giving  the  name  of  ‘day-dreams’  to  the  airy

creations of phantasy. If the meaning of our dreams usually remains

obscure to us in spite of this pointer, it is because of the circumstance

that at night there also arise in us wishes of which we are ashamed;

these we must conceal from ourselves, and they have consequently

been repressed, pushed into the unconscious. Repressed wishes of

this sort and their derivatives are only allowed to come to expression

in  a  very  distorted  form.  When  scientific  work  had  succeeded  in

elucidating this factor of dream-distortion, it was no longer difficult to

recognize that night-dreams are wish-fulfilments in just the same way

as day-dreams - the phantasies which we all know so well.

    ¹ Cf. Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a).

 


                        Creative Writers And Day-Dreaming

                                                                                      1926

 

 

   So much for phantasies. And now for the creative writer. May we

really attempt to compare the imaginative writer with the ‘dreamer in

broad  daylight’,  and  his  creations  with  day-dreams?  Here  we  must

begin by making an initial distinction. We must separate writers who,

like the ancient authors of epics and tragedies, take over their material

ready-made, from writers who seem to originate their own material.

We  will  keep  to  the  latter  kind,  and,  for  the  purposes  of  our

comparison, we will choose not the writers most highly esteemed by

the critics, but the less pretentious authors of novels, romances and

short stories, who nevertheless have the widest and most eager circle

of readers of both sexes. One feature above all cannot fail to strike us

about the creations of these story-writers: each of them has a hero

who  is  the  centre  of  interest,  for  whom  the  writer  tries  to  win  our

sympathy  by  every  possible  means  and  whom  he  seems  to  place

under  the  protection  of  a  special  Providence.  If,  at  the  end  of  one

chapter of my story, I leave the hero unconscious and bleeding from

severe wounds, I am sure to find him at the beginning of the next

being  carefully  nursed  and  on  the  way  to  recovery;  and  if  the  first

volume closes with the ship he is in going down in a storm at sea, I am

certain, at the opening of the second volume, to read of his miraculous

rescue  -  a  rescue  without  which  the  story  could  not  proceed.  The

feeling of security with which I follow the hero through his perilous

adventures is the same as the feeling with which a hero in real life

throws  himself  into  the  water  to  save  a  drowning  man  or  exposes

himself to the enemy’s fire in order to storm a battery. It is the true

heroic  feeling,  which  one  of  our  best  writers  has  expressed  in  an

inimitable  phrase:  ‘Nothing  can  happen  to me!’  It  seems  to  me,

however, that through this revealing characteristic of invulnerability we

can  immediately  recognize  His  Majesty  the  Ego,  the  hero  alike  of

every day-dream and of every story.

                         Creative Writers And Day-Dreaming

                                                                                      1927

 

   Other typical features of these egocentric stories point to the same

kinship. The fact that all the women in the novel invariably fall in love

with the hero can hardly be looked on as a portrayal of reality, but it is

easily  understood  as  a  necessary  constituent  of  a  day-dream.  The

same  is  true  of  the  fact  that  the  other  characters  in  the  story  are

sharply divided into good and bad, in defiance of the variety of human

characters that are to be observed in real life. The ‘good’ ones are the

helpers, while the ‘bad’ ones are the enemies and rivals, of the ego

which has become the hero of the story.

   We are perfectly aware that very many imaginative writings are far

removed from the model of the naïve day-dream; and yet I cannot

suppress the suspicion that even the most extreme deviations from

that model could be linked with it through an uninterrupted series of

transitional cases. It has struck me that in many of what are known as

‘psychological’  novels  only  one  person  -  once  again  the  hero  -  is

described from within. The author sits inside his mind, as it were, and

looks at the other characters from outside. The psychological novel in

general  no  doubt  owes  its  special  nature  to  the  inclination  of  the

modern writer to split up his ego, by self-observation, into many part-

egos, and, in consequence, to personify the conflicting currents of his

own  mental  life  in  several  heroes.  Certain  novels,  which  might  be

described as ‘eccentric’, seem to stand in quite special contrast to the

type of the day-dream. In these, the person who is introduced as the

hero  plays  only  a  very  small  active  part;  he  sees  the  actions  and

sufferings of other people pass before him like a spectator. Many of

Zola’s later works belong to this category. But I must point out that the

psychological analysis of individuals who are not creative writers, and

who diverge in some respects from the so-called norm, has shown us

analogous variations of the day-dream, in which the ego contents itself

with the role of spectator.

 


                        Creative Writers And Day-Dreaming

                                                                                      1928 

   If our comparison of the imaginative writer with the day-dreamer,

and of poetical creation with the day-dream, is to be of any value, it

must, above all, show itself in some way or other fruitful. Let us, for

instance, try to apply to these authors’ works the thesis we laid down

earlier  concerning  the  relation  between  phantasy  and  the  three

periods of time and the wish which runs through them; and, with its

help, let us try to study the connections that exist between the life of

the  writer  and  his  works.  No  one  has  known,  as  a  rule,  what

expectations  to  frame  in  approaching  this  problem;  and  often  the

connection has been thought of in much too simple terms. In the light

of the insight we have gained from phantasies, we ought to expect the

following state of affairs. A strong experience in the present awakens

in  the  creative  writer  a  memory  of  an  earlier  experience  (usually

belonging to his childhood) from which there now proceeds a wish

which finds its fulfilment in the creative work. The work itself exhibits

elements  of  the  recent  provoking  occasion  as  well  as  of  the  old

memory.

   Do not be alarmed at the complexity of this formula. I suspect that in

fact it will prove to be too exiguous a pattern. Nevertheless, it may

contain a first approach to the true state of affairs; and, from some

experiments  I  have  made,  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  this  way  of

looking at creative writings may turn out not unfruitful. You will not

forget that the stress it lays on childhood memories in the writer’s life -

a stress which may perhaps seem puzzling - is ultimately derived from

the assumption that a piece of creative writing, like a day-dream, is a

continuation  of,  and  a  substitute  for,  what  was  once  the  play  of

childhood.

 


                        Creative Writers And Day-Dreaming

                                                                                      1929

 

   We must not neglect, however, to go back to the kind of imaginative

works which we have to recognize, not as original creations, but as

the re-fashioning of ready-made and familiar material. Even here, the

writer keeps a certain amount of independence, which can expressitself in the choice of material and in changes in it which are often

quite extensive. In so far as the material is already at hand, however,

it is derived from the popular treasure-house of myths, legends and

fairy  tales.  The  study  of  constructions  of  folk-psychology  such  as

these  is  far  from  being  complete,  but  it  is  extremely  probable  that

myths, for instance, are distorted vestiges of the wishful phantasies of

whole nations, the secular dreams of youthful humanity.

 

   You will say that, although I have put the creative writer first in the

title  of  my  paper,  I  have  told  you  far  less  about  him  than  about

phantasies. I am aware of that, and I must try to excuse it by pointing

to the present state of our knowledge. All I have been able to do is to

throw out some encouragements and suggestions which, starting from

the study of phantasies, lead on to the problem of the writer’s choice

of his literary material. As for the other problem - by what means the

creative writer achieves the emotional effects in us that are aroused

by his creations - we have as yet not touched on it at all. But I should

like at least to point out to you the path that leads from our discussion

of phantasies to the problems of poetical effects.

   You will remember how I have said that the day-dreamer carefully

conceals his phantasies from other people because he feels he has

reasons for being ashamed of them. I should now add that even if he

were to communicate them to us he could give us no pleasure by his

disclosures.  Such  phantasies,  when  we  learn  them,  repel  us  or  at

least leave us cold. But when a creative writer presents his plays to us

or tells us what we are inclined to take to be his personal day dreams,

we experience a great pleasure, and one which probably arises from

the confluence of many sources. How the writer accomplishes this is

his innermost secret; the essential ars poetica lies in the technique of

overcoming  the  feeling  of  repulsion  in  us  which  is  undoubtedly

connected with the barriers that rise between each single ego and the

others. We can guess two of the methods used by this technique. The

writer softens the character of his egoistic day-dreams by altering and

disguising it, and he bribes us by the purely formal - that is, aesthetic -

yield  of  pleasure  which  he  offers  us  in  the  presentation  of  his

phantasies.  We  give  the  name  of  an incentive  bonus,  or  a fore-

pleasure, to a yield of pleasure such as this, which is offered to us soas to make possible the release of still greater pleasure arising from

deeper psychical sources. In my opinion, all the aesthetic pleasure

which a creative writer affords us has the character of a fore-pleasure

of this kind, and our actual enjoyment of an imaginative work proceeds

from a liberation of tensions in our minds. It may even be that not a

little of this effect is due to the writer’s enabling us thenceforward to

enjoy  our  own  day-dreams  without  self-reproach  or  shame.  This

brings  us  to  the  threshold  of  new,  interesting  and  complicated

enquiries;  but  also,  at  least  for  the  moment,  to  the  end  of  our

discussion.

                                                                                       1930

 

          HYSTERICAL PHANTASIES AND THEIR RELATION TO

                                    BISEXUALITY

                                        (1908)

 


                                                                                      1931

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1932

 

          HYSTERICAL PHANTASIES AND THEIR RELATION TO

                                    BISEXUALITY

 

We  are  all  familiar  with  the  delusional  imaginings  of  the  paranoic,

which are concerned with the greatness and the sufferings of his own

self  and  which  appear  in  forms  that  are  quite  typical  and  almost

monotonous. We have also become acquainted, through numerous

accounts, with the strange performances with which certain perverts

stage  their  sexual  satisfaction,  whether  in  idea  or  reality.

Nevertheless,  it  may  be  new  to  some  readers  to  hear  that  quite

analogous  psychical  structures  are  regularly  present  in  all  the

psychoneuroses, particularly in hysteria, and that these latter - which

are known as hysterical phantasies - can be seen to have important

connections with the causation of the neurotic symptoms.

   A common source and normal prototype of all these creations of

phantasy is to be found in what are called the day-dreams of youth.

These have already received some, though as yet insufficient, notice

in  the  literature  of  the  subject.¹  They  occur  with  perhaps  equal

frequency  in  both  sexes,  though  it  seems  that  while  in  girls  and

women they are invariably of an erotic nature, in men they may be

either erotic or ambitious. Nevertheless the importance of the erotic

factor in men, too, should not be given a secondary rating; a closer

investigation  of  a  man’s  day-dreams  generally  shows  that  all  hisheroic exploits are carried out and all his successes achieved only in

order to please a woman and to be preferred by her to other men.²

These  phantasies  are  satisfactions  of  wishes  proceeding  from

deprivation and longing. They are justly called ‘day-dreams’, for they

give us the key to an understanding of night-dreams - in which the

nucleus  of  the  dream-formation  consists  of  nothing  else  than

complicated day-time phantasies of this kind that have been distorted

and are misunderstood by the conscious psychical agency.³

 

   ¹ Cf. Breuer and Freud (1895), Pierre Janet (1898, 1), Havelock Ellis (1899), Freud (1900a),

Pick (1896).

   ² Havelock Ellis (1899) is of the same opinion.

   ³ Cf. The Interpretation of Dreams (1900a)..

 


            Hysterical Phantasies And Their Relation To Bisexuality

                                                                                      1933

 

   These day-dreams are cathected with a large amount of interest;

they are carefully cherished by the subject and usually concealed with

a  great  deal  of  sensitivity,  as  though  they  were  among  the  most

intimate  possessions  of  his  personality.  It  is  easy  to  recognize  a

person who is absorbed in day-dreaming in the street, however, by his

sudden, as it were absent-minded, smile, his way of talking to himself,

or  by  the  hastening  of  his  steps  which  marks  the  climax  of  the

imagined situation. Every hysterical attack which I have been able to

investigate up to the present has proved to be an involuntary irruption

of day-dreams of this kind. For our observations no longer leave any

room for doubt that such phantasies may be unconscious just as well

as conscious; and as soon as the latter have become unconscious

they  may  also  become  pathogenic  -  that  is,  they  may  express

themselves  in  symptoms  and  attacks.  In  favourable  circumstances,

the subject can still capture an unconscious phantasy of this sort in

consciousness. After I had drawn the attention of one of my patients to

her phantasies, she told me that on one occasion she had suddenly

found herself in tears in the street and that, rapidly considering what it

was she was actually crying about, she had got hold of a phantasy to

the  following  effect.  In  her  imagination  she  had  formed  a  tenderattachment to a pianist who was well known in the town (though she

was not personally acquainted with him); she had had a child by him

(she was in fact childless); and he had then deserted her and her child

and left them in poverty. It was at this point in her romance that she

had burst into tears.

 


            Hysterical Phantasies And Their Relation To Bisexuality

                                                                                      1934

 

   Unconscious phantasies have either been unconscious all along and

have been formed in the unconscious; or - as is more often the case -

they were once conscious phantasies, day-dreams, and have since

been  purposely  forgotten  and  have  become  unconscious  through

‘repression’. Their content may afterwards either have remained the

same or have undergone alterations, so that the present unconscious

phantasies  are  derivatives  of  the  once  conscious  ones.  Now  an

unconscious  phantasy  has  a  very  important  connection  with  the

subject’s sexual life; for it is identical with the phantasy which served

to give him sexual satisfaction during a period of masturbation. At that

time  the  masturbatory  act  (in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term)  was

compounded of two parts. One was the evocation of a phantasy and

the other some active behaviour for obtaining self-gratification at the

height of the phantasy. This compound, as we know, was itself merely

soldered  together.¹  Originally  the  action  was  a  purely  auto-erotic

procedure for the purpose of obtaining pleasure from some particular

part of the body, which could be described as erotogenic. Later, this

action became merged with a wishful idea from the sphere of object-

love and served as a partial realization of the situation in which the

phantasy culminated. When, subsequently, the subject renounces this

type  of  satisfaction,  composed  of  masturbation  and  phantasy,  the

action is given up, while the phantasy, from being conscious, becomes

unconscious. If no other mode of sexual satisfaction supervenes, the

subject remains abstinent; and if he does not succeed in sublimating

his libido - that is, in deflecting his sexual excitation to higher aims -,

the  condition  is  now  fulfilled  for  his  unconscious  phantasy  to  be

revived and to proliferate, and, at least as regards some part of itscontent, to put itself into effect, with the whole force of his need for

love, in the form of a pathological symptom.

 

   ¹ Cf. Freud, Three Essays (1905d).

 


            Hysterical Phantasies And Their Relation To Bisexuality

                                                                                      1935

 

   In this way, unconscious phantasies are the immediate psychical

precursors  of  a  whole  number  of  hysterical  symptoms.  Hysterical

symptoms are nothing other than unconscious phantasies brought into

view through  ‘conversion’; and in so far as the symptoms are somatic

ones, they are often enough taken from the circle of the same sexual

sensations  and  motor  innervations  as  those  which  had  originally

accompanied the phantasy when it was still conscious. In this way the

giving  up  of  the  habit  of  masturbation  is  in  fact  undone,  and  the

purpose of the whole pathological process, which is a restoration of

the original, primary sexual satisfaction, is achieved - though never

completely, it is true, but always in a sort of approximation.

      Anyone  who  studies  hysteria,  therefore,  soon  finds  his  interest

turned  away  from  its  symptoms  to  the  phantasies  from  which  they

proceed.  The  technique  of  psycho-analysis  enables  us  in  the  first

place to infer from the symptoms what those unconscious phantasies

are and then to make them conscious to the patient. By this means it

has  been  found  that  the  content  of  the  hysteric’s  unconscious

phantasies  corresponds  completely  to  the  situations  in  which

satisfaction is consciously obtained by perverts; and if anyone is at a

loss for examples of such situations he has only to recall the world-

famous performances of the Roman Emperors, the wild excesses of

which  were,  of  course,  determined  only  by  the  enormous  and

unrestrained power possessed by the authors of the phantasies. The

delusions of paranoics are phantasies of the same nature, though they

are phantasies which have become directly conscious. They rest on

the sado-masochistic components of the sexual instinct, and they, too,

may find their complete counterpart in certain unconscious phantasies

of hysterical subjects. We also know of cases - cases which have their

practical  importance  as  well  -  in  which  hysterics  do  not  giveexpression  to  their  phantasies  in  the  form  of  symptoms  but  as

conscious  realizations,  and  in  that  way  devise  and  stage  assaults,

attacks or acts of sexual aggression.

   This method of psycho-analytic investigation, which leads from the

conspicuous symptoms to the hidden unconscious phantasies, tells us

everything that can be known about the sexuality of psychoneurotics,

including the fact which is to be the main subject-matter of this short

preliminary publication.

 


            Hysterical Phantasies And Their Relation To Bisexuality

                                                                                      1936

 

      Owing,  probably,  to  the  difficulties  which  the  unconscious

phantasies  meet  with  in  their  endeavour  to  find  expression,  the

relationship of the phantasies to the symptoms is not simple, but on

the contrary, complicated in many ways.¹ As a rule - when, that is, the

neurosis  is  fully  developed  and  has  persisted  for  some  time  -  a

particular  symptom  corresponds,  not  to  a  single  unconscious

phantasy, but to several such phantasies; and it does so not in an

arbitrary  manner  but  in  accordance  with  a  regular  pattern.  At  the

beginning of the illness these complications are, no doubt, not all fully

developed.

   For the sake of general interest I will at this point go outside the

framework  of  this  paper  and  interpolate  a  series  of  formulas  which

attempt  to  give  a  progressively  fuller  description  of  the  nature  of

hysterical symptoms. These formulas do not contradict one another,

but some represent an increasingly complete and precise approach to

the facts, while others represent the application of different points of

view:

   (1) Hysterical symptoms are mnemic symbols of certain operative

(traumatic) impressions and experiences.

   (2) Hysterical symptoms are substitutes, produced by ‘conversion’,

for the associative return of these traumatic experiences.

   (3) Hysterical symptoms are - like other psychical structures - an

expression of the fulfilment of a wish.

      (4)  Hysterical  symptoms  are  the  realization  of  an  unconsciousphantasy which serves the fulfilment of a wish.

   (5) Hysterical symptoms serve the purpose of sexual satisfaction

and represent a portion of the subject’s sexual life (a portion which

corresponds to one of the constituents of his sexual instinct).

   (6) Hysterical symptoms correspond to a return of a mode of sexual

satisfaction which was a real one in infantile life and has since been

repressed.

      (7)  Hysterical  symptoms  arise  as  a  compromise  between  two

opposite affective and instinctual impulses, of which one is attempting

to  bring  to  expression  a  component  instinct  or  a  constituent  of  the

sexual constitution, and the other is attempting to suppress it.

   (8) Hysterical symptoms may take over the representation of various

unconscious impulses which are not sexual, but they can never be

without a sexual significance.

 

   ¹ The same is true of the relation between the ‘latent’ dream-thoughts and the elements of

the ‘manifest’ content of a dream. See the section of my Interpretation of Dreams which deals
with the ‘dream-work’.
 


            Hysterical Phantasies And Their Relation To Bisexuality

                                                                                      1937

 

   Among these various definitions the seventh brings out the nature of

hysterical  symptoms  most  completely  as  the  realization  of  an

unconscious  phantasy;  and  the  eighth  recognizes  the  proper

significance of the sexual factor. Some of the preceding formulas lead

up to these two and are contained in them.

   This connection between symptoms and phantasies makes it easy

to arrive from a psycho-analysis of the former at a knowledge of the

components of the sexual instincts which dominate the individual, as I

have demonstrated in my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality. In

some  cases,  however,  investigation  by  this  means  yields  an

unexpected result. It shows that there are many symptoms where the

uncovering of a sexual phantasy (or of a number of phantasies, one of

which, the most significant and the earliest, is of a sexual nature) is

not enough to bring about a resolution of the symptoms. To resolve it

one has to have two sexual phantasies, of which one has a masculineand  the  other  a  feminine  character.  Thus  one  of  these  phantasies

springs from a homosexual impulse. This new finding does not alter

our seventh formula. It remains true that a hysterical symptom must

necessarily  represent  a  compromise  between  a  libidinal  and  a

repressing impulse; but it may also represent a union of two libidinal

phantasies of an opposite sexual character.

 


            Hysterical Phantasies And Their Relation To Bisexuality

                                                                                      1938

 

   I shall refrain from giving examples in support of this thesis. I have

found from experience that short analyses, condensed into extracts,

can  never  have  the  convincing  effect  which  they  are  designed  to

produce.  And  on  the  other  hand,  accounts  of  fully  analysed  cases

must be left for another occasion.

   I will therefore content myself with stating the following formula and

explaining its significance:

   (9) Hysterical symptoms are the expression on the one hand of a

masculine unconscious sexual phantasy, and on the other hand of a

feminine one.

   I must expressly state that I cannot claim the same general validity

for this formula as I have done for the others. As far as I can see, it

applies neither to all the symptoms of a given case nor to all cases.

On the contrary, it is not hard to adduce cases in which the impulses

belonging  to  the  opposite  sexes  have  found  separate  symptomatic

expression,  so  that  the  symptoms  of  heterosexuality  and  those  of

homosexuality can be as clearly distinguished from each other as the

phantasies  concealed  behind  them.  Nevertheless,  the  condition  of

things stated in the ninth formula is common enough, and, when it

occurs, important enough to deserve special emphasis. It seems to

me  to  mark  the  highest  degree  of  complexity  to  which  the

determination  of  a  hysterical  symptom  can  attain,  and  one  may

therefore only expect to find it in a neurosis which has persisted for a

long  time  and  within  which  a  great  deal  of  organization  has  taken

place.¹

   The bisexual nature of hysterical symptoms, which can in any eventbe demonstrated in numerous cases, is an interesting confirmation of

my view that the postulated existence of an innate bisexual disposition

in man is especially clearly visible in the analysis of psychoneurotics.²

An exactly analogous state of affairs occurs in the same field when a

person who is masturbating tries in his conscious phantasies to have

the feelings both of the man and of the woman in the situation which

he  is  picturing.  Further  counterparts  are  to  be  found  in  certain

hysterical attacks in which the patient simultaneously plays both parts

in the underlying sexual phantasy. In one case which I observed, for

instance, the patient pressed her dress up against her body with one

hand (as the woman), while she tried to tear it off with the other (as

the man). This simultaneity of contradictory actions serves to a large

extent  to  obscure  the  situation,  which  is  otherwise  so  plastically

portrayed  in  the  attack,  and  it  is  thus  well  suited  to  conceal  the

unconscious phantasy that is at work.

 

   ¹ Sadger (1907) has recently discovered this formula independently in his own psycho-

analyses. He, however, maintains that it has general validity.

   ² Cf. my Three Essays.

 


            Hysterical Phantasies And Their Relation To Bisexuality

                                                                                      1939

 

   In psycho-analytic treatment it is very important to be prepared for a

symptom’s having a bisexual meaning. We need not then be surprised

or misled if a symptom seems to persist undiminished although we

have already resolved one of its sexual meanings; for it is still being

maintained  by  the  -  perhaps  unsuspected  -  one  belonging  to  the

opposite  sex.  In  the  treatment  of  such  cases,  moreover,  one  may

observe how the patient avails himself, during the analysis of the one

sexual meaning, of the convenient possibility of constantly switching

his associations, as though on to an adjoining track, into the field of

the contrary meaning.

 

                                                                                       1940

 

                        CHARACTER AND ANAL EROTISM

                                        (1908)

 


                                                                                      1941

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1942

 

                        CHARACTER AND ANAL EROTISM

 

Among those whom we try to help by our psycho-analytic efforts we

often come across a type of person who is marked by the possession

of a certain set of character-traits, while at the same time our attention

is  drawn  to  the  behaviour  in  his  childhood  of  one  of  his  bodily

functions and the organ concerned in it. I cannot say at this date what

particular occasions began to give me an impression that there was

some  organic  connection  between  this  type  of  character  and  this

behaviour of an organ, but I can assure the reader that no theoretical

expectation played any part in that impression.

   Accumulated experience has so much strengthened my belief in the

existence  of  such  a  connection  that  I  am  venturing  to  make  it  the

subject of a communication.

   The people I am about to describe are noteworthy for a regular

combination of the three following characteristics. They are especially

orderly, parsimonious  and obstinate.  Each  of  these  words  actually

covers a small group or series of interrelated character-traits. ‘Orderly’

covers  the  notion  of  bodily  cleanliness,  as  well  as  of

conscientiousness in carrying out small duties and trustworthiness. Its

opposite would be ‘untidy’ and ‘neglectful’. Parsimony may appear in

the  exaggerated  form  of  avarice;  and  obstinacy  can  go  over  into

defiance, to which rage and revengefulness are easily joined. The two

latter qualities - parsimony and obstinacy are linked with each othermore closely than they are with the first - with orderliness. They are,

also, the more constant element of the whole complex. Yet it seems to

me incontestable that all three in some way belong together.

 


                              Character And Anal Erotism

                                                                                      1943

 

   It is easy to gather from these people’s early childhood history that

they  took  a  comparatively  long  time  to  overcome  their  infantile

incontinentia  alvi  [faecal  incontinence],  and  that  even  in  later

childhood  they  suffered  from  isolated  failures  of  this  function.  As

infants, they seem to have belonged to the class who refuse to empty

their  bowels  when  they  are  put  on  the  pot  because  they  derive  a

subsidiary  pleasure  from  defaecating;¹  for  they  tell  us  that  even  in

somewhat later years they enjoyed holding back their stool, and they

remember - though more readily about their brothers and sisters than

about themselves - doing all sorts of unseemly things with the faeces

that  had  been  passed.  From  these  indications  we  infer  that  such

people are born with a sexual constitution in which the erotogenicity of

the  anal  zone  is  exceptionally  strong.  But  since  none  of  these

weaknesses and idiosyncracies are to be found in them once their

childhood has been passed, we must conclude that the anal zone had

lost its erotogenic significance in the course of development; and it is

to be suspected that the regularity with which this triad of properties is

present  in  their  character  may  be  brought  into  relation  with  the

disappearance of their anal erotism.

   I know that no one is prepared to believe in a state of things so long

as it appears to be unintelligible and to offer no angle from which an

explanation can be attempted. But we can at least bring the underlying

factors nearer to our understanding by the help of the postulates I laid

down in my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality in 1905. I there

attempted to show that the sexual instinct of man is highly complex

and is put together from contributions made by numerous constituents

and component instincts. Important contributions to ‘sexual excitation’

are  furnished  by  the  peripheral  excitations  of  certain  specially

designated  parts  of  the  body  (the  genitals,  mouth,  anus,  urethra),which therefore deserve to be described as ‘erotogenic zones’. But the

amounts of excitation coming in from these parts of the body do not all

undergo the same vicissitudes, nor is the fate of all of them the same

at every period of life. Generally speaking, only a part of them is made

use of in sexual life; another part is deflected from sexual aims and

directed  towards  others  -  a  process  which  deserves  the  name  of

‘sublimation’. During the period of life which may be called the period

of ‘sexual latency’ - i.e. from the completion of the fifth year to the first

manifestations of puberty (round about the eleventh year) - reaction-

formations, or counter-forces, such as shame, disgust and morality,

are created in the mind. They are actually formed at the expense of

the excitations proceeding from the erotogenic zones, and they rise

like dams to oppose the later activity of the sexual instincts. Now anal

erotism is one of the components of the instinct which, in the course of

development and in accordance with the education demanded by our

present civilization, have become unserviceable for sexual aims. It is

therefore  plausible  to  suppose  that  these  character-traits  of

orderliness, parsimony and obstinacy, which are so often prominent in

people who were formerly anal erotics, are to be regarded as the first

and most constant results of the sublimation of anal erotism.²

 

   ¹ Cf. Freud, Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d).

   ² Since it is precisely the remarks in my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality about the

anal erotism of infants that have particularly scandalized uncomprehending readers, I venture
at this point to interpolate an observation for which I have to thank a very intelligent patient. ‘A
friend of mine’, he told me, ‘who has read your Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, was
talking about the book. He entirely agreed with it, but there was one passage, which - though
of course he accepted and understood its meaning like that of the rest - struck him as so
grotesque and comic that he sat down and laughed over it for a quarter of an hour. This
passage ran: "One of the clearest signs of subsequent eccentricity or nervousness is to be
seen when a baby obstinately refuses to empty his bowels when he is put on the pot - that is,
when his nurse wants him to - and holds back that function till he himself chooses to exercise
it. He is naturally not concerned with dirtying the bed, he is only anxious not to miss the
subsidiary pleasure attached to defaecating." The picture of this baby sitting on the pot and
deliberating whether he would put up with a restriction of this kind upon his personal freedom
of  will,  and  feeling  anxious,  too,  not  to  miss  the  pleasure  attached  to  defaecating,  -  this
caused my friend the most intense amusement. About twenty minutes afterwards, as we were
having some cocoa, he suddenly remarked without any preliminary: "I say, seeing the cocoa
in front of me has suddenly made me think of an idea that I always had when I was a child. I
used  always  to  pretend  to  myself  that  I  was  the  cocoa-manufacturer  Van  Houten"  (he
pronounced the name Van "Hauten") "and that I possessed a great secret for the manufacture
of this cocoa. Everybody was trying to get hold of this secret that was a boon to humanity but Ikept it carefully to myself. I don’t know why I should have hit specially upon Van Houten.
Probably his advertisements impressed me more than any others." Laughing, and without
thinking at the time that my words had any deep meaning, I said: "Wann haut’n die Mutter?"
[‘When  does  mother  smack?’  The  first  two  words  in  the  German  phrase  are  pronounced
exactly like ‘Van Houten’.] It was only later that I realized that my pun in fact contained the key
to the whole of my friend’s sudden childhood recollection, and I then recognized it as a brilliant
example of a screen-phantasy. My friend’s phantasy, while keeping to the situation, actually
involved (the nutritional process) and making use of phonetic associations ("Kakao" [‘cocoa’. -
‘Kaka’ is the common German nursery word for ‘faeces’] and "Wann haut’n"), pacified his
sense of guilt by making a complete reversal in the content of his recollection: there was a
displacement from the back of the body to the front, excreting food became taking food in, and
something that was shameful and had to be concealed became a secret that was a boon to
humanity. I was interested to see how, only a quarter of an hour after my friend had fended
the phantasy off (though, it is true, in the comparatively mild form of raising an objection on
formal grounds) - he was, quite involuntarily, presented with the most convincing evidence by
his own unconscious.’
 


                              Character And Anal Erotism

                                                                                      1944

 

   The intrinsic necessity for this connection is not clear, of course,

even to myself. But I can make some suggestions which may help

towards  an  understanding  of  it.  Cleanliness,  orderliness  and

trustworthiness  give  exactly  the  impression  of  a  reaction-formation

against an interest in what is unclean and disturbing and should not be

part  of  the  body.  (‘Dirt  is  matter  in  the  wrong  place.’)¹  To  relate

obstinacy to an interest in defaecation would seem no easy task; but it

should  be  remembered  that  even  babies  can  show  self-will  about

parting with their stool, as we have seen above, and that it is a general

practice in children’s upbringing to administer painful stimuli to the skin

of the buttocks which is linked up with the erotogenic anal zone - in

order  to  break  their  obstinacy  and  make  them  submissive.  An

invitation to a caress of the anal zone is still used to-day, as it was in

ancient times, to express defiance or defiant scorn, and thus in reality

signifies an act of tenderness that has been overtaken by repression.

An  exposure  of  the  buttocks  represents  a  softening  down  of  this

spoken invitation into a gesture; in Goethe’s Götz von Berlichingen

both words and gesture are introduced at the most appropriate point

as an expression of defiance.

   The connections between the complexes of interest in money and of

defaecation,  which  seem  so  dissimilar,  appear  to  be  the  mostextensive  of  all.  Every  doctor  who  has  practised  psycho-analysis

knows  that  the  most  refractory  and  long-standing  cases  of  what  is

described as habitual constipation in neurotics can be cured by that

form  of  treatment.  This  is  less  surprising  if  we  remember  that  that

function has shown itself similarly amenable to hypnotic suggestion.

But in psycho-analysis one only achieves this result if one deals with

the  patients’  money  complex  and  induces  them  to  bring  it  into

consciousness with all its connections. It might be supposed that the

neurosis  is  here  only  following  as  indication  of  common  usage  in

speech,  which  calls  a  person  who  keeps  too  careful  a  hold  on  his

money  ‘dirty’  or  ‘filthy’.²  But  this  explanation  would  be  far  too

superficial.  In  reality,  wherever  archaic  modes  of  thought  have

predominated or persist - in the ancient civilizations, in myths, fairy

tales  and  superstitions,  in  unconscious  thinking,  in  dreams  and  in

neuroses - money is brought into the most intimate relationship with

dirt. We know that the gold which the devil gives his paramours turns

into excrement after his departure, and the devil is certainly nothing

else than the personification of the repressed unconscious instinctual

life.³ We also know about the superstition which connects the finding

of treasure with defaecation, and everyone is familiar with the figure of

                                                      4
the ‘shitter of ducats [Dukatenscheisser]’. Indeed, even according to

ancient Babylonian doctrine gold is ‘the faeces of Hell’ (Mammon = ilu

          5
manman). Thus in following the usage of language, neurosis, here as

elsewhere,  is  taking  words  in  their  original,  significant  sense,  and

where it appears to be using a word figuratively it is usually simply

restoring its old meaning.

 

   ¹ [In English in the original.]

   ² [The English ‘filthy’ as well as the German ‘filzig’ appears in the original.]

   ³ Compare hysterical possession and demoniac epidemics.

4
    [A term vulgarly used for a wealthy spendthrift.]

5
    Cf. Jeremias (1904, 115n.).’"Mamon" ("Mammon") is "Manman" in Babylonian and is

another name for Nergal, the God of the Underworld. According to Oriental mythology, which
has passed over into popular legends and fairy tales, gold is the excrement of Hell.’
 


                              Character And Anal Erotism

                                                                                      1945 

   It is possible that the contrast between the most precious substance

known to men and the most worthless, which they reject as waste

matter  (‘refuse’¹),  has  led  to  this  specific  identification  of  gold  with

faeces.

      Yet  another  circumstance  facilitates  this  equation  in  neurotic

thought.  The  original  erotic  interest  in  defaecation  is,  as  we  know,

destined to be extinguished in later years. In those years the interest

in money makes its appearance as a new interest which had been

absent  in  childhood.  This  makes  it  easier  for  the  earlier  impulsion,

which is in process of losing its aim, to be carried over to the newly

emerging aim.

   If there is any basis in fact for the relation posited here between anal

erotism and this triad of character-traits, one may expect to find no

very marked degree of ‘anal character’ in people who have retained

the  anal  zone’s  erotogenic  character  in  adult  life,  as  happens,  for

instance, with certain homosexuals. Unless I am much mistaken, the

evidence  of  experience  tallies  quite  well  on  the  whole  with  this

inference.

   We ought in general to consider whether other character complexes,

too,  do  not  exhibit  a  connection  with  the  excitations  of  particular

erotogenic  zones.  At  present  I  only  know  of  the  intense  ‘burning’

ambition of people who earlier suffered from enuresis. We can at any

rate  lay  down  a  formula  for  the  way  in  which  character  in  its  final

shape  is  formed  out  of  the  constituent  instincts:  the  permanent

character-traits  are  either  unchanged  prolongations  of  the  original

instincts,  or  sublimations  of  those  instincts,  or  reaction-formations

against them.

 

   ¹ [In English in the original.]

                                                                                       1946

 

        ‘CIVILIZED’ SEXUAL MORALITY AND MODERN NERVOUS

                                      ILLNESS

                                        (1908)

 


                                                                                      1947

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1948

 

        ‘CIVILIZED’ SEXUAL MORALITY AND MODERN NERVOUS

                                      ILLNESS

 

In his recently published book, Sexual Ethics, Von Ehrenfels (1907)

dwells  on  the  difference  between  ‘natural’  and  ‘civilized’  sexual

morality. By natural sexual morality we are to understand, according to

him, a sexual morality under whose dominance a human stock is able

to remain in lasting possession of health and efficiency, while civilized

sexual morality is a sexual morality obedience to which, on the other

hand, spurs men on to intense and productive cultural activity. This

contrast,  he  thinks,  is  best  illustrated  by  comparing  the  innate

character of a people with their cultural attainments. I may refer the

reader  to  Von  Ehrenfels’s  own  work  for  a  more  extensive

consideration of this significant line of thought, and I shall extract from

it  here  only  as  much  as  I  need  as  a  starting-point  for  my  own

contribution to the subject.

   It is not difficult to suppose that under the domination of a civilized

sexual morality the health and efficiency of single individuals may be

liable to impairment and that ultimately this injury to them, caused by

the sacrifices imposed on them, may reach such a pitch that, by this

indirect path, the cultural aim in view will be endangered as well. And

Von  Ehrenfels  does  in  fact  attribute  a  number  of  ill-effects  to  the

sexual morality which dominates our Western society to-day, ill-effectsfor  which  he  is  obliged  to  make  that  morality  responsible;  and,

although he fully acknowledges its high aptitude for the furtherance of

civilization, he is led to convict it of standing in need of reform. In his

view,  what  is  characteristic  of  the  civilized  sexual  morality  that

dominates us is that the demands made on women are carried over to

the  sexual  life  of  men  and  that  all  sexual  intercourse  is  prohibited

except in monogamous marriage. Nevertheless, consideration of the

natural  difference  between  the  sexes  makes  it  necessary  to  visit

men’s  lapses  with  less  severity  and  thus  in  fact  to  admit  a double

morality  for  them.  But  a  society  which  accepts  this  double  morality

cannot carry ‘the love of truth, honesty and humanity’ (Von Ehrenfels,

ibid. 32 ff.) beyond a definite and narrow limit, and is bound to induce

in  its  members  concealment  of  the  truth,  false  optimism,  self-

deception and deception of others. And civilized sexual morality has

still worse effects, for, by glorifying monogamy, it cripples the factor of

selection by virility - the factor whose influence alone can bring about

an improvement of the individual’s innate constitution, since in civilized

peoples selection  by  vitality  has  been  reduced  to  a  minimum  by

humanity and hygiene (ibid., 35).

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1949

 

   Among the damaging effects which are here laid at the door of

civilized sexual morality, the physician will miss a particular one whose

significance will be discussed in detail in the present paper. I refer to

the increase traceable to it of modern nervous illness - of the nervous

illness, that is, which is rapidly spreading in our present-day society.

Occasionally a nervous patient will himself draw the doctor’s attention

to the part played in the causation of his complaint by the opposition

between his constitution and the demands of civilization and will say:

‘In our family we’ve all become neurotic because we wanted to be

something better than what, with our origin, we are capable of being.’

Often, too, the physician finds food for thought in observing that those

who succumb to nervous illness are precisely the offspring of fathers

who, having been born of rough but vigorous families, living in simple,healthy, country conditions, had successfully established themselves

in  the  metropolis,  and  in  a  short  space  of  time  had  brought  their

children  to  a  high  level  of  culture.  But,  above  all,  nerve  specialists

themselves  have  loudly  proclaimed  the  connection  between

‘increasing nervous illness’ and modern civilized life. The grounds to

which they attribute this connection will be shown by a few extracts

from statements that have been made by some eminent observers.

   W. Erb (1893): ‘The original question, then, is whether the causes of

nervous illness that have been put before you are present in modern

life to such a heightened degree as to account for a marked increase

in  that  form  of  illness.  The  question  can  be  answered  without

hesitation in the affirmative, as a cursory glance at our present-day

existence and its features will show.

   ‘This is already clearly demonstrated by a number of general facts.

The extraordinary achievements of modern times, the discoveries and

inventions in every sphere, the maintenance of progress in the face of

increasing competition - these things have only been gained, and can

only  be  held,  by  great  mental  effort.  The  demands  made  on  the

efficiency of the individual in the struggle for existence have greatly

increased and it is only by putting out all his mental powers that he

can  meet  them.  At  the  same  time,  the  individual’s  needs  and  his

demands  for  the  enjoyments  of  life  have  increased  in  all  classes;

unprecedented luxury has spread to strata of the population who were

formerly quite untouched by it; irreligion, discontent and covetousness

have  grown  up  in  wide  social  spheres.  The  immense  extension  of

communications  which  has  been  brought  about  by  the  network  of

telegraphs  and  telephones  that  encircle  the  world  has  completely

altered  the  conditions  of  trade  and  commerce.  All  is  hurry  and

agitation; night is used for travel, day for business, even ‘holiday trips’

have  become  a  strain  on  the  nervous  system.  Important  political,

industrial and financial crises carry excitement into far wider circles of

people than they used to do; political life is engaged in quite generally;

political,  religious  and  social  struggles,  party-politics,  electioneering,

and the enormous spread of trade-unionism inflame tempers, place an

ever  greater  strain  on  the  mind,  and  encroach  upon  the  hours  for

recreation,  sleep  and  rest.  City  life  is  constantly  becoming  more

sophisticated  and  more  restless.  The  exhausted  nerves  seekrecuperation in increased stimulation and in highly-spiced pleasures,

only  to  become  more  exhausted  than  before.  Modern  literature  is

predominantly concerned with the most questionable problems which

stir up all the passions, and which encourage sensuality and a craving

for pleasure, and contempt for every fundamental ethical principle and

every ideal. It brings before the reader’s mind pathological figures and

problems  concerned  with  psychopathic  sexuality,  and  revolutionary

and other subjects. Our ears are excited and overstimulated by large

doses  of  noisy  and  insistent  music.  The  theatres  captivate  all  our

senses with their exciting performances. The plastic arts, too, turn by

preference  to  what  is  repellent,  ugly  and  suggestive,  and  do  not

hesitate to set before our eyes with revolting fidelity the most horrible

sights that reality has to offer.

   ‘This general description is already enough to indicate a number of

dangers presented by the evolution of our modern civilization. Let me

now fill in the picture with a few details.’

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1950

 

   Binswanger (1896): ‘Neurasthenia in particular has been described

as  an  essentially  modern  disorder,  and  Beard,  to  whom  we  are

indebted for a first comprehensive account of it believed that he had

discovered a new nervous disease which had developed specifically

on  American  soil.  This  supposition  was  of  course  a  mistaken  one;

nevertheless, the fact that it was an American physician who was first

able to grasp and describe the peculiar features of this illness, as the

fruit of a wide experience, indicates, no doubt, the close connections

which exist between it and modern life, with its unbridled pursuit of

money  and  possessions,  and  its  immense  advances  in  the  field  of

technology  which  have  rendered  illusory  every  obstacle,  whether

temporal or spatial, to our means of intercommunication.’

      Von  Krafft-Ebing  (1895):  ‘The  mode  of  life  of  countless  civilized

people exhibits nowadays an abundance of anti-hygienic factors which

make it easy to understand the fateful increase of nervous illness; for

those injurious factors take effect first and foremost on the brain. Inthe  course  of  the  last  decades  changes  have  taken  place  in  the

political and social - and especially in the mercantile, industrial and

agricultural - conditions of civilized nations which have brought about

great changes in people’s occupations, social position and property,

and this at the cost of the nervous system, which is called upon to

meet  the  increased  social  and  economic  demands  by  a  greater

expenditure  of  energy,  often  with  quite  inadequate  opportunity  for

recuperation.’

   The fault I have to find with these and many other similarly-worded

opinions is not that they are mistaken but that they prove insufficient to

explain the details in the picture of nervous disturbances and that they

leave out of account precisely the most important of the aetiological

factors involved. If we disregard the vaguer ways of being ‘nervous’

and consider the specific forms of nervous illness, we shall find that

the injurious influence of civilization reduces itself in the main to the

harmful suppression of the sexual life of civilized peoples (or classes)

through the ‘civilized’ sexual morality prevalent in them.

   I have tried to bring forward the evidence for this assertion in a

number of technical papers.¹ I cannot repeat it here. I will, however,

quote  the  most  important  of  the  arguments  arising  from  my

investigations.

   Careful clinical observation allows us to distinguish two groups of

nervous disorders: the neuroses proper and the psychoneuroses. In

the former the disturbances (the symptoms), whether they show their

effects in somatic or mental functioning, appear to be of a toxic nature.

They behave exactly like the phenomena accompanying an excess or

a deprivation of certain nerve poisons. These neuroses - which are

commonly  grouped  together  as  ‘neurasthenia’  -  can  be  induced  by

certain injurious influences in sexual life, without any hereditary taint

being  necessarily  present;  indeed,  the  form  taken  by  the  disease

corresponds to the nature of these noxae, so that often enough the

particular sexual aetiology can at once be deduced from the clinical

picture.  There  is  a  total  absence,  on  the  other  hand,  of  any  such

regular correspondence between the form of a nervous illness and the

other  injurious  influences  of  civilization  which  are  blamed  by  the

authorities.  We  may,  therefore,  regard  the  sexual  factor  as  the

essential one in the causation of the neuroses proper. 

   ¹ See my collection of short papers on the theory of the neuroses (1906).

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1951

 

   With the psychoneuroses, the influence of heredity is more marked

and the causation less transparent. A peculiar method of investigation

known as psycho-analysis has, however, enabled us to recognize that

the symptoms of these disorders (hysteria, obsessional neurosis, etc.)

are psychogenic  and  depend  upon  the  operation  of  unconscious

(repressed) ideational complexes. This same method has also taught

us what those unconscious complexes are and has shown that, quite

generally speaking, they have a sexual content. They spring from the

sexual needs of people who are unsatisfied and represent for them a

kind  of  substitutive  satisfaction.  We  must  therefore  view  all  factors

which  impair  sexual  life,  suppress  its  activity  or  distort  its  aims  as

being pathogenic factors in the psychoneuroses as well.

   The value of a theoretical distinction between toxic and psychogenic

neuroses is, of course, not diminished by the fact that, in most people

suffering from nervous illness, disturbances arising from both sources

are to be observed.

   The reader who is prepared to agree with me in looking for the

aetiology of nervous illness pre-eminently in influences which damage

sexual life, will also be ready to follow the further discussion, which is

intended  to  set  the  theme  of  increasing  nervous  illness  in  a  wider

context.

   Generally speaking, our civilization is built up on the suppression of

instincts.  Each  individual  has  surrendered  some  part  of  his

possessions  -  some  part  of  the  sense  of  omnipotence  or  of  the

aggressive  or  vindictive  inclinations  in  his  personality.  From  these

contributions has grown civilization’s common possession of material

and ideal property. Besides the exigencies of life, no doubt it has been

family feelings, derived from erotism, that have induced the separate

individuals  to  make  this  renunciation.  The  renunciation  has  been  a

progressive  one  in  the  course  of  the  evolution  of  civilization.  The

single steps in it were sanctioned by religion; the piece of instinctualsatisfaction  which  each  person  had  renounced  was  offered  to  the

Deity as a sacrifice, and the communal property thus acquired was

declared  ‘sacred’.  The  man  who,  in  consequence  of  his  unyielding

constitution, cannot fall in with this suppression of instinct, becomes a

‘criminal’, an ‘outlaw’,¹ in the face of society - unless his social position

or his exceptional capacities enable him to impose himself upon it as a

great man, a ‘hero’.

 

   ¹ [In English in the original]

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1952

 

      The  sexual  instinct  -  or,  more  correctly,  the  sexual  instincts,  for

analytic investigation teaches us that the sexual instinct is made up of

many separate constituents or component instincts - is probably more

strongly developed in man than in most of the higher animals; it is

certainly  more  constant,  since  it  has  almost  entirely  overcome  the

periodicity to which it is tied in animals. It places extraordinarily large

amounts of force at the disposal of civilized activity, and it does this in

virtue of its especially marked characteristic of being able to displace

its  aim  without  materially  diminishing  in  intensity.  This  capacity  to

exchange its originally sexual aim for another one, which is no longer

sexual but which is psychically related to the first aim, is called the

capacity for sublimation. In contrast to this displaceability, in which its

value  for  civilization  lies,  the  sexual  instinct  may  also  exhibit  a

particularly obstinate fixation which renders it unserviceable and which

sometimes  causes  it  to  degenerate  into  what  are  described  as

abnormalities.  The  original  strength  of  the  sexual  instinct  probably

varies in each individual; certainly the proportion of it which is suitable

for sublimation varies. It seems to us that it is the innate constitution of

each individual which decides in the first instance how large a part of

his sexual instinct it will be possible to sublimate and make use of. In

addition  to  this,  the  effects  of  experience  and  the  intellectual

influences upon his mental apparatus succeed in bringing about the

sublimation  of  a  further  portion  of  it.  To  extend  this  process  of

displacement indefinitely is, however, certainly not possible, any morethan  is  the  case  with  the  transformation  of  heat  into  mechanical

energy in our machines. A certain amount of direct sexual satisfaction

seems to be indispensable for most organizations, and a deficiency in

this amount, which varies from individual to individual, is visited by

phenomena  which,  on  account  of  their  detrimental  effects  on

functioning  and  their  subjective  quality  of  unpleasure,  must  be

regarded as an illness.

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1953

 

   Further prospects are opened up when we take into consideration

the fact that in man the sexual instinct does not originally serve the

purposes  of  reproduction  at  all,  but  has  as  its  aim  the  gaining  of

particular kinds of pleasure.¹ It manifests itself in this way in human

infancy, during which it attains its aim of gaining pleasure not only

from  the  genitals  but  from  other  parts  of  the  body  (the  erotogenic

zones),  and  can  therefore  disregard  any  objects  other  than  these

convenient ones. We call this stage the stage of auto-erotism, and the

child’s upbringing has, in our view, the task of restricting it, because to

linger  in  it  would  make  the  sexual  instinct  uncontrollable  and

unserviceable later on. The development of the sexual instinct then

proceeds from auto-erotism to object-love and from the autonomy of

the erotogenic zones to their subordination under the primacy of the

genitals,  which  are  put  at  the  service  of  reproduction.  During  this

development a part of the sexual excitation which is provided by the

subject’s  own  body  is  inhibited  as  being  unserviceable  for  the

reproductive  function  and  in  favourable  cases  is  brought  to

sublimation. The forces that can be employed for cultural activities are

thus to a great extent obtained through the suppression of what are

known as the perverse elements of sexual excitation.

   If this evolution of the sexual instinct is borne in mind, three stages

of civilization can be distinguished: a first one, in which the sexual

instinct  may  be  freely  exercised  without  regard  to  the  aims  of

reproduction;  a  second,  in  which  all  of  the  sexual  instinct  is

suppressed except what serves the aims of reproduction; and a third,in which only legitimate reproduction is allowed as a sexual aim. This

third stage is reflected in our present-day ‘civilized’ sexual morality.

   If we take the second of these stages as an average, we must point

out that a number of people are, on account of their organization, not

equal  to  meeting  its  demands.  In  whole  classes  of  individuals  the

development of the sexual instinct, as we have described it above,

from auto-erotism to object-love with its aim of uniting the genitals, has

not been carried out correctly and sufficiently fully. As a result of these

disturbances  of  development  two  kinds  of  harmful  deviation  from

normal sexuality - that is, sexuality which is serviceable to civilization -

come  about;  and  the  relation  between  these  two  is  almost  that  of

positive and negative.¹

      In  the  first  place  (disregarding  people  whose  sexual  instinct  is

altogether excessive and uninhibitable) there are the different varieties

perverts, in whom an infantile fixation to a preliminary sexual aim has

prevented  the  primacy  of  the  reproductive  function  from  being

established, and the homosexuals or inverts, in whom, in a manner

that is not yet quite understood, the sexual aim has been deflected

away from the opposite sex. If the injurious effects of these two kinds

of developmental disturbance are less than might be expected, this

mitigation can be ascribed precisely to the complex way in which the

sexual instinct is put together, which makes it possible for a person’s

sexual  life  to  reach  a  serviceable  final  form  even  if  one  or  more

components of the instinct have been shut off from development. The

constitution of people suffering from inversion - the homosexuals - is,

indeed,  often  distinguished  by  their  sexual  instinct’s  possessing  a

special aptitude for cultural sublimation.

 

   ¹ Cf. my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d).

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1954

 

   More pronounced forms of the perversions and of homosexuality,

especially if they are exclusive, do, it is true, make those subject to

them socially useless and unhappy, so that it must be recognized thatthe cultural requirements even of the second stage are a source of

suffering for a certain proportion of mankind. The fate of these people

who  differ  constitutionally  from  the  rest  varies,  and  depends  on

whether they have been born with a sexual instinct which by absolute

standards is strong or comparatively weak. In the latter case - where

the  sexual  instinct  is  in  general  weak  -  perverts  succeed  in  totally

suppressing  the  inclinations  which  bring  them  into  conflict  with  the

moral demands of their stage of civilization. But this, from the ideal

point of view, is also the only thing they succeed in achieving; for, in

order to effect this suppression of their sexual instinct, they use up the

forces which they would otherwise employ in cultural activities. They

are, as it were, inwardly inhibited and outwardly paralysed. What we

shall be saying again later on about the abstinence demanded of men

and women in the third stage of civilization applies to them too.

   Where the sexual instinct is fairly intense, but perverse, there are

two possible outcomes. The first, which we shall not discuss further, is

that the person affected remains a pervert and has to put up with the

consequences of his deviation from the standard of civilization. The

second  is  far  more  interesting.  It  is  that,  under  the  influence  of

education and social demands, a suppression of the perverse instincts

is indeed achieved, but it is a kind of suppression which is really no

suppression at all. It can better be described as a suppression that

has  failed.  The  inhibited  sexual  instincts  are,  it  is  true,  no  longer

expressed as such - and this constitutes the success of the process -

but they find expression in other ways, which are quite as injurious to

the subject and make him quite as useless for society as satisfaction

of the suppressed instincts in an unmodified form would have done.

This constitutes the failure of the process, which in the long run more

than counterbalances its success. The substitutive phenomena which

emerge in consequence of the suppression of the instinct amount to

what we call nervous illness, or, more precisely, the psychoneuroses.¹

Neurotics  are  the  class  of  people  who,  since  they  possess  a

recalcitrant organization, only succeed, under the influence of cultural

requirements,  in  achieving  a  suppression  of  their  instincts  which  is

apparent  and  which  becomes  increasingly  unsuccessful.  They

therefore only carry on their collaboration with cultural activities by a

great  expenditure  of  force  and  at  the  cost  of  an  internalimpoverishment, or are obliged at times to interrupt it and fall ill. I have

described the neuroses as the ‘negative’ of the perversions because

in  the  neuroses  the  perverse  impulses,  after  being  repressed,

manifest themselves from the unconscious part of the mind - because

the  neuroses  contain  the  same  tendencies,  though  in  a  state  of

‘repression’, as do the positive perversions.

 

   ¹ Cf. my introductory remarks above.

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1955

 

   Experience teaches us that for most people there is a limit beyond

which their constitution cannot comply with the demands of civilization.

All who wish to be more noble-minded than their constitution allows

fall victims to neurosis; they would have been more healthy if it could

have  been  possible  for  them  to  be  less  good.  The  discovery  that

perversions  and  neuroses  stand  in  the  relation  of  positive  and

negative is often unmistakably confirmed by observations made on the

members of one generation of a family. Quite frequently a brother is a

sexual pervert, while his sister, who, being a woman, possesses a

weaker  sexual  instinct,  is  a  neurotic  whose  symptoms  express  the

same  inclinations  as  the  perversions  of  her  sexually  more  active

brother. And correspondingly, in many families the men are healthy,

but from a social point of view immoral to an undesirable degree, while

the women are high-minded and over-refined, but severely neurotic.

      It  is  one  of  the  obvious  social  injustices  that  the  standard  of

civilization should demand from everyone the same conduct of sexual

life - conduct which can be followed without any difficulty by some

people, thanks to their organization, but which imposes the heaviest

psychical sacrifices on others; though, indeed, the injustice is as a rule

wiped out by disobedience to the injunctions of morality.

   These considerations have been based so far on the requirement

laid down by the second of the stages of civilization which we have

postulated,  the  requirement  that  every  sexual  activity  of  the  kind

described as perverse is prohibited, while what is called normal sexual

intercourse is freely permitted. We have found that even when the linebetween  sexual  freedom  and  restriction  is  drawn  at  this  point,  a

number  of  individuals  are  ruled  out  as  perverts,  and  a  number  of

others, who make efforts not to be perverts whilst constitutionally they

should be so, are forced into nervous illness. It is easy to predict the

result that will follow if sexual freedom is still further circumscribed and

the  requirements  of  civilization  are  raised  to  the  level  of  the  third

stage,  which  bans  all  sexual  activity  outside  legal  marriage.  The

number  of  strong  natures  who  openly  oppose  the  demands  of

civilization will increase enormously, and so will the number of weaker

ones  who,  faced  with  the  conflict  between  the  pressure  of  cultural

influences  and  the  resistance  of  their  constitution,  take  flight  into

neurotic illness.

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1956

 

   Let us now try to answer three questions that arise here:

   (1) What is the task that is set to the individual by the requirements

of the third stage of civilization?

   (2) Can the legitimate sexual satisfaction that is permissible offer

acceptable  compensation  for  the  renunciation  of  all  other

satisfactions?

      (3)  In  what  relation  do  the  possible  injurious  effects  of  this

renunciation stand to its exploitation in the cultural field?

   The answer to the first question touches on a problem which has

often been discussed and cannot be exhaustively treated here - that of

sexual  abstinence.  Our  third  stage  of  civilization  demands  of

individuals of both sexes that they shall practise abstinence until they

are married and that all who do not contract a legal marriage shall

remain abstinent throughout their lives. The position, agreeable to all

the authorities, that sexual abstinence is not harmful and not difficult to

maintain, has also been widely supported by the medical profession. It

may be asserted, however, that the task of mastering such a powerful

impulse  as  that  of  the  sexual  instinct  by  any  other  means  than

satisfying  it  is  one  which  can  call  for  the  whole  of  a  man’s  forces.

Mastering it by sublimation, by deflecting the sexual instinctual forcesaway from their sexual aim to higher cultural aims, can be achieved by

a  minority  and  then  only  intermittently,  and  least  easily  during  the

period of ardent and vigorous youth. Most of the rest become neurotic

or  are  harmed  in  one  way  or  another.  Experience  shows  that  the

majority of the people who make up our society are constitutionally

unfit to face the task of abstinence. Those who would have fallen ill

under milder sexual restrictions fall ill all the more readily and more

severely before the demands of our cultural sexual morality of to-day;

for we know no better safe-guard against the threat to normal sexual

life  offered  by  defective  innate  dispositions  or  disturbances  of

development  than  sexual  satisfaction  itself.  The  more  a  person  is

disposed  to  neurosis,  the  less  can  he  tolerate  abstinence;  instincts

which have been withdrawn from normal development, in the sense in

which it has been described above, become at the same time all the

more uninhibitable. But even those people who would have retained

their health under the requirements of the second stage of civilization

will  now  succumb  to  neurosis  in  great  numbers.  For  the  psychical

value  of  sexual  satisfaction  increases  with  its  frustration.  The

dammed-up libido is now put in a position to detect one or other of the

weaker spots which are seldom absent in the structure of sexual life,

and there to break through and obtain substitutive satisfaction of a

neurotic kind in the form of pathological symptoms. Anyone who is

able to penetrate the determinants of nervous illness will soon become

convinced that its increase in our society arises from the intensification

of sexual restrictions.

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1957

 

   This brings us to the question whether sexual intercourse in legal

marriage  can  offer  full  compensation  for  the  restrictions  imposed

before marriage. There is such an abundance of material supporting a

reply in the negative that we can give only the briefest summary of it. It

must  above  all  be  borne  in  mind  that  our  cultural  sexual  morality

restricts sexual intercourse even in marriage itself, since it imposes on

married  couples  the  necessity  of  contenting  themselves,  as  a  rule,with  a  very  few  procreative  acts.  As  a  consequence  of  this

consideration,  satisfying  sexual  intercourse  in  marriage  takes  place

only for a few years; and we must subtract from this, of course, the

intervals  of  abstention  necessitated  by  regard  for  the  wife’s  health.

After these three, four or five years, the marriage becomes a failure in

so far as it has promised the satisfaction of sexual needs. For all the

devices  hitherto  invented  for  preventing  conception  impair  sexual

enjoyment,  hurt  the  fine  susceptibilities  of  both  partners  and  even

actually cause illness. Fear of the consequences of sexual intercourse

first brings the married couple’s physical affection to an end; and then,

as  a  remoter  result,  it  usually  puts  a  stop  as  well  to  the  mental

sympathy between them, which should have been the successor to

their original passionate love. The spiritual disillusionment and bodily

deprivation  to  which  most  marriages  are  thus  doomed  puts  both

partners back in the state they were in before their marriage, except

for being the poorer by the loss of an illusion, and they must once

more have recourse to their fortitude in mastering and deflecting their

sexual instinct. We need not enquire how far men, by then in their

maturer years, succeed in this task. Experience shows that they very

frequently avail themselves of the degree of sexual freedom which is

allowed  them  -  although  only  with  reluctance  and  under  a  veil  of

silence  -  by  even  the  strictest  sexual  code.  The  ‘double’  sexual

morality which is valid for men in our society is the plainest admission

that society itself does not believe in the possibility of enforcing the

precepts which it itself has laid down. But experience shows as well

that women, who, as being the actual vehicle of the sexual interests of

mankind,  are  only  endowed  in  a  small  measure  with  the  gift  of

sublimating their instincts, and who, though they may find a sufficient

substitute for the sexual object in an infant at the breast, do not find

one in a growing child - experience shows, I repeat, that women, when

they are subjected to the disillusionments of marriage, fall ill of severe

neuroses  which  permanently  darken  their  lives.(Under  the  cultural

conditions of to-day, marriage has long ceased to be a panacea for

the nervous troubles of women; and if we doctors still advise marriage

in such cases, we are nevertheless aware that, on the contrary, a girl

must be very healthy if she is to be able to tolerate it, and we urgently

advise our male patients not to marry any girl who has had nervoustrouble before marriage. On the contrary, the cure for nervous illness

arising from marriage would be marital unfaithfulness. But the more

strictly a woman has been brought up and the more sternly she has

submitted  to  the  demands  of  civilization,  the  more  she  is  afraid  of

taking this way out; and in the conflict between her desires and her

sense of duty, she once more seeks refuge in a neurosis. Nothing

protects her virtue as securely as an illness. Thus the married state,

which is held out as a consolation to the sexual instinct of the civilized

person in his youth, proves to be inadequate even to the demands of

the actual period of life covered by it. There is no question of its being

able to compensate for the deprivation which precedes it.

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1958

 

   But even if the damage done by civilized sexual morality is admitted,

it may be argued in reply to our third question that the cultural gain

derived from such an extensive restriction of sexuality probably more

than balances these sufferings, which, after all, only affect a minority

in any severe form. I must confess that I am unable to balance gain

against loss correctly on this point, but I could advance a great many

more considerations on the side of the loss. Going back to the subject

of abstinence, which I have already touched on, I must insist that it

brings in its train other noxae besides those involved in the neuroses

and that the importance of the neuroses has for the most part not

been fully appreciated.

   The retardation of sexual development and sexual activity at which

our education and civilization aim is certainly not injurious to begin

with. It is seen to be a necessity, when one considers the late age at

which young people of the educated classes reach independence and

are  able  to  earn  a  living.  (This  reminds  one,  incidentally,  of  the

intimate interconnection between all our cultural institutions and of the

difficulty of altering any part of them without regard to the whole.) But

abstinence  continued  long  after  the  age  of  twenty  is  no  longer

unobjectionable for a young man; and it leads to other damage even

when it does not lead to neurosis. People say, to be sure, that thestruggle against such a powerful instinct, and the strengthening of all

the ethical and aesthetic forces which are necessary for this struggle,

‘steel’  the  character;  and  this  is  true  for  a  few  specially  favourably

organized natures. It must also be admitted that the differentiation of

individual character, which is so marked in our day, has only become

possible  with  the  existence  of  sexual  restriction.  But  in  the  vast

majority of cases the struggle against sexuality eats up the energy

available in a character and this at the very time when a young man is

in need of all his forces in order to win his share and place in society.

The relationship between the amount of sublimation possible and the

amount of sexual activity necessary naturally varies very much from

person to person and even from one calling to another. An abstinent

artist is hardly conceivable; but an abstinent young savant is certainly

no rarity. The latter can, by his self-restraint, liberate forces for his

studies;  while  the  former  probably  finds  his  artistic  achievements

powerfully stimulated by his sexual experience. In general I have not

gained  the  impression  that  sexual  abstinence  helps  to  bring  about

energetic  and  self-reliant  men  of  action  or  original  thinkers  or  bold

emancipators and reformers. Far more often it goes to produce well-

behaved weaklings who later become lost in the great mass of people

that tends to follow, unwillingly, the leads given by strong individuals.

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1959

 

   The fact that the sexual instinct behaves in general in a self-willed

and inflexible fashion is also seen in the results produced by efforts at

abstinence.  Civilized  education  may  only  attempt  to  suppress  the

instinct  temporarily,  till  marriage,  intending  to  give  it  free  rein

afterwards  with  the  idea  of  then  making  use  of  it.  But  extreme

measures are more successful against it than attempts at moderating

it; thus the suppression often goes too far, with the unwished-for result

that  when  the  instinct  is  set  free  it  turns  out  to  be  permanently

impaired. For this reason complete abstinence in youth is often not the

best preparation for marriage for a young man. Women sense this,

and prefer among their suitors those who have already proved theirmasculinity  with  other  women.  The  harmful  results  which  the  strict

demand for abstinence before marriage produces in women’s natures

are  quite  especially  apparent.  It  is  clear  that  education  is  far  from

underestimating  the  task  of  suppressing  a  girl’s  sensuality  till  her

marriage,  for  it  makes  use  of  the  most  drastic  measures.  Not  only

does  it  forbid  sexual  intercourse  and  set  a  high  premium  on  the

preservation of female chastity, but it also protects the young woman

from temptation as she grows up, by keeping her ignorant of all the

facts of the part she is to play and by not tolerating any impulse of love

in her which cannot lead to marriage. The result is that when the girl’s

parental authorities suddenly allow her to fall in love, she is unequal to

this psychical achievement and enters marriage uncertain of her own

feelings. In consequence of this artificial retardation in her function of

love, she has nothing but disappointments to offer the man who has

saved  up  all  his  desire  for  her.  In  her  mental  feelings  she  is  still

attached  to  her  parents,  whose  authority  has  brought  about  the

suppression of her sexuality; and in her physical behaviour she shows

herself frigid, which deprives the man of any high degree of sexual

enjoyment.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  anaesthetic  type  of  woman

exists apart from civilized education, though I consider it probable. But

in any case such education actually breeds it, and these women who

conceive without pleasure show little willingness afterwards to face the

pains of frequent childbirth. In this way, the preparation for marriage

frustrates the aims of marriage itself. When later on the retardation in

the wife’s development has been overcome and her capacity to love is

awakened at the climax of her life as a woman, her relations to her

husband  have  long  since  been  ruined;  and,  as  a  reward  for  her

previous  docility,  she  is  left  with  the  choice  between  unappeased

desire, unfaithfulness or a neurosis.

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1960

 

   The sexual behaviour of a human being often lays down the pattern

for  all  his  other  modes  of  reacting  to  life.  If  a  man  is  energetic  in

winning the object of his love, we are confident that he will pursue hisother aims with an equally unswerving energy; but if, for all sorts of

reasons,  he  refrains  from  satisfying  his  strong  sexual  instincts,  his

behaviour  will  be  conciliatory  and  resigned  rather  than  vigorous  in

other spheres of life as well. A special application of this proposition

that  sexual  life  lays  down  the  pattern  for  the  exercise  of  other

functions can easily be recognized in the female sex as a whole. Their

upbringing  forbids  their  concerning  themselves  intellectually  with

sexual  problems  though  they  nevertheless  feel  extremely  curious

about  them,  and  frightens  them  by  condemning  such  curiosity  as

unwomanly  and  a  sign  of  a  sinful  disposition.  In  this  way  they  are

scared away from any form of thinking, and knowledge loses its value

for them. The prohibition of thought extends beyond the sexual field,

partly through unavoidable association, partly automatically, like the

prohibition of thought about religion among men, or the prohibition of

thought  about  loyalty  among  faithful  subjects.  I  do  not  believe  that

women’s  ‘physiological  feeble-mindedness’  is  to  be  explained  by  a

biological opposition between intellectual work and sexual activity, as

Moebius has asserted in a work which has been widely disputed. I

think that the undoubted intellectual inferiority of so many women can

rather  be  traced  back  to  the  inhibition  of  thought  necessitated  by

sexual suppression.

      In  considering  the  question  of  abstinence,  the  distinction  is  not

nearly  strictly  enough  made  between  two  forms  of  it  -  namely

abstention  from  any  sexual  activity  whatever  and  abstention  from

sexual intercourse with the opposite sex. Many people who boast of

succeeding in being abstinent have only been able to do so with the

help of masturbation and similar satisfactions which are linked with the

auto-erotic sexual activities of early childhood. But precisely because

of this connection such substitutive means of sexual satisfaction are

by no means harmless; they predispose to the numerous varieties of

neuroses  and  psychoses  which  are  conditional  on  an  involution  of

sexual life to its infantile forms. Masturbation, moreover, is far from

meeting  the  ideal  demands  of  civilized  sexual  morality,  and

consequently  drives  young  people  into  the  same  conflicts  with  the

ideals  of  education  which  they  hoped  to  escape  by  abstinence.

Furthermore, it vitiates the character through indulgence, and this in

more than one way. In the first place, it teaches people to achieveimportant aims without taking trouble and by easy paths instead of

through an energetic exertion of force - that is, it follows the principle

that sexuality  lays  down  the  pattern  of  behaviour;  secondly,  in  the

phantasies that accompany satisfaction the sexual object is raised to a

degree of excellence which is not easily found again in reality. A witty

writer (Karl Kraus in the Vienna paper Die Fackel) once expressed this

truth in reverse by cynically remarking: ‘Copulation is no more than an

unsatisfying substitute for masturbation.’

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1961

 

   The sternness of the demands of civilization and the difficulty of the

task of abstinence have combined to make avoidance of the union of

the  genitals  of  the  two  opposite  sexes  into  the  central  point  of

abstinence and to favour other kinds of sexual activity, which, it might

be said, are equivalent to semi-obedience. Since normal intercourse

has been so relentlessly persecuted by morality - and also, on account

of the possibilities of infection, by hygiene - what are known as the

perverse forms of intercourse between the two sexes, in which other

parts of the body take over the role of the genitals, have undoubtedly

increased in social importance. These activities cannot, however, be

regarded  as  being  as  harmless  as  analogous  extensions  in  love-

relationships. They are ethically objectionable, for they degrade the

relationships of love between two human beings from a serious matter

to  a  convenient  game,  attended  by  no  risk  and  no  spiritual

participation.  A  further  consequence  of  the  aggravation  of  the

difficulties  of  normal  sexual  life  is  to  be  found  in  the  spread  of

homosexual satisfaction; in addition to all those who are homosexuals

in virtue of their organization, or who became so in their childhood,

there must be reckoned the great number of those in whom, in their

maturer years, a blocking of the main stream of their libido has caused

a widening in the side-channel of homosexuality.

      All  these  unavoidable  and  unintended  consequences  of  the

requirement  for  abstinence  converge  in  the  one  common  result  of

completely  ruining  the  preparation  for  marriage  -  marriage,  whichcivilized sexual morality thinks should be the sole heir to the sexual

impulsions. Every man whose libido, as a result of masturbatory or

perverse sexual practices, has become habituated to situations and

conditions of satisfaction which are not normal, develops diminished

potency in marriage. Women, too, who have been able to preserve

their  virginity  with  the  help  of  similar  measures,  show  themselves

anaesthetic to normal intercourse in marriage. A marriage begun with

a reduced capacity to love on both sides succumbs to the process of

dissolution even more quickly than others. As a result of the man’s

weak  potency,  the  woman  is  not  satisfied,  and  she  remains

anaesthetic even in cases where her disposition to frigidity, derived

from her education, could have been overcome by a powerful sexual

experience.  A  couple  like  this  finds  more  difficulties,  too,  in  the

prevention  of  children  than  a  healthy  one,  since  the  husband’s

diminished potency tolerates the use of contraceptives badly. In this

perplexity,  sexual  intercourse,  as  being  the  source  of  all  their

embarrassments, is soon given up, and with this the basis of married

life is abandoned.

   I ask any well-informed person to bear witness to the fact that I am

not exaggerating but that I am describing a state of affairs of which

equally bad instances can be observed over and over again. To the

uninitiated it is hardly credible how seldom normal potency is to be

found  in  a  husband  and  how  often  a  wife  is  frigid  among  married

couples who live under the dominance of our civilized sexual morality,

what  a  degree  of  renunciation,  often  on  both  sides,  is  entailed  by

marriage, and to what narrow limits married life - the happiness that is

so ardently desired - is narrowed down. I have already explained that

in these circumstances the most obvious outcome is nervous illness;

but I must further point out the way in which a marriage of this kind

continues to exercise its influence on the few children, or the only child

born of it. At a first glance, it seems to be a case of transmission by

inheritance; but closer inspection shows that it is really a question of

the  effect  of  powerful  infantile  impressions.  A  neurotic  wife  who  is

unsatisfied  by  her  husband  is,  as  a  mother,  over-tender  and  over-

anxious towards her child, on to whom she transfers her need for love;

and she awakens it to sexual precocity. The bad relations between its

parents, moreover, excite its emotional life and cause it to feel loveand hatred to an intense degree while it is still at a very tender age. Its

strict upbringing, which tolerates no activity of the sexual life that has

been aroused so early, lends support to the suppressing force and this

conflict  at  such  an  age  contains  everything  necessary  for  bringing

about lifelong nervous illness.

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1962

 

   I return now to my earlier assertion that, in judging the neuroses,

their full importance is not as a rule taken into account. I do not mean

by  this  the  undervaluation  of  these  states  shown  in  their  frivolous

dismissal by relatives and in the boasting assurances by doctors that

a  few  weeks  of  cold  water  treatment  or  a  few  months  of  rest  and

convalescence will cure the condition. These are merely the opinions

of quite ignorant doctors and laymen and are mostly no more than

words intended to give the sufferer a short-lived consolation. It is, on

the contrary, a well-known fact that a chronic neurosis, even if it does

not  totally  put  an  end  to  the  subject’s  capacity  for  existence,

represents a severe handicap in his life, of the same order, perhaps,

as  tuberculosis  or  a  cardiac  defect.  The  situation  would  even  be

tolerable if neurotic illness were to exclude from civilized activities only

a number of individuals who were in any case of the weaker sort, and

allowed the rest to play their part in it at the cost of troubles that were

merely subjective. But, far from this being so, I must insist upon the

view that neuroses, whatever their extent and wherever they occur,

always succeed in frustrating the purposes of civilization, and in that

way actually perform the work of the suppressed mental forces that

are hostile to civilization. Thus, when society pays for obedience to its

far-reaching regulations by an increase in nervous illness, it cannot

claim to have purchased a gain at the price of sacrifices; it cannot

claim a gain at all. Let us, for instance, consider the very common

case of a woman who does not love her husband, because, owing to

the conditions under which she entered marriage, she has no reason

to love him, but who very much wants to love him, because that alone

corresponds to the ideal of marriage to which she has been broughtup. She will in that case suppress every impulse which would express

the truth and contradict her endeavours to fulfil her ideal, and she will

make  special  efforts  to  play  the  part  of  a  loving,  affectionate  and

attentive wife. The outcome of this self-suppression will be a neurotic

illness; and this neurosis will in a short time have taken revenge on

the  unloved  husband  and  have  caused  him  just  as  much  lack  of

satisfaction  and  worry  as  would  have  resulted  from  an

acknowledgement  of  the  true  state  of  affairs.  This  example  is

completely  typical  of  what  a  neurosis  achieves.  A  similar  failure  to

obtain compensation is to be seen after the suppression of impulses

inimical  to  civilization  which  are  not  directly  sexual.  If  a  man,  for

example, has become over-kind as a result of a violent suppression of

a constitutional inclination to harshness and cruelty, he often loses so

much  energy  in  doing  this  that  he  fails  to  carry  out  all  that  his

compensatory impulses require, and he may, after all, do less good on

the whole than he would have done without the suppression.

 


            'Civilized' Sexual Morality And Modern Nervous Illness

                                                                                      1963

 

   Let us add that a restriction of sexual activity in a community is quite

generally accompanied by an increase of anxiety about life and of fear

of death which interferes with the individual’s capacity for enjoyment

and does away with his readiness to face death for any purpose. A

diminished  inclination  to  beget  children  is  the  result,  and  the

community or group of people in question is thus excluded from any

share in the future. In view of this, we may well raise the question

whether our ‘civilized’ sexual morality is worth the sacrifice which it

imposes  on  us,  especially  if  we  are  still  so  much  enslaved  to

hedonism as to include among the aims of our cultural development a

certain amount of satisfaction of individual happiness. It is certainly not

a physician’s business to come forward with proposals for reform; but

it seemed to me that I might support the urgency of such proposals if I

were to amplify Von Ehrenfels’s description of the injurious effects of

our ‘civilized’ sexual morality by pointing to the important bearing of

that morality upon the spread of modern nervous illness.                                                                                       1964

 

                ON THE SEXUAL THEORIES OF CHILDREN

                                        (1908)

 


                                                                                      1965

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1966

 

                ON THE SEXUAL THEORIES OF CHILDREN

 

The material on which the following synthesis is based is derived from

several sources. Firstly, from the direct observation of what children

say  and  do;  secondly,  from  what  adult  neurotics  consciously

remember  from  their  childhood  and  relate  during  psycho-analytic

treatment; and thirdly, from the inferences and constructions, and from

the unconscious memories translated into conscious material, which

result from the psycho-analysis of neurotics.

   That the first of these three sources has not by itself supplied all that

is worth knowing on the subject is due to the attitude which the adult

adopts towards the sexual life of children. He does not credit them

with  having  any  sexual  activity  and  therefore  takes  no  trouble  to

observe any such thing while, on the other hand, he suppresses any

manifestation  of  such  an  activity  which  might  claim  his  attention.

Consequently the opportunity of obtaining information from this, the

most unequivocal and fertile source of all, is a very restricted one.

Whatever  comes  from  the  uninfluenced  communications  made  by

adults concerning their own conscious childhood memories is at the

best  subject  to  the  objection  that  it  may  have  been  falsified  in

retrospect; but, in addition to thus, it has to be viewed in the light of

the fact that the informants have subsequently become neurotic. The

material that comes from the third source is open to all the criticisms

which  it  is  the  custom  to  marshal  against  the  trustworthiness  ofpsycho-analysis and the reliability of the conclusions that are drawn

from  it.  Thus  I  cannot  attempt  to  justify  it  here;  I  can  only  give  an

assurance  that  those  who  know  and  practise  the  psycho-analytic

technique acquire an extensive confidence in its findings.

 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1967

 

   I cannot guarantee the completeness of my results, but I can answer

for the care taken in arriving at them.

      There  remains  a  difficult  question  to  decide.  How  far  may  one

assume that what is here reported of children generally is true of all

children - that is, of every particular child? Pressure of education and

varying intensity of the sexual instinct certainly make great individual

variations in the sexual behaviour of children possible, and, above all,

influence the date at which a child’s sexual interest appears. For this

reason, I have not divided my presentation of the material according to

the successive epochs of childhood, but have combined into a single

account  things  that  come  into  play  in  different  children  sometimes

earlier and sometimes later. It is my conviction that no child - none, at

least, who is mentally normal and still less one who is intellectually

gifted - can avoid being occupied with the problems of sex in the years

before puberty.

   I do not think much of the objection that neurotics are a special class

of people, marked by an innate disposition that is ‘degenerate’, from

whose childhood life we must not be allowed to infer anything about

the childhood of other people. Neurotics are people much like others.

They cannot be sharply differentiated from normal people, and in their

childhood they are not always easily distinguishable from those who

remain healthy in later life. It is one of the most valuable results of our

psycho-analytic investigations to have discovered that the neuroses of

such people have no special mental content that is peculiar to them,

but that, as Jung has expressed it, they fall ill of the same complexes

against which we healthy people struggle as well. The only difference

is that healthy people know how to overcome those complexes without

any gross damage demonstrable in practical life, whereas in nervouscases the suppression of the complexes succeeds only at the price of

costly substitutive formations - that is to say, from a practical point of

view it is a failure. In childhood neurotic and normal people naturally

approximate to each other much more closely than they do in later life,

so that I cannot regard it as a methodological error to make use of the

communications  of  neurotics  about  their  childhood  for  drawing

conclusions by analogy about normal childhood life. But since those

who later become neurotics very often have in their inborn constitution

an especially strong sexual instinct and a tendency to precocity and to

a premature expression of that instinct, they make it possible for us to

recognize a great deal of infantile activity more sharply and clearly

than our capacity for observation (which is in any case a blunted one)

would enable us to do in other children. But we shall of course only be

able  to  assess  the  true  value  of  these  communications  made  by

neurotic  adults  when,  following  Havelock  Ellis’s  example,  we  shall

have  thought  it  worth  while  to  collect  the  childhood  memories  of

healthy adults as well.

 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1968

 

   In consequence of unfavourable circumstances, both of an external

and an internal nature, the following observations apply chiefly to the

sexual development of one sex only - that is, of males. The value of a

compilation such as I am attempting here need not, however, be a

purely descriptive one. A knowledge of infantile sexual theories in the

shapes they assume in the thoughts of children can be of interest in

various ways - even, surprisingly enough, for the elucidation of myths

and  fairy  tales.  They  are  indispensable,  moreover,  for  an

understanding of the neuroses themselves; for in them these childish

theories are still operative and acquire a determining influence upon

the form taken by the symptoms.

 

   If we could divest ourselves of our corporeal existence, and could

view the things of this earth with a fresh eye as purely thinking beings,

from  another  planet  for  instance,  nothing  perhaps  would  strike  ourattention  more  forcibly  than  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  two  sexes

among human beings, who, though so much alike in other respects,

yet  mark  the  difference  between  them  with  such  obvious  external

signs. But it does not seem that children choose this fundamental fact

in the same way as the starting-point of their researches into sexual

problems. Since they have known a father and mother as far back as

they  can  remember  in  life,  they  accept  their  existence  as  a  reality

which  needs  no  further  enquiry,  and  a  boy  has  the  same  attitude

towards  a  little  sister  from  whom  he  is  separated  by  only  a  slight

difference of age of one or two years. A child’s desire for knowledge

on  this  point  does  not  in  fact  awaken  spontaneously,  prompted

perhaps by some inborn need for established causes; it is aroused

under the goad of the self-seeking instincts that dominate him, when -

perhaps after the end of his second year - he is confronted with the

arrival of a new baby. And a child whose own nursery has received no

such addition is able, from observations made in other homes, to put

himself in the same situation. The loss of his parents’ care, which he

actually experiences or justly fears, and the presentiment that from

now  on  he  must  for  evermore  share  all  his  possessions  with  the

newcomer, have the effect of awakening his emotions and sharpening

his  capacities  for  thought.  The  elder  child  expresses  unconcealed

hostility towards his rival, which finds vent in unfriendly criticisms of it,

in wishes that ‘the stork should take it away again’ and occasionally

even in small attacks upon the creature lying helpless in the cradle. A

wider difference in age usually softens the expression of this primary

hostility. In the same way, at a rather later age, if no small brother or

sister has appeared, the child’s wish for a playmate, such as he has

seen in other families, may gain the upper hand.

 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1969

 

   At the instigation of these feelings and worries, the child now comes

to be occupied with the first, grand problem of life and asks himself the

question: ‘Where do babies come from?’ - a question which, there can

be no doubt, first ran: ‘Where did this particular, intruding baby comefrom?’ We seem to hear the echoes of this first riddle in innumerable

riddles of myth and legend. The question itself is, like all research, the

product of a vital exigency, as though thinking were entrusted with the

task  of  preventing  the  recurrence  of  such  dreaded  events.  Let  us

assume, however, that the child’s thinking soon becomes independent

of  this  instigation,  and  henceforward  goes  on  operating  as  a  self-

sustained instinct for research. Where a child is not already too much

intimidated, he sooner or later adopts the direct method of demanding

an answer from his parents or those in charge of him, who are in his

eyes the source of all knowledge. This method, however, fails. The

child receives either evasive answers or a rebuke for his curiosity, or

he is dismissed with the mythologically significant piece of information

which,  in  German  countries,  runs:  ‘The  stork  brings  the  babies;  it

fetches them out of the water.’ I have reason to believe that far more

children than their parents suspect are dissatisfied with this solution

and meet it with energetic doubts, which, however, they do not always

openly admit. I know of a three-year-old boy who, after receiving this

piece of enlightenment, disappeared - to the terror of his nurse. He

was found at the edge of the big pond adjoining the country house, to

which he had hurried in order to see the babies in the water. I also

know  of  another  boy  who  could  only  allow  his  disbelief  to  find

expression in a hesitant remark that he knew better, that it was not a

stork that brought babies but a heron. It seems to me to follow from a

great deal of information I have received that children refuse to believe

the stork theory and that from the time of this first deception and rebuff

they nourish a distrust of adults and have a suspicion of there being

something forbidden which is being withheld from them by the ‘grown-

ups’, and that they consequently hide their further researches under a

cloak of secrecy. With this, however, the child also experiences the

first occasion for a ‘psychical conflict’, in that views for which he feels

an instinctual kind of preference, but which are not ‘right’ in the eyes of

the  grown-ups,  come  into  opposition  with  other  views,  which  are

supported by the authority of the grown-ups without being acceptable

to  him  himself.  Such  a  psychical  conflict  may  soon  turn  into  a

‘psychical  dissociation’.  The  set  of  views  which  are  bound  up  with

being  ‘good’,  but  also  with  a  cessation  of  reflection,  become  the

dominant  and  conscious  views;  while  the  other  set,  for  which  thechild’s work of research has meanwhile obtained fresh evidence, but

which  are  not  supposed  to  count,  become  the  suppressed  and

‘unconscious’ ones. The nuclear complex of a neurosis is in this way

brought into being.

 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1970

 

      Recently,  the  analysis  of  a  five-year-old  boy,  which  his  father

undertook and which he has handed over to me for publication, has

given me irrefutable proof of the correctness of a view towards which

the psycho-analysis of adults had long been leading me. I now know

that the change which takes place in the mother during pregnancy

does not escape the child’s sharp eyes and that he is very well able

before long to establish the true connection between the increase in

his mother’s stoutness and the appearance of the baby. In the case

just mentioned the boy was three and a half years old when his sister

was  born  and  four  and  three  quarters  when  he  showed  his  better

knowledge  by  the  most  unmistakable  allusions.  This  precocious

discovery, however, is always kept secret, and later, in conformity with

the further vicissitudes of the child’s sexual researches, it is repressed

and forgotten.

      The  ‘stork  fable’,  therefore,  is  not  one  of  the  sexual  theories  of

children. On the contrary, it is the child’s observation of animals, who

hide so little of their sexual life and to whom he feels so closely akin,

that strengthens his disbelief in it. With his knowledge, independently

obtained, that babies grow inside the mother’s body, he would be on

the right road to solving the problem on which he first tries out his

powers of thinking. But this further progress is inhibited by a piece of

ignorance which cannot be made good and by false theories which the

state of his own sexuality imposes on him.

   These false sexual theories, which I shall now discuss, all have one

very  curious  characteristic.  Although  they  go  astray  in  a  grotesque

fashion, yet each one of them contains a fragment of real truth; and in

this they are analogous to the attempts of adults, which are looked at

as strokes of genius, at solving the problems of the universe which aretoo hard for human comprehension. What is correct and hits the mark

in such theories is to be explained by their origin from the components

of  the  sexual  instinct  which  are  already  stirring  in  the  childish

organism. For it is not owing to any arbitrary mental act or to chance

impressions  that  those  notions  arise,  but  to  the  necessities  of  the

child’s  psychosexual  constitution;  and  this  is  why  we  can  speak  of

sexual theories in children as being typical, and why we find the same

mistaken beliefs in every child whose sexual life is accessible to us.

 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1971

 

      The  first  of  these  theories  starts  out  from  the  neglect  of  the

differences between the sexes on which I laid stress at the beginning

of  this  paper  as  being  characteristic  of  children.  It  consists  in

attributing to everyone, including females, the possession of a penis,

such as the boy knows from his own body. It is precisely in what we

must  regard  as  the  ‘normal’  sexual  constitution  that  already  in

childhood the penis is the leading erotogenic zone and the chief auto-

erotic sexual object; and the boy’s estimate of its value is logically

reflected in his inability to imagine a person like himself who is without

this  essential  constituent.  When  a  small  boy  sees  his  little  sister’s

genitals,  what  he  says  shows  that  his  prejudice  is  already  strong

enough  to  falsify  his  perception.  He  does  not  comment  on  the

absence  of  a  penis,  but invariably  says,  as  though  by  way  of

consolation and to put things right: ‘Her ---'s still quite small. But when

she gets bigger it’ll grow all right.’ The idea of a woman with a penis

returns in later life, in the dreams of adults: the dreamer, in a state of

nocturnal sexual excitation, will throw a woman down, strip her and

prepare for intercourse - and then, in place of the female genitals, he

beholds  a  well-developed  penis  and  breaks  off  the  dream  and  the

excitation.  The  numerous  hermaphrodites  of  classical  antiquity

faithfully reproduce this idea, universally held in childhood; one may

observe that to most normal people they cause no offence, while the

real hermaphroditic formations of the genitals which are permitted to

occur by Nature nearly always excite the greatest abhorrence.      If  this  idea  of  a  woman  with  a  penis  becomes  ‘fixated’  in  an

individual when he is a child, resisting all the influences of later life

and making him as a man unable to do without a penis in his sexual

object, then, although in other respects he may lead a normal sexual

life, he is bound to become a homosexual, and will seek his sexual

object  among  men  who,  owing  to  some  other  physical  and  mental

characteristics, remind him of women. Real women, when he comes

to  know  them  later,  remain  impossible  as  sexual  objects  for  him,

because  they  lack  the  essential  sexual  attraction;  indeed,  in

connection  with  another  impression  of  his  childhood  life,  they  may

even  become  abhorrent  to  him.  The  child,  having  been  mainly

dominated  by  excitations  in  the  penis,  will  usually  have  obtained

pleasure by stimulating it with his hand; he will have been detected in

this by his parents or nurse and terrorized by the threat of having his

penis cut off. The effect of this ‘threat of castration’ is proportionate to

the value set upon that organ and is quite extraordinarily deep and

persistent. Legends and myths testify to the upheaval in the child’s

emotional  life  and  to  the  horror  which  is  linked  with  the  castration

complex  -  a  complex  which  is  subsequently  remembered  by

consciousness with corresponding reluctance. The woman’s genitalia,

when seen later on, are regarded as a mutilated organ and recall this

threat,  and  they  therefore  arouse  horror  instead  of  pleasure  in  the

homosexual.  This  reaction  cannot  be  altered  in  any  way  when  the

homosexual comes to learn from science that his childish assumption

that women had a penis too was not so far wrong after all. Anatomy

has  recognized  the  clitoris  within  the  female  pudenda  as  being  an

organ  that  is  homologous  to  the  penis;  and  the  physiology  of  the

sexual processes has been able to add that this small penis which

does not grow any bigger behaves in fact during childhood like a real

and genuine penis - that it becomes the seat of excitations which lead

to  its  being  touched,  that  its  excitability  gives  the  little  girl’s  sexual

activity a masculine character and that a wave of repression in the

years of puberty is needed in order for this masculine sexuality to be

discarded  and  the  woman  to  emerge.  Since  the  sexual  function  of

many women is crippled, whether by their obstinate clinging on to this

excitability  of  the  clitoris  so  that  they  remain  anaesthetic  in

intercourse,  or  by  such  excessive  repression  occurring  that  itsoperation is partly replaced by hysterical compensatory formations -

all this seems to show that there is some truth in the infantile sexual

theory that women, like men, possess a penis.

 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1972

 

   It is easy to observe that little girls fully share their brother’s opinion

of it. They develop a great interest in that part of the boy’s body. But

this  interest  promptly  falls  under  the  sway  of  envy.  They  feel

themselves unfairly treated. They make attempts to micturate in the

posture that is made possible for boys by their possessing a big penis;

and when a girl declares that ‘she would rather be a boy’, we know

what deficiency her wish is intended to put right.

   If children could follow the hints given by the excitation of the penis

they would get a little nearer to the solution of their problem. That the

baby  grows  inside  the  mother’s  body  is  obviously  not  a  sufficient

explanation.  How  does  it  get  inside?  What  starts  its  development?

That the father has something to do with it seems likely; he says that

the baby is his baby as well.¹ Again, the penis certainly has a share,

too,  in  these  mysterious  happenings;  the  excitation  in  it  which

accompanies all these activities of the child’s thoughts bears witness

to  this.  Attached  to  this  excitation  are  impulsions  which  the  child

cannot account for - obscure urges to do something violent, to press

in, to knock to pieces, to tear open a hole somewhere. But when the

child thus seems to be well on the way to postulating the existence of

the  vagina  and  to  concluding  that  an  incursion  of  this  kind  by  his

father’s penis into his mother is the act by means of which the baby is

created in his mother’s body - at this juncture his enquiry is broken off

in helpless perplexity. For standing in its way is his theory that his

mother possesses a penis just as a man does, and the existence of

the cavity which receives the penis remains undiscovered by him. It is

not hard to guess that the lack of success of his intellectual efforts

makes it easier for him to reject and forget them. This brooding and

doubting, however, becomes the prototype of all later intellectual work

directed towards the solution of problems, and the first failure has acrippling effect on the child’s whole future.

 

   ¹ Cf. the ‘Analysis of a Five-Year-Old Boy’ (1909b).

 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1973

 

   Their ignorance of the vagina also makes it possible for children to

believe in the second of their sexual theories. If the baby grows in the

mother’s body and is then removed from it, this can only happen along

the  one  possible  pathway  -the  anal  aperture. The  baby  must  be

evacuated  like  a  piece  of  excrement,  like  a  stool.  When,  in  later

childhood, the same question is the subject of solitary reflection or of a

discussion between two children, the explanations probably arrived at

are that the baby emerges from the navel, which comes open, or that

the  abdomen  is  slit  up  and  the  baby  taken  out  -  which  was  what

happened to the wolf in the story of Little Red Riding-Hood. These

theories are expressed aloud and also consciously remembered later

on;    they  no  longer  contain  anything  objectionable.  These  same

children have by then completely forgotten that in earlier years they

believed in another theory of birth, which is now obstructed by the

repression  of  the  anal  sexual  components  that  has  meanwhile

occurred. At that time a motion was something which could be talked

about in the nursery without shame. The child was still not so distant

from  his  constitutional  coprophilic  inclinations.  There  was  nothing

degraded about coming into the world like a heap of faeces, which

had  not  yet  been  condemned  by  feelings  of  disgust.  The  cloacal

theory, which, after all, is valid for so many animals, was the most

natural theory, and it alone could obtrude upon the child as being a

probable one.

   This being so, however, it was only logical that the child should

refuse  to  grant  women  the  painful  prerogative  of  giving  birth  to

children. If babies are born through the anus, then a man can give

birth just as well as a woman. It is therefore possible for a boy to

imagine that he, too, has children of his own, without there being any

need to accuse him on that account of having feminine inclinations.

He is merely giving evidence in this of the anal erotism which is stillalive in him.

 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1974

 

   If the cloacal theory of birth is preserved in consciousness during

later years of childhood, as occasionally happens, it is accompanied

too by a solution - no longer, it is true, a primary one - of the problem

of the origin of babies. Here it is like being in a fairy story; one eats

some particular thing and gets a child from it. This infantile theory of

birth is revived in cases of insanity. A manic woman, for instance, will

lead  the  visiting  doctor  to  a  little  heap  of  faeces  which  she  has

deposited in a corner of her cell, and say to him with a laugh: ‘That’s

the baby I had to-day.’

   The third of the typical sexual theories arises in children if, through

some chance domestic occurrence, they become witnesses of sexual

intercourse  between  their  parents.  Their  perceptions  of  what  is

happening are bound, however, to be only very incomplete. Whatever

detail it may be that comes under their observation - whether it is the

relative positions of the two people, or the noises they make, or some

accessory circumstance - children arrive in every case at the same

conclusion. They adopt what may be called a sadistic view of coition.

They  see  it  as  something  that  the  stronger  participant  is  forcibly

inflicting on the weaker, and they (especially boys) compare it to the

romping  familiar  to  them  from  their  childish  experience  -  romping

which, incidentally, is not without a dash of sexual excitation. I have

not been able to ascertain that children recognize this behaviour which

they have witnessed between their parents as the missing link needed

for  solving  the  problem  of  babies;  it  appears  more  often  that  the

connection is overlooked by them for the very reason that they have

interpreted the act of love as an act of violence. But this view of it itself

gives an impression of being a return of the obscure impulse towards

cruel  behaviour  which  became  attached  to  the  excitations  of  the

child’s penis when he first began to think about the problem of where

babies came from. The possibility, too, cannot be excluded that this

premature  sadistic  impulse,  which  might  so  nearly  have  led  to  thediscovery  of  coition,  itself  first  emerged  under  the  influence  of

extremely  obscure  memories  of  parental  intercourse,  for  which  the

child had obtained the material - though at the time he made no use of

it - while he was still in his first years and was sharing his parents’

bedroom.¹

 

    ¹ Restif de la Bretonne, in his autobiographical work Monsiur Nocholas (1794), tells a story

of an impression he received at the age of four, which confirms this sadistic misunderstanding
of coitus.
 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1975

 

   The sadistic theory of coitus which, taken in isolation, is misleading

where it might have provided confirmatory evidence, is, once again,

the expression of one of the innate components of the sexual instinct,

any of which may be strongly marked to a greater or lesser degree in

each  particular  child.  For  this  reason  the  theory  is  correct  up  to  a

certain point; it has in part divined the nature of the sexual act and the

‘sex-battle’  that  precedes  it.  Not  infrequently,  too,  the  child  is  in  a

position  to  support  this  view  by  accidental  observations  which  he

understands in part correctly, but also in part incorrectly and indeed in

a reversed sense. In many marriages the wife does in fact recoil from

her husband’s embraces, which bring her no pleasure, but the risk of a

fresh pregnancy. And so the child who is believed to be asleep (or

who is pretending to be asleep) may receive an impression from his

mother which he can only interpret as meaning that she is defending

herself against an act of violence. At other times the whole marriage

offers  an  observant  child  the  spectacle  of  an  unceasing  quarrel,

expressed in loud words and unfriendly gestures; so that he need not

be surprised if the quarrel is carried on at night as well, and finally

settled by the same method which he himself is accustomed to use in

his relations with his brothers and sisters or playmates.

   Moreover, if the child discovers spots of blood in his mother’s bed or

on her underclothes, he regards it as a confirmation of his view. It

proves to him that his father has made another similar assault on his

mother  during  the  night  (whereas  we  should  rather  take  the  freshspots of blood to mean that there had been a temporary cessation of

sexual  intercourse).  Much  of  the  otherwise  inexplicable  ‘horror  of

blood’ shown by neurotics finds its explanation from this connection.

Once again, however, the child’s mistake contains a fragment of truth.

For in certain familiar circumstances a trace of blood is in fact judged

as a sign that sexual intercourse has been begun.

      A  question  connected  somewhat  indirectly  with  the  insoluble

problem  of  where  babies  come  from  also  engages  the  child  -  the

question  as  to  the  nature  and  content  of  the  state  called  ‘being

married’;  and  he  answers  the  question  differently  according  as  his

chance  perceptions  in  relation  to  his  parents  have  coincided  with

instincts of his own which are still pleasurably coloured. All that these

answers seem to have in common is that the child promises himself

pleasurable  satisfaction  from  being  married  and  supposes  that  it

involves a disregard of modesty. The notion I have most frequently

met with is that each of the married couple urinate in front of the other.

A  variation  of  this,  which  sounds  as  if  it  was  meant  to  indicate  a

greater  knowledge  symbolically,  is  that the  man  urinates  into  the

woman’s chamber-pot. In other instances the meaning of marriage is

supposed to be that the two people show their behinds to each other

(without  being  ashamed).  In  one  case,  in  which  education  had

succeeded  in  postponing  sexual  knowledge  especially  late,  a

fourteen-year-old girl, who had already begun to menstruate, arrived

from the books she had read at the idea that being married consisted

in a ‘mixing of blood’; and since her own sister had not yet started her

periods, the lustful girl made an assault on a female visitor who had

confessed that she was just then menstruating, so as to force her to

take part in this ‘blood mixing’.

 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1976

 

      Childhood  opinions  about  the  nature  of  marriage,  which  are  not

seldom retained by conscious memory, have great significance for the

symptomatology of later neurotic illness. At first they find expression in

children’s games in which each child does with another whatever it isthat in his view constitutes being married; and then, later on, the wish

to  be  married  may  choose  the  infantile  form  of  expression  and  so

make its appearance in a phobia which is at first sight unrecognizable,

or in some corresponding symptom.¹

   These seem to be the most important of the typical sexual theories

that children produce spontaneously in early childhood, under the sole

influence of the components of the sexual instinct. I know that I have

not succeeded in making my material complete or in establishing an

unbroken connection between it and the rest of infantile life. But I may

add one or two supplementary observations, whose absence would

otherwise be noticed by any well-informed person. Thus, for instance,

there is the significant theory that a baby is got by a kiss - a theory

which obviously betrays the predominance of the erotogenic zone of

the mouth. In my experience this theory is exclusively feminine and is

sometimes found to be pathogenic in girls whose sexual researches

have  been  subjected  to  exceedingly  strong  inhibitions  in  childhood.

Again, through an accidental observation, one of my women patients

happened upon the theory of the ‘couvade’, which, as is well known, is

a  general  custom  among  some  races  and  is  probably  intended  to

contradict  the  doubts  as  to  paternity  which  can  never  be  entirely

overcome. A rather eccentric uncle of this patient’s stayed at home for

days after the birth of his child and received visitors in his dressing-

gown, from which she concluded that both parents took part in the

birth of their children and had to go to bed.

 

   ¹ The games that are most significant for subsequent neuroses are playing at ‘doctor’ and

at ‘father and mother’.
 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1977

 

   In about their tenth or eleventh year, children get to hear about

sexual  matters.  A  child  who  has  grown  up  in  a  comparatively

uninhibited social atmosphere, or who has found better opportunities

for  observation,  tells  other  children  what  he  knows,  because  this

makes him feel mature and superior. What children learn in this way is

mostly correct - that is, the existence of the vagina and its purpose isrevealed to them; but otherwise the explanations they get from one

another are not infrequently mixed with false ideas and burdened with

remains of the older infantile sexual theories. They are scarcely ever

complete or sufficient to solve the primordial problem. Just as formerly

it  was  ignorance  of  the  vagina  which  prevented  the  whole  process

from being understood, so now is it ignorance of the semen. The child

cannot guess that another substance besides urine is excreted from

the  male  sexual  organ,  and  occasionally  an  ‘innocent’  girl  on  her

wedding night is still indignant at her husband ‘urinating into her’. This

information acquired in the years of pre-puberty is followed by a new

access of sexual researches by the child. But the theories which he

now produces no longer have the typical and original stamp which

was characteristic of the primary theories of early childhood as long as

the infantile sexual components could find expression in theories in an

uninhibited and unmodified fashion. The child’s later intellectual efforts

at solving the puzzles of sex have not seemed to me worth collecting,

nor  can  they  have  much  claim  to  a  pathogenic  significance.  Their

multiplicity  is  of  course  mainly  dependent  on  the  nature  of  the

enlightenment which a child receives; but their significance consists

rather in the fact that they re-awaken the traces, which have since

become unconscious, of his first period of sexual interest; so that it is

not  infrequent  for  masturbatory  sexual  activity  and  some  degree  of

emotional  detachment  from  his  parents  to  be  linked  up  with  them.

Hence the condemnatory judgement of teachers that enlightenment of

such a kind at this age ‘corrupts’ children.

 


                      On The Sexual Theories Of Children

                                                                                      1978

 

   Let me give a few examples to show what elements often enter into

these late speculations by children about sexual life. A girl had heard

from her schoolmates that the husband gives his wife an egg, which

she hatches out in her body. A boy, who had also heard of the egg,

identified it with the testicle, which [in German] is vulgarly called by the

same  word  [Ei];  and  he  racked  his  brains  to  make  out  how  the

contents of the scrotum could be constantly renewed. The informationgiven  seldom  goes  far  enough  to  prevent  important  uncertainties

about  sexual  events.  Thus  a  girl  may  arrive  at  an  expectation  that

intercourse occurs on one occasion only, but that it lasts a very long

time - twenty-four hours - and that all the successive babies come

from this single occasion. One would suppose that this child had got

her knowledge of the reproductive process from certain insects; but it

turned  out  that  this  was  not  so  and  that  the  theory  emerged  as  a

spontaneous  creation.  Other  girls  are  ignorant  of  the  period  of

gestation, the life in the womb, and assume that the baby appears

immediately  after  the  first  night  of  intercourse.  Marcel  Prevost  has

turned  this  girlhood  mistake  into  an  amusing  story  in  one  of  his

‘Lettres de femmes’. These later sexual researches of children, or of

adolescents who have been retarded at the stage of childhood, offer

an  almost  inexhaustible  theme  and  one  which  is  perhaps  not

uninteresting  in  general;    but  it  is  more  remote  from  my  present

interest. I must only lay stress on the fact that in this field children

produce many incorrect ideas in order to contradict older and better

knowledge which has become unconscious and is repressed.

   The way in which children react to the information they are given

also has its significance. In some, sexual repression has gone so far

that they will not listen to anything; and these succeed in remaining

ignorant even in later life - apparently ignorant, at least - until, in the

psycho-analysis of neurotics, the knowledge that originated in early

childhood comes to light. I also know of two boys between ten and

thirteen years old who, though it is true that they listened to the sexual

information, rejected it with the words: ‘ Your father and other people

may do something like that, but I know for certain my father never

would.’ But however widely children’s later reactions to the satisfaction

of their sexual curiosity may vary, we may assume that in the first

years of childhood their attitude was absolutely uniform, and we may

feel certain that at that time all of them tried most eagerly to discover

what it was that their parents did with each other so as to produce

babies.

                                                                                       1979

 

        SOME GENERAL REMARKS ON HYSTERICAL ATTACKS

                                        (1909)

 


                                                                                      1980

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1981

 

        SOME GENERAL REMARKS ON HYSTERICAL ATTACKS

 
                                            A

 

When  one  carries  out  the  psycho-analysis  of  a  hysterical  woman

patient whose complaint is manifested in attacks, one soon becomes

convinced  that  these  attacks  are  nothing  else  but  phantasies

translated into the motor sphere, projected on to motility and portrayed

in pantomime. It is true that the phantasies are unconscious; but apart

from this they are of the same nature as the phantasies which can be

observed  directly  in  day-dreams  or  which  can  be  elicited  by

interpretation from dreams at night. Often a dream takes the place of

an attack, and still more often it explains it, since the same phantasy

finds a different expression in a dream and in an attack. We might

expect then that by observing an attack we should be able to get to

know the phantasy represented in it; but this is seldom possible. As a

rule,  owing  to  the  influence  of  the  censorship,  the  pantomimic

portrayal  of  the  phantasy  has  undergone  distortions  which  are

completely analogous to the hallucinatory distortions of a dream, so

that both of them have, in the first resort, become unintelligible to the

subject’s  own  consciousness  as  well  as  to  the  observer’s

comprehension. A hysterical attack, therefore, needs to be subjected

to the same interpretative revision as we employ for night-dreams. But

not only are the forces from which the distortion proceeds and thepurpose of the distortion the same as those we have come to know

through the interpretation of dreams; the technique employed in the

distortion is the same too.

 


                Some General Remarks On Hysterical Attacks

                                                                                      1982

 

      (1)  The  attack  becomes  unintelligible  through  the  fact  that  it

represents several phantasies in the same material simultaneously -

that is to say through condensation. The elements common to the two

(or more) phantasies constitute the nucleus of the representation, as

they do in dreams. The phantasies which are thus made to coincide

are  often  of  quite  a  different  nature.  They  may,  for  instance,  be  a

recent wish and the re-activation of an infantile impression. The same

innervations are in that case made to serve both purposes, often in a

most ingenious way. Hysterical patients who make a very extensive

use of condensation may find a single form of attack sufficient; others

express their numerous pathogenic phantasies by a multiplication of

the forms of attack.

   (2) The attack becomes obscured through the fact that the patient

attempts to carry out the activities of both the figures who appear in

the phantasy, that is to say, through multiple identification. Compare,

for  instance,  the  example  I  mentioned  in  my  paper  on  ‘Hysterical

Phantasies  and  their  Relation  to  Bisexuality’  (1908a),  in  which  the

patient  tore  off  her  dress  with  one  hand  (as  the  man)  while  she

pressed it to her body with the other (as the woman).

   (3) A particularly extensive distortion is effected by an antagonistic

inversion of the innervations. This is analogous to the transformation

of  an  element  into  its  opposite,  which  commonly  happens  in  the

dream-work.  For  instance,  an  embrace  may  be  represented  in  the

attack by drawing back the arms convulsively till the hands meet over

the  spinal  column.  It  is  possible  that  the  well-known arc  de  cercle

which occurs during attacks in major hysteria is nothing else than an

energetic repudiation like this, through antagonistic innervation, of a

posture of the body that is suitable for sexual intercourse.

      (4)  Scarcely  less  confusing  and  misleading  is  a reversal  of  thechronological order within the phantasy that is portrayed, which once

more has its complete counterpart in a number of dreams which begin

with the end of the action and end with its beginning. Supposing, for

instance,  that  a  hysterical  woman  has  a  phantasy  of  seduction  in

which she is sitting reading in a park with her skirt slightly lifted so that

her foot is visible; a gentleman approaches and speaks to her; they

then go somewhere and make love to one another. This phantasy is

acted out in the attack by her beginning with the convulsive stage,

which corresponds to the coitus, by her then getting up, going into

another room, sitting down and reading and presently answering an

imaginary remark addressed to her.

   The two last-mentioned forms of distortion give us some idea of the

intensity of the resistances which the repressed material must take

into account even when it breaks through in a hysterical attack.

 


                Some General Remarks On Hysterical Attacks

                                                                                      1983

 

                                            B

 

      The  onset  of  hysterical  attacks  follows  laws  that  are  easily

understandable. Since the repressed complex consists of a libidinal

cathexis and an ideational content (the phantasy), the attack can be

evoked  (1) associatively,  when  the  content  of  the  complex  (if

sufficiently cathected) is touched on by something connected with it in

conscious life; (2) organically, when, for internal somatic reasons and

as a result of psychical influences from outside, the libidinal cathexis

rises above a certain degree; (3) in the service of the primary purpose

-  as  an  expression  of  a  ‘flight  into  illness’,  when  reality  becomes

distressing or frightening - that is, as a consolation; (4) in the service

of the secondary purposes, with which the illness allies itself, as soon

as,  by  producing  an  attack,  the  patient  can  achieve  an  aim  that  is

useful  to  him.  In  the  last  case  the  attack  is  directed  at  particular

individuals;  it  can  be  put  off  till  they  are  present,  and  it  gives  an

impression of being consciously simulated.

 

                                            C 

   Investigation of the childhood history of hysterical patients shows

that the hysterical attack is designed to take the place of an auto-

erotic satisfaction previously practised and since given up. In a great

number  of  cases  this  satisfaction  (masturbation  by  contact  or  by

pressure of the thighs, or, again, by movements of the tongue, and so

on) recurs during the attack itself, while the subject’s consciousness is

deflected. Moreover, the onset of an attack that is due to an increase

of libido and is in the service of the primary purpose - as a consolation

- exactly repeats the conditions under which, at the earlier time, the

patient  had  intentionally  sought  this  auto-erotic  satisfaction.  The

anamnesis of the patient shows the following stages: (a) auto-erotic

satisfaction,  without  ideational  content;  (b)  the  same  satisfaction,

connected with a phantasy which leads to the act of satisfaction; (c)

renunciation of the act, with retention of the phantasy; (d) repression

of the phantasy, which then comes into effect as a hysterical attack,

either in an unchanged form, or in a modified one and adapted to new

environmental impressions. Furthermore, (e) the phantasy may even

reinstate the act of satisfaction belonging to it which had ostensibly

been  given  up.  This  is  a  typical  cycle  of  infantile  sexual  activity:

repression, failure of repression, and return of the repressed.

 


                Some General Remarks On Hysterical Attacks

                                                                                      1984

 

   The involuntary passing of urine is certainly not to be regarded as

incompatible  with  the  diagnosis  of  a  hysterical  attack;  it  is  merely

repeating the infantile form of a violent pollution. Moreover, biting the

tongue may also be met with in undoubted cases of hysteria. It is no

more inconsistent with hysteria than it is with love-making. It occurs

more readily in attacks if the patient’s attention had been drawn by the

doctor’s questions to the difficulties of making a differential diagnosis.

Self-injury may occur in hysterical attacks (more frequently in the case

of men) where it repeats an accident in childhood - as, for instance,

the result of a romp.

   The loss of consciousness, the ‘absence’¹, in a hysterical attack isderived  from  the  fleeting  but  unmistakable  lapse  of  consciousness

which is observable at the climax of every intense sexual satisfaction,

including auto-erotic ones. This course of development can be traced

with most certainty where hysterical absences arise from the onset of

pollutions in young people of the female sex. The so-called ‘hypnoid

states’ - absences during day-dreaming -, which are so common in

hysterical subjects, show the same origin. The mechanism of these

absences  is  comparatively  simple.  All  the  subject’s  attention  is

concentrated  to  begin  with  on  the  course  of  the  process  of

satisfaction; with the occurrence of the satisfaction, the whole of this

cathexis  of  attention  is  suddenly  removed,  so  that  there  ensues  a

momentary  void  in  her  consciousness.  This  gap  in  consciousness,

which might be termed a physiological one, is then widened in the

service  of  repression,  till  it  can  swallow  up  everything  that  the

repressing agency rejects.

 

                                            D

 

   What points the way for the motor discharge of the repressed libido

in a hysterical attack is the reflex mechanism of the act of coition - a

mechanism which is ready to hand in everybody, including women,

and  which  we  see  coming  into  manifest  operation  when  an

unrestrained surrender is made to sexual activity. Already in ancient

times coition was described as a ‘minor epilepsy’. We might alter this

and say that a convulsive hysterical attack is an equivalent of coition.

The analogy with an epileptic fit helps us little, since its genesis is

even less understood than that of hysterical attacks.

   Speaking as a whole, hysterical attacks, like hysteria in general,

revive a piece of sexual activity in women which existed during their

childhood  and  at  that  time  revealed  an  essentially  masculine

character.  It  can  often  be  observed  that  girls  who  have  shown  a

boyish  nature  and  inclinations  up  to  the  years  before  puberty  are

precisely  those  who  become  hysterical  from  puberty  onwards.  In  a

whole number of cases the hysterical neurosis merely represents an

excessive  accentuation  of  the  typical  wave  of  repression  which,  by

doing  away  with  her  masculine  sexuality,  allows  the  woman  to

emerge.² 

   ¹ [The French term.]

   ² Cf. my Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d).

                                                                                       1985

 

                                FAMILY ROMANCES

                                        (1909)

 


                                                                                      1986

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      1987

 

                                FAMILY ROMANCES

 

The liberation of an individual, as he grows up, from the authority of

his  parents  is  one  of  the  most  necessary  though  one  of  the  most

painful results brought about by the course of his development. It is

quite  essential  that  that  liberation  should  occur  and  it  may  be

presumed that it has been to some extent achieved by everyone who

his  reached  a  normal  state.  Indeed,  the  whole  progress  of  society

rests  upon  the  opposition  between  successive  generations.  On  the

other  hand,  there  is  a  class  of  neurotics  whose  condition  is

recognizably determined by their having failed in this task.

   For a small child his parents are at first the only authority and the,

source of all belief. The child’s most intense and most momentous

wish during these early years is to be like his parents (that is, the

parent of his own sex) and to be big like his father and mother. But as

intellectual  growth  increases,  the  child  cannot  help  discovering  by

degrees the category to which his parents belong. He gets to know

other parents and compares them with his own, and so acquires the

right  to  doubt  the  incomparable  and  unique  quality  which  he  had

attributed to them. Small events in the child’s life which make him feel

dissatisfied  afford  him  provocation  for  beginning  to  criticize  his

parents,  and  for  using,  in  order  to  support  his  critical  attitude,  the

knowledge  which  he  has  acquired  that  other  parents  are  in  some

respects preferable to them. The psychology of the neuroses teachesus  that,  among  other  factors,  the  most  intense  impulses  of  sexual

rivalry contribute to this result. A feeling of being slighted is obviously

what constitutes the subject-matter of such provocations. There are

only too many occasions on which a child is slighted, or at least feels

he has been slighted, on which he feels he is not receiving the whole

of  his  parents’  love,  and,  most  of  all,  of  which  he  feels  regrets  at

having to share it with brothers and sisters. His sense that his own

affection is not being fully reciprocated then finds a vent in the idea,

often  consciously  recollected  later  from  early  childhood,  of  being  a

step-child  or  an  adopted  child.  People  who  have  not  developed

neuroses  very  frequently  remember  such  occasions,  on  which  -

usually as a result of something they have read - they interpreted and

responded to their parent’s hostile behaviour in this fashion. But here

the  influence  of  sex  is  already  in  evidence,  for  a  boy  is  far  more

inclined to feel hostile impulses towards his father than towards his

mother and has a far more intense desire to get free from him than

from her. In this respect the imagination of girls is apt to show itself

much  weaker.  These  consciously  remembered  mental  impulses  of

childhood  embody  the  factor  which  enables  us  to  understand  the

nature of myths.

 


                                    Family Romances

                                                                                      1988

 

   The later stage in the development of the neurotic’s estrangement

from his parents, begun in this manner, might be described as ‘the

neurotic’s family romance’. It is seldom remembered consciously but

can  almost  always  be  revealed  by  psycho-analysis.  For  a  quite

peculiarly  marked  imaginative  activity  is  one  of  the  essential

characteristics of neurotics and also of all comparatively highly gifted

people. This activity emerges first in children’s play, and then, starting

roughly from the period before puberty, takes over the topic of family

relations. A characteristic example of this peculiar imaginative activity

is to be seen in the familiar day-dreaming¹ which persists far beyond

puberty. If these day-dreams are carefully examined, they are found to

serve as the fulfilment of wishes and as a correction of actual life.They have two principal aims, an erotic and an ambitious one - though

an erotic aim is usually concealed behind the latter too. At about the

period  I  have  mentioned,  then,  the  child’s  imagination  becomes

engaged in the task of getting free from the parents of whom he now

has a low opinion and of replacing them by others, who, as a rule, are

of higher social standing. He will make use in this connection of any

opportune  coincidences  from  his  actual  experience,  such  as  his

becoming  acquainted  with  the  Lord  of  the  Manor  or  some  landed

proprietor  if  he  lives  in  the  country  or  with  some  member  of  the

aristocracy if he lives in town. Chance occurrences of this kind arouse

the child’s envy, which finds expression in a phantasy in which both

his parents are replaced by others of better birth. The technique used

in developing phantasies like this (which are, of course, conscious at

this period) depends upon the ingenuity and the material which the

child has at his disposal. There is also the question of whether the

phantasies  are  worked  out  with  greater  or  less  effort  to  obtain

verisimilitude. This state is reached at a time at which the child is still

in ignorance of the sexual determinants of procreation.

 

   ¹ Cf. ’Hysterical Phantasies and their Relation to Bisexuality’ (1908a), where a reference will

be found to the literature of the subject.
 


                                    Family Romances

                                                                                      1989

 

   When presently the child comes to know the difference in the parts

played by fathers and mothers in their sexual relations, and realizes

that ‘pater semper incertus est’, while the mother is ‘certissima’,¹ the

family romance undergoes a curious curtailment: it contents itself with

exalting  the  child’s  father,  but  no  longer  casts  any  doubts  on  his

maternal  origin,  which  is  regarded  as  something  unalterable.  This

second (sexual) stage of the family romance is actuated by another

motive as well, which is absent in the first (asexual) stage. The child,

having learnt about sexual processes, tends to picture to himself erotic

situations and relations, the motive force behind this being his desire

to  bring  his  mother  (who  is  the  subject  of  the  most  intense  sexual

curiosity) into situations of secret infidelity and into secret love-affairs.In this way the child’s phantasies, which started by being, as it were,

asexual, are brought up to the level of his later knowledge.

   Moreover the motive of revenge and retaliation, which was in the

foreground at the earlier state, is also to be found at the later one. It is,

as a rule, precisely these neurotic children who were punished by their

parents for sexual naughtiness and who now revenge themselves on

their parents by means of phantasies of this kind.

 

   ¹ [An old legal tag: ‘paternity is always uncertain, maternity is most certain.’]

 


                                    Family Romances

                                                                                      1990

 

   A younger child is very specially inclined to use imaginative stories

such  as  these  in  order  to  rob  those  born  before  him  of  their

prerogatives - in a way which reminds one of historical intrigues; and

he often has no hesitation in attributing to his mother as many fictitious

love-affairs as he himself has competitors. An interesting variant of the

family romance may then appear, in which the hero and author returns

to legitimacy himself while his brothers and sisters are eliminated by

being bastardized. So too if there are any other particular interests at

work they can direct the course to be taken by the family romance; for

its  many-sidedness  and  its  great  range  of  applicability  enable  it  to

meet every sort of requirement. In this way, for instance, the young

phantasy-builder can get rid of his forbidden degree of kinship with

one of his sisters if he finds himself sexually attracted by her.

   If anyone is inclined to turn away in horror from this depravity of the

childish  heart  or  feels  tempted,  indeed,  to  dispute  the  possibility  of

such things, he should observe that these works of fiction, which seem

so full of hostility, are none of them really so badly intended, and that

they still preserve, under a slight disguise, the child’s original affection

for his parents. The faithlessness and ingratitude are only apparent. If

we examine in detail the commonest of these imaginative romances,

the  replacement  of  both  parents  or  of  the  father  alone  by  grander

people, we find that these new and aristocratic parents are equipped

with attributes that are derived entirely from real recollections of the

actual and humble ones; so that in fact the child is not getting rid of hisfather but exalting him. Indeed the whole effort at replacing the real

father by a superior one is only an expression of the child’s longing for

the happy, vanished days when his father seemed to him the noblest

and  strongest  of  men  and  his  mother  the  dearest  and  loveliest  of

women. He is turning away from the father whom he knows to-day to

the father in whom he believed in the earlier years of his childhood;

and his phantasy is no more than the expression of a regret that those

happy days have gone. Thus in these phantasies the overvaluation

that characterizes a child’s earliest years comes into its own again. An

interesting  contribution  to  this  subject  is  afforded  by  the  study  of

dreams. We learn from their interpretation that even in later years, if

the  Emperor  and  Empress  appear  in  dreams,  those  exalted

personages stand for the dreamer’s father and mother.¹ So that the

child’s overvaluation of his parents survives as well in the dreams of

normal adults.

 

   ¹ Cf. my Interpretation of Dreams (1900a).

                                                                                       1991

 

          CONTRIBUTION TO A QUESTIONNAIRE ON READING

                                        (1907)

 

You ask me to name ‘ten good books’ for you, and refrain from adding

to this any word of explanation. Thus you leave to me not only the

choice  of  the  books  but  also  the  interpretation  of  your  request.

Accustomed to paying attention to small signs, I must then trust the

wording in which you couch your enigmatical demand. You did not

say:  ‘the  ten  most  magnificent  works  (of  world  literature)',  in  which

case I should have been obliged to reply, with so many others: Homer,

the tragedies of Sophocles, Goethe’s Faust, Shakespeare’s Hamlet,

Macbeth, etc. Nor did you say the ‘ten most significant books’, among

which  scientific  achievements  like  those  of  Copernicus,  of  the  old

physician Johann Weier on the belief in witches, Darwin’s Descent of

Man, and others, would then have found a place. You did not even

ask  for  ‘favourite  books’,  among  which  I  should  not  have  forgotten

Milton’s Paradise Lost and Heine’s Lazarus. I think, therefore, that a

particular stress falls on the ‘good’ in your phrase, and that with this

predicate you intend to designate books to which one stands in rather

the same relationship as to ‘good’ friends, to whom one owes a part of

one’s knowledge of life and view of the world - books which one has

enjoyed  oneself  and  gladly  commends  to  others,  but  in  connection

with which the element of timid reverence, the feeling of one’s own

smallness in the face of their greatness, is not particularly prominent.

   I will therefore name ten such ‘good’ books for you which have come

to my mind without a great deal of reflection.

 

                                    Multatuli, Letters and Works.

                                    Kipling, Jungle Book.

                                    Anatole France, Sur la pierre blanche.

                                    Zola, Fécondité.

                                    Merezhkovsky, Leonardo da Vinci.

                                    G. Keller, Leute von Seldwyla.

                                    C. F. Meyer, Huttens letzte Tage.                                    Macaulay, Essays.

                                    Gomperz, Griechische Denker.

                                    Mark Twain, Sketches.

 


                  Contribution To A Questionnaire On Reading

                                                                                      1992

 

   I do not know what you intend to do with this list. It seems a most

peculiar one even to me; I really cannot let it go without comment. The

problem of why precisely these and not other equally ‘good’ books I

will not begin to tackle; I merely wish to throw light on the relation

between the author and his work. The connection is not in every case

as firm as it is, for instance, with Kipling’s Jungle Book. For the most

part I could just as well have singled out another work by the same

author - for instance, in the case of Zola, Docteur Pascal - and the

like.  The  same  man  who  has  given  us  one  good  book  has  often

presented us with several good books. In the case of Multatuli I felt in

two minds whether to reject the private letters in favour of the ‘Love

Letters’ or the latter in favour of the former, and for that reason wrote:

‘Letters  and  Works’.  Genuinely  creative  writing  of  purely,  poetical

value has been excluded from this list, probably because your charge

- good books - did not seem exactly aimed at such; for in the case of

C. F. Meyer’s Hutten I must set its ‘goodness’ far above its beauty:

‘edification’ above aesthetic enjoyment.

   You have touched on something, with your request to name for you

‘ten good books’, on which an immeasurable amount could be said.

And so I will conclude, in order not to become even more informative.

                                                                      Yours sincerely,

                                                                                    FREUD.

                                                                                       1993

 

          PROSPECTUS FOR SCHRIFTEN ZUR ANGEWANDTEN

                                    SEELENKUNDE

                                        (1907)

 

The Schriften  zur  angewandten  Seelenkunde,  the  first  number  of

which is published herewith, are aimed at that wider circle of educated

people who without actually being philosophers or medical men are

nevertheless able to appreciate the science of the human mind for its

significance  in  the  understanding  and  deepening  of  our  lives.  The

papers  will  appear  in  no  prescribed  order,  but  will  present  in  each

instance  a  single  study,  which  will  undertake  the  application  of

psychological knowledge to subjects in art and literature, in the history

of civilizations and religions, and in analogous fields. These studies

will sometimes bear the character of exact investigations, sometimes

that  of  speculative  efforts,  attempting  now  to  embrace  a  larger

problem,  now  to  penetrate  into  a  more  restricted  one;  but  in  every

case they will be in the nature of original achievements and will avoid

resembling mere reviews or compilations.

   The Editor feels himself in duty bound to vouch for the originality and

general merit of the articles appearing in this series. For the rest, he

does  not  wish  either  to  interfere  with  the  independence  of  his

contributors or to be held answerable for what they express. The fact

that  the  first  numbers  of  the  series  take  particular  account  of  the

theories  which  he  himself  has  advocated  in  the  sphere  of  science

should  not  determine  the  view  taken  of  this  enterprise.  On  the

contrary, the series is open to the exponents of divergent opinions and

hopes to be able to give expression to the variety of points of view and

principles in contemporary science.

 

  THE PUBLISHER THE EDITOR

                                                                                       1994

 

                        PREFACE TO WILHELM STEKEL’S

          NERVOUS ANXIETY-STATES AND THEIR TREATMENT

                                        (1908)

 

My  investigations  into  the  aetiology  and  psychical  mechanism  of

neurotic  illnesses,  which  I  have  pursued  since  1893,  attracted  little

notice to begin with among my fellow specialists. At length, however,

those  investigations  have  met  with  recognition  from  a  number  of

medical  research  workers  and  have  also  drawn  attention  to  the

psycho-analytic methods of examination and treatment to which I owe

my  findings.  Dr.  Wilhelm  Stekel,  who  was  one  of  the  first  of  the

colleagues  to  whom  I  was  able  to  impart  a  knowledge  of  psycho-

analysis,  and  who  has  himself  become  familiar  with  its  technique

through many years of practice in it, has now undertaken the task of

working over one topic in the clinical aspect of these neuroses on the

basis  of  my  views  and  of  presenting  medical  readers  with  the

experiences he has obtained through the psycho-analytic method. If I

am glad to take the responsibility for his work in the sense which I

have just indicated, I think it is only right to declare explicitly that my

direct influence upon the volume on nervous states of anxiety which

lies before us has been a very slight one. The observations and all the

detailed opinions and interpretations are the author’s own. My share

has been limited to proposing the use of the term ‘anxiety hysteria’.

   I will add that Dr. Stekel’s work is founded upon rich experience and

is calculated to stimulate other physicians into confirming by their own

efforts our views on the aetiology of these conditions. His work reveals

many unexpected glimpses of the realities of life, which so often lie

concealed behind neurotic symptoms; and it may well convince our

colleagues  that  the  attitude  they  choose  to  adopt  to  the  hints  and

explanations given in these pages cannot be a matter of indifference

from  the  point  of  view  either  of  their  understanding  or  of  their

therapeutic efficiency.

 

VIENNA, March 1908                                                                                       1995

 

                      PREFACE TO SANDOR FERENCZI’S

        PSYCHO-ANALYSIS: ESSAYS IN THE FIELD OF PSYCHO-

                                      ANALYSIS

                                        (1910)

 

Psycho-analytic  research  into  the  neuroses  (the  various  forms  of

nervous  illness  with  a  mental  causation)  has  endeavoured  to  trace

their connection with instinctual life and the restrictions imposed on it

by the claims of civilization, with the activities of the normal individual

in phantasies and dreams, and with the creations of the popular mind

in  religion.,  myths  and  fairy  tales.  The  psycho-analytic  treatment  of

neurotic patients, based on this method of research, makes far higher

demands on doctor and patient than the methods hitherto in common

use,  which  operate  through  medicaments,  diet,  hydropathy  and

suggestion.  But  it  brings  the  patients  so  much  more  relief  and

permanent strengthening in the face of life’s problems, that there is no

cause for surprise at the continual advances made by this therapeutic

method in spite of violent opposition.

   The author of the following essays, who is a close acquaintance of

mine, and who is familiar, to an extent that few others are, with all the

difficulties  of  psycho-analytic  problems,  is  the  first  Hungarian  to

undertake the task of creating an interest in psycho-analysis among

doctors  and  men  of  education  in  his  own  country  through  writings

composed  in  their  mother  tongue.  It  is  our  cordial  wish  that  this

attempt of his may succeed and may result in gaining for this new field

of work new workers from the body of his compatriots.

                                                                                       1996

 

              CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE NEUE FREIE PRESSE

                                        (1903-4)

 

                                            I

 

      REVIEW OF GEORG BIEDENKAPP’S IM KAMPFE GEGEN HIRNBACILLEN

 

Concealed behind this somewhat unpromising title is the book of a

brave man who succeeds in telling the reader much that is worthy of

consideration. The sub-title of the work reveals more of its content: ‘A

Philosophy  of  Small  Words’.  The  author  is  in  fact  fighting  against

those  ‘little  words  and  arrangements  of  words  which  exclude  or

include too much’ and which reveal, in people who have the habit of

using  them  for  preference,  a  tendency  towards  ‘exclusive  or

superlative judgements’. It is self-evident - our author would contest

even this phrase - that the fight is not concerned with these harmless

words but with the tendency to become intoxicated by them and to

forget, on account of the exaggerated representation thus achieved,

the necessary limitations on our pronouncements and the inevitable

relativity of our judgements. It really serves as a useful warning if one

is  shown  how  much  that  was  described  by  people  of  an  earlier

generation as ‘self-evident’ or as ‘nonsensical’ ranks with us to-day

conversely as nonsensical or self-evident; or if we observe, in a series

of well-chosen examples, to what a narrowing of their mental horizon

even important writers must plead guilty, as a result of their misuse of

superlatives.  The  exhortation  to  moderation  in  judgement  and

expression actually serves our author only as a point of departure for

further discussions on other ‘errors of thought’ of human beings - on

the  central  delusion,  faith,  on  atheistic  morality,  and  the  like.  In  all

these observations is manifest the author’s honest endeavour to take

seriously  the  implications  of  the  particular  view  of  the  world

necessitated by the discoveries of modern science, in particular of the

theory of evolution. A lot that is psychologically accurate is included,

and  many  truths  of  the  kind  that  have  often  been  said  before  but

cannot  be  often  enough  repeated.  The  author  has  set  himself  thethankless  task  ‘of  improving  and  converting  people’  by  means  of

exerting a sober influence, without seeking to move them to laughter

by humour or sweep them along with him by passion. Let us wish him

all success.

 


                      Contributions To The Neue Freie Presse

                                                                                      1997

 

                                            II

 

                REVIEW OF JOHN BIGELOW’S THE MYSTERY OF SLEEP

 

Solving  the  mystery  of  sleep  might  well  have  been  reserved  to

science; the pious author, however, operates with biblical arguments

and teleological causes. For example: it would be an idea unworthy of

divine  providence  to  suppose  that  it  would  allow  human  beings  to

spend a full third of their life in spiritual inactivity. Sleep is rather that

state  in  which  divine  influence  penetrates  most  freely  and  most

effectively into human mental life. But in spite of all objections to the

author’s way of thinking we will not omit to emphasize the kernel of

truth in his assertion. Scientific studies of the state of mental life during

sleep,  too,  oblige  us  to  relinquish  as  inadequate  our  previous

assumption  that  sleep  reduces  the  play  of  mental  activity  to  a

minimum. The important processes of unconscious mental and even

intellectual activity continue - as the elucidation of dreams given by

your  reviewer  demonstrates  -  even  during  profound  sleep.  This

unconscious  mental  activity  deserves  to  be  called  ‘daemonic’  but

scarcely divine.

 


                      Contributions To The Neue Freie Presse

                                                                                      1998

 

                                            III

 

                    OBITUARY OF PROFESSOR S. HAMMERSCHLAG

 

S. Hammerschlag, who relinquished his activity as a Jewish religiousteacher about thirty years ago, was one of those personalities who

possess  the  gift  of  leaving  ineradicable  impressions  on  the

development  of  their  pupils.  A  spark  from  the  same  fire  which

animated the spirit of the great Jewish seers and prophets burned in

him and was not extinguished until old age weakened his powers. But

the passionate side of his nature was happily tempered by the ideal of

humanism of our German classical period which governed him, and

his  method  of  education  was  based  on  the  foundation  of  the

philological and classical studies to which he had devoted his own

youth. Religious instruction served him as a way of educating towards

love of the humanities, and from the material of Jewish history he was

able to find means of tapping the sources of enthusiasm hidden in the

hearts  of  young  people  and  of  making  it  flow  out  far  beyond  the

limitations of nationalism or dogma. Those of his pupils who were later

allowed to seek him out in his own home gained a paternally solicitous

friend in him and were able to perceive that sympathetic kindness was

the  fundamental  characteristic  of  his  nature.  Feelings  of  gratitude

towards  a  revered  teacher  -  undiminished  through  the  course  of

decades - received most dignified expression over his grave from Dr.

Friedjung the historian.

                                                                                       1999

 

            ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A FIVE-YEAR-OLD BOY

                                        (1909)

 


                                                                                      2000

 

Intentionally left blank

 


                                                                                      2001

 

            ANALYSIS OF A PHOBIA IN A FIVE-YEAR-OLD BOY

 

                                            I

 

                                    INTRODUCTION

 

In the following pages I propose to describe the course of the illness

and recovery of a very youthful patient. The case history is not, strictly

speaking, derived from my own observation. It is true that I laid down

the general lines of the treatment, and that on one single occasion,

when I had a conversation with the boy, I took a direct share in it; but

the treatment itself was carried out by the child’s father, and it is to him

that I owe my sincerest thanks for allowing me to publish his notes

upon the case. But his services go further than this. No one else, in

my opinion, could possibly have prevailed on the child to make any

such avowals; the special knowledge by means of which he was able

to  interpret  the  remarks  made  by  his  five-year-old  son  was

indispensable,  and  without  it  the  technical  difficulties  in  the  way  of

conducting a psycho-analysis upon so young a child would have been

insuperable. It was only because the authority of a father and of a

physician were united in a single person, and because in him both

affectionate  care  and  scientific  interest  were  combined,  that  it  was

possible in this one instance to apply the method to a use to which it

would not otherwise have lent itself. 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2002

 

   But the peculiar value of this observation lies in the considerations

which follow. When a physician treats an adult neurotic by psycho-

analysis,  the  process  he  goes  through  of  uncovering  the  psychical

formations,  layer  by  layer,  eventually  enables  him  to  frame  certain

hypotheses  as  to  the  patient’s  infantile  sexuality;  and  it  is  in  the

components  of  the  latter  that  he  believes  he  has  discovered  the

motive forces of all the neurotic symptoms of later life. I have set out

these  hypotheses  in  my Three  Essays  on  the  Theory  of  Sexuality

(1905d),  and  I  am  aware  that  they  seem  as  strange  to  an  outside

reader as they seem incontrovertible to a psycho-analyst. But even a

psycho-analyst may confess to the wish for a more direct and less

roundabout proof of these fundamental theorems. Surely there must

be  a  possibility  of  observing  in  children  at  first  hand  and  in  all  the

freshness of life the sexual impulses and wishes which we dig out so

laboriously in adults from among their own débris - especially as it is

also our belief that they are the common property of all men, a part of

the human constitution, and merely exaggerated or distorted in the

case of neurotics.

   With this end in view I have for many years been urging my pupils

and my friends to collect observations of the sexual life of children -

the  existence  of  which  has  as  a  rule  been  cleverly  overlooked  or

deliberately  denied.  Among  the  material  which  came  into  my

possession as a result of these requests, the reports which I received

at regular intervals about little Hans soon began to take a prominent

place. His parents were both among my closest adherents, and they

had agreed that in bringing up their first child they would use no more

coercion  than  might  be  absolutely  necessary  for  maintaining  good

behaviour. And, as the child developed into a cheerful, good-natured

and lively little boy, the experiment of letting him grow up and express

himself  without  being  intimidated  went  on  satisfactorily.  I  shall  now

proceed  to  reproduce  his  father’s  records  of  little  Hans  just  as  I

received  them;  and  I  shall  of  course  refrain  from  any  attempt  atspoiling  the naïveté  and  directness  of  the  nursery  by  making  any

conventional emendations.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2003

 

 

   The first reports of Hans date from a period when he was not quite

three  years  old.  At  that  time,  by  means  of  various  remarks  and

questions,  he  was  showing  a  quite  peculiarly  lively  interest  in  that

portion of his body which he used to describe as his ‘widdler’.¹ Thus

he once asked his mother this question:

   Hans: ‘Mummy, have you got a widdler too?’

   Mother: ‘Of course. Why?’

   Hans: ‘I was only just thinking.’

   At the same age he went into a cow-shed once and saw a cow

being  milked.  ‘Oh,  look!’  he  said,  ‘there’s  milk  coming  out  of  its

widdler!’

   Even these first observations begin to rouse an expectation that

much,  if  not  most,  of  what  little  Hans  shows  us  will  turn  out  to  be

typical of the sexual development of children in general. I once put

forward the view² that there was no need to be too much horrified at

finding in a woman the idea of sucking at a male organ. This repellent

impulse, I argued, had a most innocent origin, since it was derived

from sucking at the mother’s breast; and in this connection, I went on,

a cows udder plays an apt part as an intermediate image, being in its

nature a mamma and in its shape and position a penis. Little Hans’s

discovery confirms the latter part of my contention.

      Meanwhile  his  interest  in  widdlers  was  by  no  means  a  purely

theoretical one; as might have been expected, it also impelled him to

touch his member. When he was three and a half his mother found

him with his hand on his penis. She threatened him in these words: ‘If

you do that, I shall send for Dr. A. to cut off your widdler. And then

what’ll you widdle with?’

   Hans: ‘With my bottom.’

    ¹ [‘Wiwimacher’ in the original.]

   ² See my ‘Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria’ (1905e).

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2004

 

   He made this reply without having any sense of guilt as yet. But this

was  the  occasion  of  his  acquiring  the  ‘castration  complex’,  the

presence  of  which  we  are  so  often  obliged  to  infer  in  analysing

neurotics,  though  they  one  and  all  struggle  violently  against

recognizing  it.  There  is  much  of  importance  to  be  said  upon  the

significance  of  this  element  in  the  life  of  a  child.  The  ‘castration

complex’ has left marked traces behind it in myths (and not only in

Greek  myths);  in  a  passage  in  my Interpretation  of  Dreams,  and

elsewhere, I have touched upon the part it plays.¹

 

   ¹ [Footnote added 1923:] - Since this was written, the study of the castration complex has

been further developed in contributions to the subject by Lou Andreas-Salomé, A. Stärcke, F.
Alexander, and others. It has been urged that every time his mother’s breast is withdrawn
from a baby he is bound to feel it as castration (that is to say, as the loss of what he regards
as an important part of his own body); that, further, he cannot fail to be similarly affected by
the regular loss of his faeces; and, finally, that the act of birth itself (consisting as it does in the
separation  of  the  child  from  his  mother,  with  whom  he  has  hitherto  been  united)  is  the
prototype  of  all  castration.  While  recognizing  all  of  these  roots  of  the  complex,  I  have
nevertheless put forward the view that the term ‘castration complex’ ought to be confined to
those excitations and consequences which are bound up with the loss of the penis. Any one
who, in analysing adults, has become convinced of the invariable presence of the castration
complex, will of course find difficulty in ascribing its origin to a chance threat - of a kind which
is  not,  after  all,  of  such  universal  occurrence;  he  will  be  driven  to  assume  that  children
construct this danger for themselves out of the slightest hints, which will never be wanting.
This circumstance is also the motive, indeed, that has stimulated the search for those deeper
roots of the complex which are universally forthcoming. But this makes it all the more valuable
that in the case of little Hans the threat of castration is reported by his parents themselves,
and moreover at a date before there was any question of his phobia.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2005

 

   At about the same age (three and a half), standing in front of the

lions’ cage at Schönbrunn, little Hans called out in a joyful and excitedvoice: ‘I saw the lion’s widdler.’

   Animals owe a good deal of their importance in myths and fairy tales

to the openness with which they display their genitals and their sexual

functions to the inquisitive little human child. There can be no doubt

about Hans’s sexual curiosity; but it also roused the spirit of enquiry in

him and enabled him to arrive at genuine abstract knowledge.

   When he was at the station once (at three and three quarters) he

saw some water being let out of an engine. ‘Oh, look,’ he said, ‘the

engine’s widdling. Where’s it got its widdler?’

   After a little he added in reflective tones: ‘A dog and a horse have

widdlers;  a  table  and  a  chair  haven’t.’  He  had  thus  got  hold  of  an

essential  characteristic  for  differentiating  between  animate  and

inanimate objects.

   Thirst for knowledge seems to be inseparable from sexual curiosity.

Hans’s curiosity was particularly directed towards his parents.

     Hans  (aged  three  and  three-quarters):  ‘Daddy,  have  you  got  a

widdler too?’

   Father: ‘Yes, of course.’

   Hans: ‘But I’ve never seen it when you were undressing.’

   Another time he was looking on intently while his mother undressed

before going to bed. ‘What are you staring like that for?’ she asked.

   Hans: ‘I was only looking to see if you’d got a widdler too.’

   Mother: ‘Of course. Didn’t you know that?’

   Hans: ‘No. I thought you were so big you’d have a widdler like a

horse.’

   This expectation of little Hans’s deserves to be borne in mind; it will

become important later on.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2006

 

 

   But the great event of Hans’s life was the birth of his little sister

Hanna when he was exactly three and a half.¹ His behaviour on that

occasion was noted down by his father on the spot: ‘At five in the

morning’, he writes, ‘labour began, and Hans’s bed was moved intothe next room. He woke up there at seven, and, hearing his mother

groaning,  asked:  "Why’s  Mummy  coughing?"  Then,  after  a  pause,

"The stork’s coming to-day for certain."

   ‘Naturally he has often been told during the last few days that the

stork is going to bring a little girl or a little boy; and he quite rightly

connected the unusual sounds of groaning with the stork’s arrival.

   ‘Later on he was taken into the kitchen. He saw the doctor’s bag in

the front hall and asked: "What’s that?" "A bag," was the reply. Upon

which he declared with conviction: "The stork’s coming to-day." After

the baby’s delivery the midwife came into the kitchen and Hans heard

her ordering some tea to be made. At this he said: "I know! Mummy’s

to have some tea because she’s coughing." He was then called into

the bedroom. He did not look at his mother, however, but at the basins

and other vessels, filled with blood and water, that were still standing

about the room. Pointing to the blood-stained bed-pan, he observed in

a surprised voice: "But blood doesn’t come out of my widdler."

   ‘Everything he says shows that he connects what is strange in the

situation with the arrival of the stork. He meets everything he sees

with a very suspicious and intent look, and there can be no question

that his first doubts about the stork have taken root.

   ‘Hans is very jealous of the new arrival, and whenever any one

praises her, says she is a lovely baby, and so on, he at once declares

scornfully: "But she’s not got any teeth yet."² And in fact when he saw

her for the first time he was very much surprised that she was unable

to speak, and decided that this was because she had no teeth. During

the first few days he was naturally put very much in the background.

He was suddenly taken ill with a sore throat. In his fever he was heard

saying: "But I don’t want a baby sister!"

 

   ¹ April 1903 to October 1906.

   ² This again is a typical mode of behaviour. Another little boy, only two years his sister’s

senior, used to parry similar remarks with an angry cry of ‘Too 'ickle! too 'ickle!’
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2007

 

      ‘Some  six  months  later  he  had  got  over  his  jealousy,  and  hisbrotherly affection for the baby was only equalled by his sense of his

own superiority over her.¹

   ‘A little later Hans was watching his seven-day-old sister being given

a  bath.  "But  her  widdler’s  still  quite  small,"  he  remarked;  and  then

added, as though by way of consolation: "When she grows up it’ll get

bigger all right."²

 

   ¹ Another child, rather older than Hans, welcomed his younger brother with the words: ‘The

stork can take him away again.’ Compare in this connection my remarks in The Interpretation
of Dreams on dreams of the death of loved relatives.

   ² Two other boys were reported to me as having made the same judgement, expressed in

identical words and followed by the same anticipation, when they were allowed to satisfy their
curiosity and look at their baby sister’s body for the first time. One might well feel horrified at
such signs of the premature decay of a child’s intellect. Why was it that these young enquirers
did not report what they really saw - namely, that there was no widdler there? In little Hans’s
case, at all events, we can account completely for the faulty perception. We are aware that by
a process of careful induction he had arrived at the general proposition that every animate
object, in contradistinction to inanimate ones, possesses a widdler. His mother had confirmed
him in this conviction by giving him corroborative information in regard to persons inaccessible
to his own observation. He was now utterly incapable of surrendering what he had achieved
merely on the strength of this single observation made upon his little sister. He therefore
made a judgement that in that instance also there was a widdler present, only that it was still
very small, but that it would grow till it was as big as a horse’s.
   We can go a step further in vindicating little Hans’s honour. As a matter of fact, he was
behaving no worse than a philosopher of the school of Wundt. In the view of that school,
consciousness is the invariable characteristic of what is mental, just as in the view of little
Hans a widdler is the indispensable criterion of what is animate. If now the philosopher comes
across mental processes whose existence cannot but be inferred, but about which there is not
a trace of consciousness to be detected - for the subject, in fact, knows nothing of them,
although it is impossible to avoid inferring their existence - then, instead of saying that they
are unconscious mental processes, he calls them semi-conscious.  The  widdler’s  still  very
small! And in this comparison the advantage is in favour of little Hans. For, as is so often the
case with the sexual researches of children, behind the mistake a piece of genuine knowledge
lies concealed. Little girls do possess a small widdler, which we call a clitoris, though it does
not  grow  any  larger  but  remains  permanently  stunted.  Compare  my  short  paper  on  ‘The
Sexual Theories of Children’ (1908c).
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2008

 

 

   ‘At the same age (when he was three and three-quarters) Hans

produced his first account of a dream: "To-day when I was asleep I

thought I was at Gmunden with Mariedl."   ‘Mariedl was the thirteen-year-old daughter of our landlord and used

often to play with him.’

   As Hans’s father was telling his mother the dream in his presence,

he  corrected  him,  saying:  ‘Not  with  Mariedl,  but  quite  alone  with

Mariedl.’

   In this connection we learn: ‘In the summer of 1906 Hans was at

Gmunden,  and  used  to  run  about  all  day  long  with  our  landlord’s

children. When we left Gmunden we thought he would be very much

upset  by  having  to  come  away  and  move  back  to  town.  To  our

surprise  this  was  not  so.  He  seemed  glad  of  the  change,  and  for

several weeks he talked very little about Gmunden. It was not until

after  some  weeks  had  passed  that  there  began  to  emerge

reminiscences - often vividly coloured - of the time he had spent at

Gmunden.  During  the  last  four  weeks  or  so  he  has  been  working

these  reminiscences  up  into  phantasies.  He  imagines  that  he  is

playing with the other children, with Berta, Olga, and Fritzl; he talks to

them  as  though  they  were  really  with  him,  and  he  is  capable  of

amusing himself in this way for hours at a time. Now that he has got a

sister  and  is  obviously  taken  up  with  the  problem  of  the  origin  of

children, he always calls Berta and Olga "his children"; and once he

added: "my children Berta and Olga were brought by the stork too."

The dream, occurring now, after six months’ absence from Gmunden,

is evidently to be read as an expression of a longing to go back there.’

   Thus far his father. I will anticipate what is to come by adding that

when  Hans  made  this  last  remark  about  his  children  having  been

brought  by  the  stork,  he  was  contradicting  aloud  a  doubt  that  was

lurking within him.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2009

 

 

   His father luckily made a note of many things which turned out later

on to be of unexpected value. ‘I drew a giraffe for Hans, who has been

to Schönbrunn several times lately. He said to me: "Draw its widdler

too." "Draw it yourself," I answered; whereupon he added this line tomy picture (see Fig. 1). He began by drawing a short stroke, and then

added a bit on to it, remarking: "Its widdler’s longer."

 











 
                                          Fig 1.

 

   ‘Hans and I walked past a horse that was micturating, and he said:

"The horse has got its widdler underneath like me."

   ‘He was watching his three-months-old sister being given a bath,

and said in pitying tones: "She has got a tiny little widdler."

   ‘He was given a doll to play with and undressed it. He examined it

carefully and said: "Her widdler’s ever so tiny."'

   As we already know, this formula made it possible for him to go on

believing in his discovery (see p. 2005).

   Every investigator runs the risk of falling into an occasional error. It

is some consolation for him if, like little Hans in the next example, he

does not err alone but can quote a common linguistic usage in his

support. For Hans saw a monkey in his picture-book one day, and

pointing to its up-curled tail, said: ‘Daddy, look at its widdler!’

   His interest in widdlers led him to invent a special game of his own.

‘Leading  out  of  the  front  hall  there  is  a  lavatory  and  also  a  dark

storeroom for keeping wood in. For some time past Hans has been

going into this wood-cupboard and saying: "I’m going to my W.C." I

once looked in to see what he was doing in the dark storeroom. He

showed me his parts and said: "I’m widdling." That is to say, he has

been "playing" at W.C. That it is in the nature of a game is shown not

merely by the fact that he was only pretending to widdle, but also by

the fact that he does not go into the W.C., which would after all be far

simpler, but prefers the wood-cupboard and calls it "his W.C."' 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2010

 

 

   We should be doing Hans an injustice if we were to trace only the

auto-erotic  features  of  his  sexual  life.  His  father  has  detailed

information  to  give  us  on  the  subject  of  his  love  relationships  with

other children. From these we can discern the existence of an ‘object-

choice’ just as in the case of an adult; and also, it must be confessed,

a very striking degree of inconstancy and a disposition to polygamy.

   ‘In the winter (at the age of three and three-quarters) I took Hans to

the  skating  rink  and  introduced  him  to  my  friend  N.’s  two  little

daughters,  who  were  about  ten  years  old.  Hans  sat  down  beside

them, while they, in the consciousness of their mature age, looked

down on the little urchin with a good deal of contempt; he gazed at

them  with  admiration,  though  this  proceeding  made  no  great

impression  on  them.  In  spite  of  this  Hans  always  spoke  of  them

afterwards as "my little girls". "Where are my little girls? When are my

little girls coming?" And for some weeks he kept tormenting me with

the question: "When am I going to the rink again to see my little girls?"

   A five-year-old boy cousin came to visit Hans, who had by then

reached the age of four. Hans was constantly putting his arms round

him, and once, as he was giving him one of these tender embraces,

said: ‘I am so fond of you.’

   This is the first trace of homosexuality that we have come across in

him,  but  it  will  not  be  the  last.  Little  Hans  seems  to  be  a  positive

paragon of all the vices.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2011

 

 

   ‘When Hans was four years old we moved into a new flat. A door led

out of the kitchen on to a balcony, from which one could see into a flat

on the opposite side of the courtyard. In this flat Hans discovered alittle girl of about seven or eight. He would sit on the step leading on to

the balcony so as to admire her, and would stop there for hours on

end. At four o’clock in the afternoon in particular, when the little girl

came  home  from  school,  he  was  not  to  be  kept  in  the  room,  and

nothing could induce him to abandon his post of observation. Once,

when the little girl failed to make her appearance at the window at her

usual hour, Hans grew quite restless, and kept pestering the servants

with questions. "When’s the little girl coming? Where’s the little girl?"

and so on. When she did appear at last, he was quite blissful and

never took his eyes off the flat opposite. The violence with which this

"long-range love"¹ came over him is to be explained by his having no

playmates  of  either  sex.  Spending  a  good  deal  of  time  with  other

children clearly forms part of a child’s normal development.

      ‘Hans  obtained  some  companionship  of  this  kind  when,  shortly

afterwards (he was by then four and a half), we moved to Gmunden

for the summer holidays. In our house there his playmates were our

landlord’s children: Franzl (about twelve years old), Fritzl (eight), Olga

(seven), and Berta (five). Besides these there were the neighbour’s

children, Anna (ten), and two other little girls of nine and seven whose

names I have forgotten. Hans’s favourite was Fritzl; he often hugged

him and made protestations of his love. Once when he was asked:

‘"Which of the girls are you fondest of?" he answered: "Fritzl!" At the

same time he treated the girls in a most aggressive, masculine and

arrogant way, embracing them and kissing them heartily - a process to

which Berta in particular offered no objection. When Berta was coming

out of the room one evening he put his arms round her neck and said

in the fondest tones: "Berta, you are a dear!" This, by the way, did not

prevent his kissing the others as well and assuring them of his love.

He was fond, too, of the fourteen-year-old Mariedl - another of our

landlord’s daughters - who used to play with him. One evening as he

was being put to bed he said: "I want Mariedl to sleep with me." On

being  told  that  would  not  do,  he  said:  "Then  she  shall  sleep  with

Mummy or with Daddy." He was told that would not do either, but that

Mariedl must sleep with her own father and mother. Upon which the

following dialogue took place:

   ‘Hans: "Oh, then I’II just go downstairs and sleep with Mariedl."

      ‘Mother:  "You  really  want  to  go  away  from  Mummy  and  sleepdownstairs?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh, I’II come up again in the morning to have breakfast and

do number one."

      ‘Mother:  "Well,  if  you  really  want  to  go  away  from  Daddy  and

Mummy, then take your coat and knickers - and good-bye!"

   ‘Hans did in fact take his clothes and go towards the staircase, to go

and sleep with Mariedl, but, it need hardly be said, he was fetched

back.

   ‘(Behind his wish, "I want Mariedl to sleep with us," there of course

lay another one: "I want Mariedl" (with whom he liked to be so much)

"to become one of our family." But Hans’s father and mother were in

the habit of taking him into their bed, though only occasionally, and

there  can  be  no  doubt  that  lying  beside  them  had  aroused  erotic

feelings in him; so that his wish to sleep with Mariedl had an erotic

sense as well. Lying in bed with his father or mother was a source of

erotic feelings in Hans just as it is in every other child.’

   In spite of his accesses of homosexuality, little Hans bore himself

like a true man in the face of his mother’s challenge.

 

   ¹  Und die Liebe per Distanz,

      Kurzgesagt, missfällt mir ganz.

                            WILHELM BUSCH

   [Long-range love, I must admit, Does not suit my taste a bit.]
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2012

 

 

   ‘In the next instance, too, Hans said to his mother: "I say, I should so

like to sleep with the little girl." This episode has given us a great deal

of entertainment, for Hans has really behaved like a grown-up person

in love. For the past few days a pretty little girl of about eight has been

coming to the restaurant where we have lunch. Of course Hans fell in

love with her on the spot. He keeps constantly turning round in his

chair  to  take  furtive  looks  at  her;  when  he  has  finished  eating,  he

stations himself in her vicinity so as to flirt with her, but if he finds he is

being observed, he blushes scarlet. If his glances are returned by thelittle girl, he at once looks shamefacedly the other way. His behaviour

is naturally a great joy to every one lunching at the restaurant. Every

day as he is taken there he says: "Do you think the little girl will be

there to-day?" And when at last she appears, he goes quite red, just

as a grown-up person would in such a case. One day he came to me

with a beaming face and whispered in my ear: "Daddy, I know where

the little girl lives. I saw her going up the steps in such-and-such a

place." Whereas he treats the little girls at home aggressively, in this

other  affair  he  appears  in  the  part  of  a  platonic  and  languishing

admirer.  Perhaps  this  has  to  do  with  the  little  girls  at  home  being

village children, while the other is a young lady of refinement. As I

have already mentioned, he once said he would like to sleep with her.

   ‘Not wanting Hans to be left in the overwrought state to which he

had been brought by his passion for the little girl, I managed to make

them acquainted, and invited the little girl to come and see him in the

garden after he had finished his afternoon sleep. Hans was so much

excited at the prospect of the little girl coming, that for the first time he

could not get off to sleep in the afternoon, but tossed about restlessly

on his bed. When his mother asked, "Why aren’t you asleep? Are you

thinking about the little girl?" he said "Yes" with a happy look. And

when he came home from the restaurant he said to every one in the

house: "I say, my little girl’s coming to see me to-day." The fourteen-

year-old Mariedl reported that he had repeatedly kept asking her: "I

say, do you think she’ll be nice to me? Do you think she’ll kiss me if I

kiss her?" and so on.

   ‘But in the afternoon it rained, so that the visit did not come off, and

Hans consoled himself with Berta and Olga.’

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2013

 

 

   Other observations, also made at the time of the summer holidays,

suggest that all sorts of new developments were going on in the little

boy.

   ‘Hans, four and a quarter. This morning Hans was given his usualdaily bath by his mother and afterwards dried and powdered. As his

mother was powdering round his penis and taking care not to touch it,

Hans said: "Why don’t you put your finger there?"

   ‘Mother: "Because that’d be piggish."

   ‘Hans: "What’s that? Piggish? Why?"

   ‘Mother: "Because it’s not proper."

   ‘Hans (laughing): "But it’s great fun."¹

 

   At about the same period Hans had a dream which was in striking

contrast with the boldness he had shown towards his mother. It was

the first dream of his that was made unrecognizable by distortion. His

father’s penetration, however, succeeded in clearing it up.

   ‘Hans, four and a quarter. Dream. This morning Hans woke up and

said: "I say, last night I thought: Some one said: ‘Who wants to come

to me?’ Then some one said: ‘I do.’ Then he had to make him widdle."

 

   ¹ Another mother, a neurotic, who was unwilling to believe in infantile masturbation, told me

of a similar attempt at seduction on the part of her three-and-a-half-year-old daughter. She
had had a pair of drawers made for the little girl, and was trying them on her to see whether
they were not too tight for walking. To do this she passed her hand upwards along the inner
surface of the child’s thigh. Suddenly the little girl shut her legs together on her mother’s hand,
saying: ‘Oh, Mummy, do leave your hand there. It feels so lovely.’
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2014

 

   ‘Further questions made it clear that there was no visual content

whatever in this dream, and that it was of the purely auditory type.

During the last few days Hans has been playing parlour games and

"forfeits" with our landlord’s children, amongst whom are his friends

Olga  (aged  seven)  and  Berta  (aged  five).  (The  game  of  forfeits  is

played in this way: A: "Whose is this forfeit in my hand?" B: "Mine."

Then it is decided what B must do.) The dream was modelled on this

game; only what Hans wished was that the person to whom the forfeit

belonged should be condemned, not to give the usual kiss or be given

the usual box on the ear, but to widdle, or rather to be made to widdle

by someone.

   ‘I got him to tell me the dream again. He told it in the same words,except that instead of "then some one said" this time he said "then she

said". This "she" is obviously Berta or Olga, one of the girls he had

been playing with. Translated, the dream ran as follows: "I was playing

forfeits with the little girls. I asked: ‘Who wants to come to me?’ She

(Berta or Olga) replied: ‘I do.’ Then she had to make me widdle." (That

is, she had to assist him in micturating, which is evidently agreeable

for Hans.)

      ‘It  is  clear  that  being  made  to  widdle  -  having  his  knickers

unbuttoned  and  his  penis  taken  out  -  is  a  pleasurable  process  for

Hans. On walks it is mostly his father who assists Hans in this way;

and this gives the child an opportunity for the fixation of homosexual

inclinations upon him.

   ‘Two days ago, as I have already reported, while his mother was

washing and powdering his genital region, he asked her: "Why don’t

you put your finger there?" Yesterday, when I was helping Hans to do

number one, he asked me for the first time to take him to the back of

the house so that no one should see him. He added: "Last year when I

widdled, Berta and Olga watched me." This meant, I think, that last

year he had enjoyed being watched by the girls, but that this was no

longer so. His exhibitionism has now succumbed to repression. The

fact that the wish that Berta and Olga should watch him widdling (or

make him widdle) is now repressed in real life is the explanation of its

appearance in the dream, where it was neatly disguised under the

game of forfeits. - I have repeatedly observed since then that he does

not like to be seen widdling.’

   I will only add that this dream obeys the rule I have given in The

Interpretation  of  Dreams,  to  the  effect  that  speeches  occurring  in

dreams are derived from speeches heard or spoken by the dreamer

during the preceding days.

 

   Hans’s father has noted down one other observation, dating from

the period immediately after their return to Vienna: ‘Hans (aged four

and a half) was again watching his little sister being given her bath,

when he began laughing. On being asked why he was laughing, he

replied:  "I’m  laughing  at  Hanna’s  widdler."  "Why?"  "Because  her

widdler’s so lovely."

   ‘Of course his answer was a disingenuous one. In reality her widdlerhad  seemed  to  him funny.  Moreover,  this  is  the  first  time  he  has

recognized  in  this  way  the  distinction  between  male  and  female

genitals instead of denying it.’

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2015

 

                                            II

 

                      CASE HISTORY AND ANALYSIS

 

My dear Professor, I am sending you a little more about Hans - but

this time, I am sorry to say, material for a case history. As you will see,

during the last few days he has developed a nervous disorder, which

has made my wife and me most uneasy, because we have not been

able to find any means of dissipating it. I shall venture to call upon you

tomorrow, . . . but in the meantime . . . I enclose a written record of the

material available.

   ‘No doubt the ground was prepared by sexual over-excitation due to

his  mother’s  tenderness;  but  I  am  not  able  to  specify  the  actual

exciting cause. He is afraid a horse will bite him in the street, and this

fear seems somehow to be connected with his having been frightened

by a large penis. As you know from a former report, he had noticed at

a very early age what large penises horses have, and at that time he

inferred that as his mother was so large she must have a widdler like a

horse.

      ‘I  cannot  see  what  to  make  of  it.  Has  he  seen  an  exhibitionist

somewhere? Or is the whole thing simply connected with his mother?

It is not very pleasant for us that he should begin setting us problems

so early. Apart from his being afraid of going into the street and from

his being in low spirits in the evening, he is in other respects the same

Hans, as bright and cheerful as ever.’

   We will not follow Hans’s father either in his easily comprehensible

anxieties or in his first attempts at finding an explanation; we will begin

by examining the material before us. It is not in the least our business

to ‘understand’ a case at once: this is only possible at a later stage,when we have received enough impressions of it. For the present we

will  suspend  our  judgement  and  give  our  impartial  attention  to

everything that there is to observe.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2016

 

 

   The earliest accounts, dating from the first days in January of the

present year (1908), run as follows:

   ‘Hans (aged four and three-quarters) woke up one morning in tears.

Asked why he was crying, he said to his mother: "When I was asleep I

thought you were gone and I had no Mummy to coax with."¹

   ‘An anxiety dream, therefore.

   ‘I had already noticed something similar at Gmunden in the summer.

When  he  was  in  bed  in  the  evening  he  was  usually  in  a  very

sentimental state. Once he made a remark to this effect: "Suppose I

was  to  have  no  Mummy",  or  "Suppose  you  were  to  go  away",  or

something  of  the  sort;  I  cannot  remember  the  exact  words.

Unfortunately,  when  he  got  into  an  elegiac  mood  of  that  kind,  his

mother used always to take him into bed with her.

   ‘On about January 5th he came into his mother’s bed in the morning,

and said: "Do you know what Aunt M. said? She said: ‘He has got a

dear  little  thingummy.’"²  (Aunt  M.  was  stopping  with  us  four  weeks

ago. Once while she was watching my wife giving the boy a bath she

did in fact say these words to her in a low voice. Hans had overheard

them and was now trying to put them to his own uses.)

   ‘On January 7th he went to the Stadtpark with his nurse maid as

usual.  In  the  street  he  began  to  cry  and  asked  to  be  taken  home,

saying that he wanted to "coax" with his Mummy. At home he was

asked why he had refused to go any farther and had cried, but he

would not say. Till the evening he was cheerful, as usual. But in the

evening  he  grew  visibly  frightened;  he  cried  and  could  not  be

separated from his mother, and wanted to "coax" with her again. Then

he grew cheerful again, and slept well.

    ¹ ‘Hans’ expression for "to caress".’

   ² Meaning his penis. It is one of the commonest things - psycho-analyses are full of such

incidents  -  for  children’s  genitals  to  be  caressed,  not  only  in  word  but  in  deed,  by  fond
relatives, including even parents themselves.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2017

 

   ‘On January 8th my wife decided to go out with him herself, so as to

see what was wrong with him. They went to Schönbrunn, where he

always likes going. Again he began to cry, did not want to start, and

was frightened. In the end he did go; but was visibly frightened in the

street. On the way back from Schönbrunn he said to his mother, after

much internal struggling: "I was afraid a horse would bite me." (He

had, in fact, become uneasy at Schönbrunn when he saw a horse.) In

the evening he seems to have had another attack similar to that of the

previous evening, and to have wanted to be "coaxed" with. He was

calmed down. He said, crying: "I know I shall have to go for a walk

again to-morrow." And later: "The horse’ll come into the room."

   ‘On the same day his mother asked: "Do you put your hand to your

widdler?" and he answered: "Yes. Every evening, when I’m in bed."

The  next  day,  January  9th,  he  was  warned,  before  his  afternoon

sleep, not to put his hand to his widdler. When he woke up he was

asked about it, and said he had put it there for a short while all the

same.’

   Here, then, we have the beginning of Hans’s anxiety as well as of

his  phobia.  As  we  see,  there  is  good  reason  for  keeping  the  two

separate.  Moreover,  the  material  seems  to  be  amply  sufficient  for

giving us our bearings; and no moment of time is so favourable for the

understanding of a case as its initial stage, such as we have here,

though unluckily that stage is as a rule neglected or passed over in

silence. The disorder set in with thoughts that were at the same time

fearful and tender, and then followed an anxiety dream on the subject

of losing his mother and so not being able to coax with her any more.

His affection for his mother must therefore have become enormously

intensified. This was the fundamental phenomenon in his condition. In

support  of  this,  we  may,  recall  his  two  attempts  at  seducing  hismother, the first of which dated back to the summer, while the second

(a simple commendation of his penis) occurred immediately before the

outbreak of his street-anxiety. It was this increased affection for his

mother which turned suddenly into anxiety - which, as we should say,

succumbed to repression. We do not yet know from what quarter the

impetus towards repression may have come. Perhaps it was merely

the result of the intensity of the child’s emotions, which had become

greater than he could control; or perhaps other forces which we have

not yet recognized were also at work. This we shall learn as we go on.

Hans’s  anxiety,  which  thus  corresponded  to  a  repressed  erotic

longing, was, like every infantile anxiety, without an object to begin

with: it was still anxiety and not yet fear. The child cannot tell what he

is  afraid  of;  and  when  Hans,  on  the  first  walk  with  the  nursemaid,

would not say what he was afraid of, it was simply that he himself did

not yet know. He said all that he knew, which was that in the street he

missed his mother, whom he could coax with, and that he did not want

to  be  away  from  her.  In  saying  this  he  quite  straightforwardly

confessed the primary meaning of his dislike of streets.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2018

 

      Then  again,  there  were  the  states  into  which  he  fell  on  two

consecutive  evenings  before  going  to  sleep,  and  which  were

characterized  by  anxiety  mingled  with  clear  traces  of  tenderness.

These states show that at the beginning of his illness there was as yet

no phobia whatever present, whether of streets or of walking or even

of horses. If there had been, his evening states would be inexplicable;

for who bothers at bed time about streets and walking? On the other

hand it becomes quite clear why he was so fearful in the evening, if

we suppose that at bedtime he was overwhelmed by an intensification

of his libido - for its object was his mother, and its aim may perhaps

have  been  to  sleep  with  her.  He  had  besides  learnt  from  his

experience  that at  Gmunden  his  mother  could  be  prevailed  upon,

when he got into such moods, to take him into her bed, and he wanted

to gain the same ends here in Vienna. Nor must we forget that for partof the time at Gmunden he had been alone with his mother, as his

father had not been able to spend the whole of the holidays there, and

further, that in the country his affections had been divided among a

number of playmates and friends of both sexes, while in Vienna he

had none, so that his libido was in a position to return undivided to his

mother.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2019

 

   His anxiety, then, corresponded to repressed longing. But it was not

the  same  thing  as  the  longing:  the  repression  must  be  taken  into

account too. Longing can be completely transformed into satisfaction if

it is presented with the object longed for. Therapy of that kind is no

longer  effective  in  dealing  with  anxiety.  The  anxiety  remains  even

when  the  longing  can  be  satisfied.  It  can  no  longer  be  completely

retransformed into libido; there is something that keeps the libido back

under repression.¹ This was shown to be so in the case of Hans on

the occasion of his next walk, when his mother went with him. He was

with his mother, and yet he still suffered from anxiety - that is to say,

from an unsatisfied longing for her. It is true that the anxiety was less;

for he did allow himself to be induced to go for the walk, whereas he

had obliged the nursemaid to turn back. Nor is a street quite the right

place  for  ‘coaxing’,  or  whatever  else  this  young  lover  may  have

wanted. But his anxiety had stood the test; and the next thing for it to

do was to find an object. It was on this walk that he first expressed a

fear that a horse would bite him. Where did the material for this phobia

come from?  Probably from the complexes, as yet unknown to us,

which  had  contributed  to  the  repression  and  were  keeping  under

repression  his  libidinal  feelings  towards  his  mother.  That  is  an

unsolved problem, and we shall now have to follow the development

of the case in order to arrive at its solution. Hans’s father has already

given us certain clues, probably trustworthy ones, such as that Hans

had always observed horses with interest on account of their large

widdlers, that he had supposed that his mother must have a widdler

like a horse, and so on. We might thus be led to think that the horsewas merely a substitute for his mother. But if so, what would be the

meaning of his being afraid in the evening that a horse would come

into  the  room?    A  small  boy’s  foolish  fears,  it  will  be  said.  But  a

neurosis never says foolish things, any more than a dream. When we

cannot  understand  something,  we  always  fall  back  on  abuse.  An

excellent way of making a task lighter.

 

   ¹ To speak quite frankly, this is actually the criterion according to which we decide whether

such feelings of mingled apprehension and longing are normal or not: we begin to call them
‘pathological  anxiety’  from  the  moment  at  which  they  can  no  longer  be  relieved  by  the
attainment of the object longed for.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2020

 

   There is another point in regard to which we must avoid giving way

to  this  temptation.  Hans  admitted  that  every  night  before  going  to

sleep he amused himself with playing with his penis. ‘Ah!’ the family

doctor will be inclined to say, ‘now we have it. The child masturbated:

hence his pathological anxiety.’ But gently. That the child was getting

pleasure for himself by masturbating does not by any means explain

his anxiety; on the contrary, it makes it more problematical than ever.

States  of  anxiety  are  not  produced  by  masturbation  or  by  getting

satisfaction in any shape. Moreover, we may presume that Hans, who

was now four and three-quarters, had been indulging in this pleasure

every evening for at least a year (see p. 2003). And we shall find that

at this moment he was actually engaged in a struggle to break himself

of the habit - a state of things which fits in much better with repression

and the generation of anxiety.

   We must say a word, too, on behalf of Hans’s excellent and devoted

mother. His father accuses her, not without some show of justice, of

being responsible for the outbreak of the child’s neurosis, on account

of  her  excessive  display  of  affection  for  him  and  her  too  frequent

readiness to take him into her bed. We might as easily blame her for

having  precipitated  the  process  of  repression  by  her  energetic

rejection  of  his  advances  (‘that’d  be  piggish’).  But  she  had  a

predestined part to play, and her position was a hard one.   I arranged with Hans’s father that he should tell the boy that all this

business about horses was a piece of nonsense and nothing more.

The truth was, his father was to say, that he was very fond of his

mother and wanted to be taken into her bed. The reason he was afraid

of  horses  now  was  that  he  had  taken  so  much  interest  in  their

widdlers. He himself had noticed that it was not right to be so very

much preoccupied with widdlers, even with his own, and he was quite

right in thinking this. I further suggested to his father that he should

begin  giving  Hans  some  enlightenment  in  the  matter  of  sex

knowledge. The child’s past behaviour justified us in assuming that his

libido  was  attached  to  a  wish  to  see  his  mother’s  widdler;  so  I

proposed to his father that he should take away this aim from Hans by

informing him that his mother and all other female beings (as he could

see  from  Hanna)  had  no  widdler  at  all.  This  last  piece  of

enlightenment was to be given him on a suitable occasion when it had

been led up to by some question or some chance remark on Hans’s

part.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2021

 

 

   The next batch of news about Hans covers the period from March

1st  to  March  17th.  The  interval  of  more  than  a  month  will  be

accounted for directly.

      ‘After  Hans  had  been  enlightened,¹  there  followed  a  fairly  quiet

period,  during  which  he  could  be  induced  without  any  particular

difficulty to go for his daily walk in the Stadtpark. His fear of horses

became  transformed  more  and  more  into  a  compulsion  to  look  at

them. He said: "I have to look at horses, and then I’m frightened."

   ‘After an attack of influenza, which kept him in bed for two weeks,

his phobia increased again so much that he could not be induced to

go out, or at any rate no more than on to the balcony. Every Sunday

he went with me to Lainz,² because on that day there is not much

traffic in the streets, and it is only a short way to the station. On one

occasion  in  Lainz  he  refused  to  go  for  a  walk  outside  the  gardenbecause  there  was  a  carriage  standing  in  front  of  it.  After  another

week which he has had to spend indoors because he has had his

tonsils cut, the phobia has grown very much worse again. He goes out

on to the balcony, it is true, but not for a walk. As soon as he gets to

the street door he hurriedly turns round.

   ‘On Sunday, March 1st, the following conversation took place on the

way to the station. I was once more trying to explain to him that horses

do  not  bite. He:  "But  white  horses  bite.  There’s  a  white  horse  at

Gmunden that bites. If you hold your finger to it it bites." (I was struck

by his saying "finger" instead of "hand".) He then told me the following

story, which I give here in a connected form: "When Lizzi had to go

away, there was a cart with a white horse in front of her house, to take

her luggage to the station." (Lizzi, he tells me, was a little girl who lived

in a neighbouring house.) "Her father was standing near the horse,

and the horse turned its head round (to touch him), and he said to

Lizzi: ‘Don’t put your finger to the white horse or it’ll bite you’" Upon

this I said: "I say, it strikes me that it isn’t a horse you mean, but a

widdler, that one mustn’t put one’s hand to."

 

   ¹ As to the meaning of his anxiety; not yet as to women having no widdlers.

   ² A suburb of Vienna where Hans’s grandparents lived.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2022

 

   ‘He: "But a widdler doesn’t bite."

   ‘I: "Perhaps it does, though." He then went on eagerly to try and

prove to me that it really was a white horse.¹

   ‘On March 2nd, as he again showed signs of being afraid, I said to

him: "Do you know what? This nonsense of yours" (that is how he

speaks of his phobia) "will get better if you go for more walks. It’s so

bad now because you haven’t been able to go out because you were

ill."

   ‘He: "Oh no, it’s so bad because I still put my hand to my widdler

every night."'

      Doctor  and  patient,  father  and  son,  were  therefore  at  one  in

ascribing  the  chief  share  in  the  pathogenesis  of  Hans’s  presentcondition to his habit of masturbating. Indications were not wanting,

however, of the presence of other significant factors.

      ‘On  March  3rd  we  got  in  a  new  maid,  whom  he  is  particularly

pleased with. She lets him ride on her back while she cleans the floor,

and so he always calls her "my horse", and holds on to her dress with

cries  of  "Gee-up".  On  about  March  10th  he  said  to  this  new

nursemaid: "If you do such-and-such a thing you’ll have to undress

altogether,  and  take  off  your  chemise  even."  (He  meant  this  as  a

punishment, but it is easy to recognize the wish behind it.)

   ‘She: "And what’d be the harm? I’d just say to myself I haven’t got

any money to spend on clothes."

   ‘He: "Why, it’d be shameful. People’d see your widdler." ‘

   Here we have the same curiosity again, but directed on to a new

object, and (appropriately to a period of repression) cloaked under a

moralizing purpose.

   ‘On March 13th in the morning I said to Hans: "You know, if you

don’t put your hand to your widdler any more, this nonsense of yours’ll

soon get better."

 

   ¹ Hans’s father had no reason to doubt that it was a real event that the boy was describing.

-I may also mention that the sensations of itching in the glans penis, which lead children to
touch their genitals, are usually described by them in the phrase ‘Es beisst mich’ [‘I’m itching’,
literally ‘it bites me’].
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2023

 

   ‘Hans: "But I don’t put my hand to my widdler any more."

   ‘I: "But you still want to."

   ‘Hans: "Yes, I do. But wanting’s not doing, and doing’s not wanting."

(!!)

   ‘I: "Well, but to prevent your wanting to, this evening you’re going to

have a bag to sleep in."

   ‘After this we went out in front of the house. Hans was still afraid, but

his spirits were visibly raised by the prospect of having his struggles

made easier for him, and he said: "Oh, if I have a bag to sleep in my

nonsense’ll  have  gone  to-morrow."  And,  in  fact,  he  was much lessafraid of horses, and was fairly calm when vehicles drove past.

   ‘Hans had promised to go with me to Lainz the next Sunday, March

15th. He resisted at first, but finally went with me all the same. He

obviously felt all right in the street, as there was not much traffic, and

said: "How sensible! God’s done away with horses now." On the way I

explained to him that his sister has not got a widdler like him. Little

girls and women, I said, have no widdlers: Mummy has none, Anna

has none, and so on.

   ‘Hans: "Have you got a widdler?"

   ‘I: "Of course. Why, what do you suppose?"

   ‘Hans (after a pause): "But how do little girls widdle, if they have no

widdlers?"

   ‘I: "They don’t have widdlers like yours. Haven’t you noticed already,

when Hanna was being given her bath?"

   ‘All day long he was in very high spirits, went tobogganing, and so

on. It was only towards evening that he fell into low spirits again and

seemed to be afraid of horses.

   ‘That evening his attack of nerves and his need for being coaxed

with  were  less  pronounced  than  on  previous  days.  Next  day  his

mother took him with her into town and he was very much frightened

in  the  streets.  The  day  after,  he  stopped  at  home  and  was  very

cheerful. Next morning he woke up in a fright at about six o’clock.

When he was asked what was the matter he said: "I put my finger to

my widdler just a very little. I saw Mummy quite naked in her chemise,

and  she  let  me  see  her  widdler.  I  showed  Grete,¹  my  Grete,  what

Mummy was doing, and showed her my widdler. Then I took my hand

away  from  my  widdler  quick."  When  I  objected  that  he  could  only

mean "in her chemise" or "quite naked", Hans said: "She was in her

chemise, but the chemise was so short that I saw her widdler."'

   This was none of it a dream, but a masturbatory phantasy, which

was, however, equivalent to a dream. What he made his mother do

was  evidently  intended  as  a  piece  of  self-justification:  ‘If  Mummy

shows her widdler, I may too.’

   We can gather two things from this phantasy: first, that his mother’s

reproof  had  produced  a  powerful  result  on  him  at  the  time  it  was

made, and secondly, that the enlightenment he had been given to the

effect that women have no widdlers was not accepted by him at first.He regretted that it should be so, and in his phantasy he stuck to his

former view. He may also perhaps have had his reasons for refusing

to believe his father for the moment.

 

   ¹ ‘Grete is one of the little girls at Gmunden about whom Hans is having phantasies just

now; he talks and plays with her.’
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2024

 

 

   Weekly report from Hans’s father: ‘My dear Professor, I enclose the

continuation of Hans’s story - quite an interesting instalment. I shall

perhaps  take  the  liberty  of  calling  upon  you  during  your  consulting

hours on Monday and if possible of bringing Hans with me - assuming

that he will come. I said to him to-day: "Will you come with me on

Monday to see the Professor, who can take away your nonsense for

you?"

   ‘He: "No."

   ‘I: "But he’s got a very pretty little girl." - Upon which he willingly and

gladly consented.

      ‘Sunday,  March  22nd.  With  a  view  to  extending  the  Sunday

programme, I proposed to Hans that we should go first to Schönbrunn,

and only go on from there to Lainz at midday. He had, therefore, to

make his way not only from our house to the Hauptzollamt station on

the Stadtbahn, but also from the Hietzing station to Schönbrunn, and

again  from  there  to  the  Hietzing  steam  tramway  station.  And  he

managed all this, looking hurriedly away whenever any horses came

along, for he was evidently feeling nervous. In looking away he was

following a piece of advice given him by his mother.

   ‘At Schönbrunn he showed signs of fear at animals which on other

occasions he had looked at without any alarm. Thus he absolutely

refused to go into the house in which the giraffe is kept, nor would he

visit the elephant, which used formerly to amuse him a great deal. He

was  afraid  of  all  the  large  animals,  whereas  he  was  very  much

entertained by the small ones. Among the birds, he was also afraid of

the pelican this time - which had never happened before - evidentlybecause of its size again.

      ‘I  therefore  said  to  him:  "Do  you  know  why  you’re  afraid  of  big

animals? Big animals have big widdlers, and you’re really afraid of big

widdlers."

   ‘Hans: "But I’ve never seen the big animals’ widdlers yet."¹

   ‘I: "But you have seen a horse’s, and a horse is a big animal."

   ‘Hans: "Oh, a horse’s often. Once at Gmunden when the cart was

standing at the door, and once in front of the Head Customs House."

   ‘I:  "When  you  were  small,  you  most  likely  went  into  a  stable  at

Gmunden . . ."

      ‘Hans  (interrupting):  "Yes,  I  went  into  the  stable  every  day  at

Gmunden when the horses had come home."

   ‘I:  ".  .  .  and  you  were  most  likely  frightened  when  you  saw  the

horse’s  big  widdler  one  time.  But  there’s  no  need  for  you  to  be

frightened of it. Big animals have big widdlers, and little animals have

little widdlers."

   ‘Hans: "And every one has a widdler. And my widdler will get bigger

as I get bigger; it’s fixed in, of course."

   ‘Here the talk came to an end. During the next few days it seemed

as  though  his  fears  had  again  somewhat  increased.  He  hardly

ventured out of the front door, to which he was taken after luncheon.’

 

   ¹ This was untrue. See his exclamation in front of the lions’ cage on p. 2005.  It  was

probably the beginning of amnesia resulting from repression.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2025

 

   Hans’s last words of comfort throw a light upon the situation and

allow us to make some small corrections in his father’s assertions. It is

true that he was afraid of big animals because he was obliged to think

of their big widdlers; but it cannot really be said that he was afraid of

big  widdlers  themselves.  Formerly  the  idea  of  them  had  been

decidedly pleasurable to him, and he used to make every effort to get

a glimpse of one. Since that time this enjoyment had been spoiled for

him, owing to the general reversal of pleasure into unpleasure which

had come over the whole of his sexual researches - in a way whichhas not yet been explained - and also owing to something which is

clearer to us, namely, to certain experiences and reflections which had

led to distressing conclusions. We may infer from his self-consolatory

words  (‘my  widdler  will  get  bigger  as  I  get  bigger’)  that  during  his

observations he had constantly been making comparisons, and that

he  had  remained  extremely  dissatisfied  with  the  size  of  his  own

widdler.  Big  animals  reminded  him  of  his  defect,  and  were  for  that

reason disagreeable to him. But since the whole train of thought was

probably  incapable  of  becoming  clearly  conscious,  this  distressing

feeling, too, was transformed into anxiety, so that his present anxiety

was  erected  both  upon  his  former  pleasure  and  his  present

unpleasure.  When  once  a  state  of  anxiety  establishes  itself,  the

anxiety swallows up all other feelings; with the progress of repression,

and the more those ideas which are charged with affect and which

have been conscious move down into the unconscious, all affects are

capable of being changed into anxiety.

   Hans’s singular remark, ‘it’s fixed in, of course’, makes it possible to

guess many things in connection with his consolatory speech which

he could not express in words and did not express during the course

of the analysis. I shall bridge the gap for a little distance by means of

my experiences in the analyses of grown-up people; but I hope the

interpolation will not be considered arbitrary or capricious. ‘It’s fixed in,

of course’: if the motives of the thought were solace and defiance, we

are  reminded  of  his  mother’s  old  threat  that  she  should  have  his

widdler cut off if he went on playing with it. At the time it was made,

when he was three and a half, this threat had no effect. He calmly

replied that then he should widdle with his bottom. It would be the

most completely typical procedure if the threat of castration were to

have a deferred effect, and if he were now, a year and a quarter later,

oppressed by the fear of having to lose this precious piece of his ego.

In other cases of illness we can observe a similar deferred operation

of  commands  and  threats  made  in  childhood,  where  the  interval

covers  as  many  decades  or  more.  I  even  know  cases  in  which  a

‘deferred  obedience’  under  the  influence  of  repression  has  had  a

principal share in determining the symptoms of the disease.

                   Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2026

 

   The piece of enlightenment which Hans had been given a short time

before to the effect that women really do not possess a widdler was

bound to have had a shattering effect upon his self-confidence and to

have aroused his castration complex. For this reason he resisted the

information, and for this reason it had no therapeutic results. Could it

be that living beings really did exist which did not possess widdlers? If

so, it would no longer be so incredible that they could take his own

widdler away, and, as it were, make him into a woman!¹

 

   ¹ I cannot interrupt the discussion so far as to demonstrate the typical character of the

unconscious train of thought which I think there is here reason for attributing to little Hans. The
castration complex is the deepest unconscious root of anti-semitism; for even in the nursery
little boys hear that a Jew has something cut off his penis - a piece of his penis, they think -
and this gives them a right to despise Jews. And there is no stronger unconscious root for the
sense of superiority over women. Weininger (the young philosopher who, highly gifted but
sexually deranged, committed suicide after producing his remarkable book, Geschlecht und
Charakter), in a chapter that attracted much attention, treated Jews and women with equal
hostility  and  overwhelmed  them  with  the  same  insults.  Being  a  neurotic,  Weininger  was
completely  under  the  sway  of  his  infantile  complexes;  and  from  that  standpoint  what  is
common to Jews and women is their relation to the castration complex.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2027

 

 

   ‘During the night of 27th-28th Hans surprised us by getting out of

bed  while  it  was  quite  dark  and  coming  into  our  bed.  His  room  is

separated from our bedroom by another small room. We asked him

why: whether he had been afraid, perhaps. "No," he said; "I’II tell you

to-morrow." He went to sleep in our bed and was then carried back to

his own.

   ‘Next day I questioned him closely to discover why he had come in

to  us  during  the  night;  and  after  some  reluctance  the  following

dialogue took place, which I immediately took down in shorthand:

   ‘He: "In the night there was a big giraffe in the room and a crumpled

one; and the big one called out because I took the crumpled one awayfrom  it.  Then  it  stopped  calling  out;  and  then  I  sat  on  top  of  the

crumpled one."

   ‘I (puzzled): "What? A crumpled giraffe? How was that?"

   ‘He: "Yes." (He quickly fetched a piece of paper, crumpled it up, and

said:) "It was crumpled like that."

   ‘I: "And you sat down on top of the crumpled giraffe? How?"

   ‘He again showed me, by sitting down on the ground.

   ‘I: "Why did you come into our room?"

   ‘He: "I don’t know myself."

   ‘I: "Were you afraid?"

   ‘He: "No. Of course not."

   ‘I: "Did you dream about the giraffe?"

   ‘He: "No. I didn’t dream. I thought it. I thought it all. I’d woken up

earlier."

      ‘I:  "What  can  it  mean:  a  crumpled  giraffe?  You  know  you  can’t

squash a giraffe together like a piece of paper."

   ‘He: "Of course I know. I just thought it. Of course there aren’t any

really and truly.¹ The crumpled one was all lying on the floor, and I

took it away - took hold of it with my hands."

   I:  "What?  Can  you  take  hold  of  a  big  giraffe  like  that  with  your

hands?"

   ‘He: "I took hold of the crumpled one with my hand."

   ‘I: "Where was the big one meanwhile?"

   ‘He: "The big one just stood farther off."

   ‘I: "What did you do with the crumpled one?"

   ‘He: "I held it in my hand for a bit, till the big one had stopped calling

out. And when the big one had stopped calling out, I sat down on top

of it."

 

   ¹ In is own language Hans was saying quite definitely that it was a phantasy.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2028

 

   ‘I: "Why did the big one call out?"

   ‘He: "Because I’d taken away the little one from it." (He noticed that I

was taking everything down, and asked:) "Why are you writing thatdown?"

   ‘I: "Because I shall send it to a Professor, who can take away your

‘nonsense’ for you."

   ‘He: "Oho! So you’ve written down as well that Mummy took off her

chemise, and you’ll give that to the Professor too."

   ‘I: "Yes. But he won’t understand how you can think that a giraffe

can be crumpled up."

   ‘He: ‘Just tell him I don’t know myself, and then he won’t ask. But if

he asks what the crumpled giraffe is, then he can write to us, and we

can write back, or let’s write at once that I don’t know myself."

   ‘I: "But why did you come in in the night?"

   ‘He: "I don’t know."

   ‘I: "Just tell me quickly what you’re thinking of."

 

   ‘He (jokingly): "Of raspberry syrup."

   ‘I: "What else?"                                                } His wishes.

   ‘He: "A gun for shooting people dead with."¹

 

   ‘I: "You’re sure you didn’t dream it?"

   ‘He: "Quite sure; no, I’m quite certain of it."

   ‘He proceeded: "Mummy begged me so long to tell her why I came

in in the night. But I didn’t want to say, because I felt ashamed with

Mummy at first."

   ‘I: "Why?"

   ‘He: "I didn’t know."

   ‘My wife had in fact examined him all the morning, till he had told her

the giraffe story.’

 

   ¹ At this point his father in his perplexity was trying to practise the classical technique of

psycho-analysis. This did not lead to much; but the result, such as it was, can be given a
meaning in the light of later disclosures.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2029

 

      That  same  day  his  father  discovered  the  solution  of  the  giraffe

phantasy.   ‘The big giraffe is myself, or rather my big penis (the long neck), and

the  crumpled  giraffe  is  my  wife,  or  rather  her  genital  organ.  It  is

therefore the result of the enlightenment he has had.

      ‘Giraffe:  see  the  expedition  to  Schönbrunn.  Moreover,  he  has  a

picture of a giraffe and an elephant hanging over his bed.

   ‘The whole thing is a reproduction of a scene which has been gone

through  almost  every  morning  for  the  last  few  days.  Hans  always

comes in to us in the early morning, and my wife cannot resist taking

him into bed with her for a few minutes. Thereupon I always begin to

warn her not to take him into bed with her ("the big one called out

because I’d taken the crumpled one away from it"); and she answers

now and then, rather irritated, no doubt, that it’s all nonsense, that

after all one minute is of no importance, and so on. Then Hans stays

with her a little while. ("Then the big giraffe stopped calling out; and

there I sat down on top of the crumpled one.")

   ‘Thus the solution of this matrimonial scene transposed into giraffe

life is this: he was seized in the night with a longing for his mother, for

her caresses, for her genital organ, and came into our bedroom for

that reason. The whole thing is a continuation of his fear of horses.’

   I have only this to add to his father’s penetrating interpretation. The

‘sitting down on top of’ was probably Hans’s representation of taking

possession.  But  the  whole  thing  was  a  phantasy  of  defiance

connected  with  his  satisfaction  at  the  triumph  over  his  father’s

resistance. ‘Call out as much as you like! But Mummy takes me into

bed  all  the  same,  and  Mummy  belongs  to  me!’  It  is  therefore

justifiable, as his father suspected, to divine behind the phantasy a

fear  that  his  mother  did  not  like  him,  because  his  widdler  was  not

comparable to his father’s.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2030

 

   Next morning his father was able to get his interpretation confirmed.

   ‘On Sunday, March 29th, I went with Hans to Lainz. I jokingly took

leave of my wife at the door with the words: "Good-bye, big giraffe!"

"Why giraffe?" asked Hans. "Mummy’s the big giraffe," I replied; towhich Hans rejoined: "Oh yes! And Hanna’s the crumpled giraffe, isn’t

she?"

   ‘In the train I explained the giraffe phantasy to him, upon which he

said: "Yes, that’s right." And when I said to him that I was the big

giraffe, and that its long neck had reminded him of a widdler, he said:

"Mummy has a neck like a giraffe, too. I saw, when she was washing

her white neck."¹

   ‘On Monday, March 30th, in the morning, Hans came to me and

said: "I say! I thought two things this morning!" "What was the first?" "I

was  with  you  at  Schönbrunn  where  the  sheep  are;  and  then  we

crawled through under the ropes, and then we told the policeman at

the end of the garden, and he grabbed hold of us." He had forgotten

the second thing.

   ‘I can add the following comment on this. When we wanted to visit

the sheep on Sunday, we found that a space in the gardens was shut

off by a rope, so that we were unable to get to them. Hans was very

much astonished that the space should be shut off only with a rope,

which it would be quite easy to slip under. I told him that respectable

people didn’t crawl under the rope. He said it would be quite easy;

whereupon I replied that a policeman might come along and take one

off. There is a lifeguardsman on duty at the entrance of Schönbrunn;

and I once told Hans that he arrested naughty children.

   ‘After we returned from our visit to you, which took place the same

day, Hans confessed to yet another little bit of craving to do something

forbidden: "I say, I thought something this morning again." "What?" "I

went  with  you  in  the  train,  and  we  smashed  a  window  and  the

policeman took us off with him."'

      A  most  suitable  continuation  of  the  giraffe  phantasy.  He  had  a

suspicion that to take possession of his mother was forbidden; he had

come  up  against  the  barrier  against  incest.  But  he  regarded  it  as

forbidden in itself. His father was with him each time in the forbidden

exploits which he carried out in his imagination, and was locked up

with  him.  His  father,  he  thought,  also  did  that  enigmatic  forbidden

something with his mother which he replaced by an act of violence

such as smashing a window-pane or forcing a way into an enclosed

space.

    ¹ Hans only confirmed the interpretation of the two giraffes as his father and mother, and

not the sexual symbolism, according to which the giraffe itself represented the penis. This
symbolism was probably correct, but we really cannot ask more of Hans.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2031

 

   That afternoon the father and son visited me during my consulting

hours.  I  already  knew  the  funny  little  fellow,  and  with  all  his  self-

assurance he was yet so amiable that I had always been glad to see

him.  I  do  not  know  whether  he  remembered  me,  but  he  behaved

irreproachably  and  like  a  perfectly  reasonable  member  of  human

society.  The  consultation  was  a  short  one.  His  father  opened  it  by

remarking that, in spite of all the pieces of enlightenment we had given

Hans, his fear of horses had not yet diminished. We were also forced

to confess that the connections between the horses he was afraid of

and  the  affectionate  feelings  towards  his  mother  which  had  been

revealed were by no means abundant. Certain details which I now

learnt - to the effect that he was particularly bothered by what horses

wear in front of their eyes and by the black round their mouths - were

certainly not to be explained from what we knew. But as I saw the two

of  them  sitting  in  front  of  me  and  at  the  same  time  heard  Hans’s

description of his anxiety-horses, a further piece of the solution shot

through my mind, and a piece which I could well understand might

escape  his  father.  I  asked  Hans  jokingly  whether  his  horses  wore

eyeglasses, to which he replied that they did not. I then asked him

whether his father wore eyeglasses, to which, against all the evidence,

he once more said no. Finally I asked him whether by ‘the black round

the mouth’ he meant a moustache; and I then disclosed to him that he

was  afraid  of  his  father,  precisely  because  he  was  so  fond  of  his

mother. It must be, I told him, that he thought his father was angry with

him on that account; but this was not so, his father was fond of him in

spite of it, and he might admit everything to him without any fear. Long

before he was in the world, I went on, I had known that a little Hans

would come who would be so fond of his mother that he would be

bound to feel afraid of his father because of it; and I had told his father

this. ‘But why do you think I’m angry with you?’ his father interruptedme at this point; ‘have I ever scolded you or hit you?’ Hans corrected

him:  ‘Oh  yes!  You  have  hit  me.’  ‘That’s  not  true.  When  was  it,

anyhow?’  ‘This  morning,’  answered  the  little  boy;  and  his  father

recollected that Hans had quite unexpectedly butted his head into his

stomach, so that he had given him as it were a reflex blow with his

hand.  It  was  remarkable  that  he  had  not  brought  this  detail  into

connection  with  the  neurosis;  but  he  now  recognized  it  as  an

expression  of  the  little  boy’s  hostile  disposition  towards  him,  and

perhaps also as a manifestation of a need for getting punished for it.¹

 

   ¹ Later on the boy repeated his reaction towards his father in a clearer and more complete

manner, by first hitting his father on the hand and then affectionately kissing the same hand.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2032

 

   ‘Does the Professor talk to God,’ Hans asked his father on the way

home, ‘as he can tell all that beforehand?’ I should be extraordinarily

proud of this recognition out of the mouth of a child, if I had not myself

provoked  it  by  my  joking  boastfulness.  From  the  date  of  this

consultation I received almost daily reports of the alterations in the

little patient’s condition. It was not to be expected that he should be

freed from his anxiety at a single blow by the information I gave him;

but it became apparent that a possibility had now been offered him of

bringing  forward  his  unconscious  productions  and  of  unfolding  his

phobia. From that time forward he carried out a programme which I

was able to announce to his father in advance.

 

   ‘April 2nd. The first real improvement is to be noted. While formerly

he could never be induced to go out of the street door for very long,

and always ran back into the house with every sign of fright if horses

came along, this time he stayed in front of the street-door for an hour -

even while carts were driving past, which happens fairly often in our

street. Every now and then he ran into the house when he saw a cart

approaching in the distance, but he turned round at once as though he

were  changing  his  mind.  In  any  case  there  is  only  a  trace  of  the

anxiety left, and the progress since his enlightenment is unmistakable.   ‘In the evening he said: "We get as far as the street-door now, so

we’ll go into the Stadtpark too."

 

   ‘On April 3rd, in the morning he came into bed with me, whereas for

the last few days he had not been coming any more and had even

seemed to be proud of not doing so. "And why have you come to-

day?" I asked.

   ‘Hans: "When I’m not frightened I shan’t come any more."

   ‘I: "So you come in to me because you’re frightened?"

   ‘Hans: "When I’m not with you I’m frightened; when I’m not in bed

with  you,  then  I’m  frightened.  When  I’m  not  frightened  any  more  I

shan’t come any more."

   I: "So you’re fond of me and you feel anxious when you’re in your

bed in the morning? and that’s why you come in to me?"

   Hans: "Yes. Why did you tell me I’m fond of Mummy and that’s why

I’m frightened, when I’m fond of you?"‘

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2033

 

   Here the little boy was displaying a really unusual degree of clarity.

He  was  bringing  to  notice  the  fact  that  his  love  for  his  father  was

wrestling with his hostility towards him in his capacity of rival with his

mother; and he was reproaching his father with not having yet drawn

his attention to this interplay of forces, which was bound to end in

anxiety. His father did not entirely understand him as yet, for during

this conversation he only succeeded in convincing himself of the little

boy’s  hostility  towards  him,  the  existence  of  which  I  had  asserted

during our consultation. The following dialogue, which I nevertheless

give without alteration, is really of more importance in connection with

the progress of the father’s enlightenment than with the little patient.

      ‘Unfortunately  I  did  not  immediately  grasp  the  meaning  of  this

reproach. Because Hans is fond of his mother he evidently wants to

get me out of the way, and he would then be in his father’s place. This

suppressed hostile wish is turned into anxiety about his father, and he

comes  in  to  me  in  the  morning  to  see  if  I  have  gone  away.Unfortunately at the moment I did not understand this, and said to him:

   ‘"When you’re alone, you’re just anxious for me and come in to me."

   ‘Hans: "When you’re away, I’m afraid you’re not coming home."

   ‘I: "And have I ever threatened you that I shan’t come home?"

   ‘Hans: "Not you, but Mummy. Mummy’s told me she won’t come

back." (He had probably been naughty, and she had threatened to go

away.)

   ‘I: "She said that because you were naughty."

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "So you’re afraid I’m going away because you were naughty;

that’s why you come in to me."

   ‘When I got up from table after breakfast Hans said: "Daddy, don’t

trot away from me!" I was struck by his saying "trot" instead of "run",

and replied: "Oho! So you’re afraid of the horse trotting away from

you." Upon which he laughed.’

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2034

 

   We know that this portion of Hans’s anxiety had two constituents:

there was fear of his father and fear for his father. The former was

derived from his hostility towards his father, and the latter from the

conflict between his affection, which was exaggerated at this point by

way of compensation, and his hostility.

   His father proceeds: ‘This is no doubt the beginning of an important

phase. His motive for at the most just venturing outside the house but

not  going  away  from  it,  and  for  turning  round  at  the  first  attack  of

anxiety when he is half-way, is his fear of not finding his parents at

home because they have gone away. He sticks to the house from love

of  his  mother,  and  he  is  afraid  of  my  going  away  because  of  the

hostile wishes that he nourishes against me - for then he would be the

father.

   ‘In the summer I used to be constantly leaving Gmunden for Vienna

on business, and he was then the father. You will remember that his

fear  of  horses  is  connected  with  the  episode  at  Gmunden  when  a

horse was to take Lizzi’s luggage to the station. The repressed wishthat I should drive to the station, for then he would be alone with his

mother (the wish that "the horse should drive off"), is turned into fear

of the horse’s driving off; and in fact nothing throws him into greater

alarm  than  when  a  cart  drives  off  from  the  courtyard  of  the  Head

Customs House (which is just opposite our flat) and the horses start

moving.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2035

 

   ‘This new phase (hostile sentiments towards his father) could only

come out after he knew that I was not angry because he was so fond

of his mother.

   ‘In the afternoon I went out in front of the street-door with him again;

he again went out in front of the house, and stayed there even when

carts went past. In the case of a few carts only he was afraid, and ran

into the entrance-hall. He also said to me in explanation: "Not all white

horses bite." That is to say: owing to the analysis some white horses

have already been recognized as "Daddy", and they no longer bite;

but there are others still left over which do bite.

 









 

                                          Fig. 2.

 

      ‘The  position  of  our  street-door  is  as  follows:  Opposite  it  is  the

warehouse of the Office for the Taxation of Food-Stuffs, with a loading

dock at which carts are driving up all day long to fetch away boxes,

packing-cases, etc. This courtyard is cut off from the street by railings;

and the entrance gates to the courtyard are opposite our house (Fig.

2).  I  have  noticed  for  some  days  that  Hans  is  specially  frightenedwhen carts drive into or out of the yard, a process which involves their

taking a corner. I asked at the time why he was so much afraid, and

he replied: "I’m afraid the horses will fall down when the cart turns" (a).

He is equally frightened when carts standing at the loading dock start

moving in order to drive off (b). Further (c), he is more frightened of

large dray-horses than of small horses, and of rough farm-horses than

of smart horses (such as those in a carriage and pair). He is also more

frightened when a vehicle drives past quickly (d) than when the horses

trot up slowly. These differentiations have, of course, only come to

light clearly during the last few days.’

   I should be inclined to say that, in consequence of the analysis, not

only the patient but his phobia too had plucked up courage and was

venturing to show itself.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2036

 

 

   ‘On April 5th Hans came in to our bedroom again, and was sent

back to his own bed. I said to him: "As long as you come into our room

in the mornings, your fear of horses won’t get better." He was defiant,

however,  and  replied:  "I  shall  come  in  all  the  same,  even  if  I am

afraid." So he will not let himself be forbidden to visit his mother.

   ‘After breakfast we were to go downstairs. Hans was delighted, and

planned that, instead of stopping in front of the street-door as usual,

he  should  go  across  the  street  into  the  yard,  where  he  had  often

enough seen street-boys playing. I told him I should be pleased if he

were to go across, and took the opportunity of asking him why he is so

much afraid when the loaded carts at the loading dock start moving

(b).

   ‘Hans: "I’m afraid of standing by the cart and the cart driving off

quick, and of my standing on it and wanting to get on to the board (the

loading dock), and my driving off in the cart."

   ‘I: ‘And if the cart stands still? Aren’t you afraid then? Why not?"

   ‘Hans: "If the cart stands still, then I can get on to the cart quick and

get on to the board."   ‘(So Hans is planning to climb over a cart on to the loading dock,

and is afraid of the cart driving away while he is on it.)

   ‘I: "Perhaps you’re afraid you won’t come home any more if you

drive away in the cart?"

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2037

 






                                  Hans’s projected route

 

                                          Fig. 3.

 

   ‘Hans: "Oh no! I can always come back to Mummy, in the cart or in a

cab. I can tell him the number of the house too."

   ‘I: "Then why are you afraid?"

   ‘Hans: "I don’t know. But the Professor’ll know. D’you think he’ll

know?"

   ‘I: "And why do you want to get over on to the board?"

   ‘Hans: "Because I’ve never been up there, and I should so much like

to be there; and d’you know why I should like to go there? Because I

should like to load and unload the boxes, and I should like to climb

about on the boxes there. I should so like to climb about there. D’you

know who I learnt the climbing about from? Some boys climbed on the

boxes, and I saw them, and I want to do it too."

   ‘His wish was not fulfilled. For when Hans ventured once more in

front of the street-door, the few steps across the street and into the

courtyard  awoke  too  great  resistances  in  him,  because  carts  were

constantly driving into the yard.’

   The Professor only knows that the game which Hans intended to

play  with  the  loaded  carts  must  have  stood  in  the  relation  of  a

symbolic  substitute  to  some  other  wish  as  to  which  he  had  so  far

uttered no word. But, if it did not seem too daring, this wish mightalready, even at this stage, be constructed.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2038

 

   ‘In the afternoon we again went out in front of the street door, and

when I returned I asked Hans:

   ‘"Which horses are you actually most afraid of?"

   ‘Hans: "All of them."

   ‘I: "That’s not true."

   ‘Hans: "I’m most afraid of horses with a thing on their mouths."

      ‘I:  "What  do  you  mean?  The  piece  of  iron  they  have  in  their

mouths?"

      ‘Hans:  "No.  They  have  something  black  on  their  mouths."  (He

covered his mouth with his hand.)

   ‘I: "What? A moustache, perhaps?"

   ‘Hans (laughing): "Oh no!"

   ‘I: "Have they all got it?"

   ‘Hans: "No, only a few of them."

   ‘I: "What is it that they’ve got on their mouths?"

   ‘Hans: "A black thing." (I think in reality it must be the thick piece of

harness that dray-horses wear over their noses.)

 







 

                                          Fig. 4.

 

   ‘"And I’m most afraid of furniture-vans, too."

   ‘I :"Why?"

      ‘Hans:  "I  think  when  furniture-horses  are  dragging  a  heavy  van

they’ll fall down."

   ‘I: "So you’re not afraid with a small cart?"   ‘Hans: "No. I’m not afraid with a small cart or with a post-office van.

I’m most afraid too when a bus comes along."

   ‘I: "Why? Because its so big?"

   ‘Hans: "No. Because once a horse in a bus fell down."

   ‘I: "When?"

      ‘Hans:  "Once  when  I  went  out  with  Mummy  in  spite  of  my

‘nonsense’,  when  I  bought  the  waistcoat."  (This  was  subsequently

confirmed by his mother.)

   ‘I: "What did you think when the horse fell down?"

   ‘Hans: "Now it’ll always be like this. All horses in buses’ll fall down."

   ‘I: "In all buses?"

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2039

 

   ‘Hans: "Yes. And in furniture-vans too. Not often in furniture-vans."

   ‘I: "You had your nonsense already at that time?"

   ‘Hans: "No. I only got it then. When the horse in the bus fell down, it

gave me such a fright, really! That was when I got the nonsense."

   ‘I: "But the nonsense was that you thought a horse would bite you.

And now you say you were afraid a horse would fall down."

   ‘Hans: "Fall down and bite."¹

   ‘I: "Why did it give you such a fright?"

   ‘Hans: "Because the horse went like this with its feet," (He lay down

on the ground and showed me how it kicked about.) "It gave me a

fright because it made a row with its feet."

   ‘I: "Where did you go with Mummy that day?"

   ‘Hans:  "First  to  the  Skating  Rink,  then  to  a café,  then  to  buy  a

waistcoat, then to the pastry-cook’s with Mummy, and then home in

the evening; we went back through the Stadtpark." (All of this was

confirmed by my wife, as well as the fact that the anxiety broke out

immediately afterwards.)

   ‘I: "Was the horse dead when it fell down?"

   ‘Hans: Yes!"

   ‘I: "How do you know that?"

   ‘Hans: "Because I saw it." (He laughed.) "No, it wasn’t a bit dead."   ‘I: "Perhaps you thought it was dead?"

   ‘Hans: "No. Certainly not. I only said it as a joke." (His expression at

the moment, however, had been serious.)

   ‘As he was tired, I let him run off. He only told me besides this that

he had first been afraid of bus-horses, then of all others, and only in

the end of furniture-van horses.

 

   ¹ Hans was right, however improbable this collocation may sound. The train of thought, as

we shall see, was that the horse (his father) would bite him because of his wish that it (his
father) should fall down.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2040

 

   ‘On the way back from Lainz there were a few more questions:

   ‘I: "When the bus-horse fell down, what colour was it: white, red,

brown, grey?"

   ‘Hans: "Black. Both horses were black."

   ‘I: "Was it big or little?"

   ‘Hans: "Big."

   ‘I: "Fat or thin?"

   ‘Hans: "Fat. Very big and fat."

   ‘I: "When the horse fell down, did you think of your daddy?"

   ‘Hans: "Perhaps. Yes. It’s possible."'

   His father’s investigations may have been without success at some

points; but it does no harm to make acquaintance at close quarters

with a phobia of this sort - which we may feel inclined to name after its

new objects. For in this way we get to see how diffuse it really is. It

extends on to horses and on to carts, on to the fact that horses fall

down and that they bite, on to horses of a particular character, on to

carts  that  are  heavily  loaded.  I  will  reveal  at  once  that  all  these

characteristics  were  derived  from  the  circumstance  that  the  anxiety

originally had no reference at all to horses but was transposed on to

them secondarily and had now become fixed upon those elements of

the horse-complex which showed themselves well adapted for certain

transferences.  We  must  specially  acknowledge  one  most  important

result of the boy’s examination by his father. We have learned theimmediate precipitating cause after which the phobia broke out. This

was when the boy saw a big heavy horse fall down; and one at least

of the interpretations of this impression seems to be that emphasized

by his father, namely, that Hans at that moment perceived a wish that

his father might fall down in the same way - and be dead. His serious

expression  as  he  was  telling  the  story  no  doubt  referred  to  this

unconscious meaning. May there not have been yet another meaning

concealed behind all this? And what can have been the significance of

the making a row with its legs?

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2041

 

 

   ‘For some time Hans has been playing horses in the room; he trots

about, falls down, kicks about with his feet, and neighs. Once he tied a

small bag on like a nose-bag. He has repeatedly run up to me and

bitten me.’

   In this way he was accepting the last interpretations more decidedly

than he could in words, but naturally with a change of parts, for the

game was played in obedience to a wishful phantasy. Thus he was

the horse, and bit his father, and in this way was identifying himself

with his father.

   ‘I have noticed for the last two days that Hans has been defying me

in the most decided manner, not impudently, but in the highest spirits.

Is it because he is no longer afraid of me - the horse?

 

   ‘April 6th. Went out with Hans in front of the house in the afternoon.

At every horse that passed I asked him if he saw the "black on its

mouth"; he said "no" every time. I asked him what the black really

looked like; he said it was black iron. My first idea, that he meant the

thick  leather  straps  that  are  part  of  the  harness  of  dray-horses,  is

therefore unconfirmed. I asked him if the "black" reminded him of a

moustache, and he said: "Only by its colour." So I do not yet know

what it really is.

   ‘The fear has diminished; this time he ventured as far as the next-door  house,  but  turned  round  quickly  when  he  heard  the  sound  of

horses’ hooves in the distance. When a cart drew up at our door and

came  to  a  stop,  he  became  frightened  and  ran  into  the  house,

because the horse began pawing with its foot. I asked him why he was

afraid, and whether perhaps he was nervous because the horse had

done like this (and I stamped with my foot). He said: "Don’t make such

a row with your feet!" Compare his remark about the fallen bus-horse.

   ‘He was particularly terrified by a furniture-van passing by. At that he

ran right inside the house. "Doesn’t a furniture-van like that," I asked

him  unconcernedly,  "really  look  like  a  bus?"  He  said  nothing.  I

repeated the question, and he then said: "Why, of course! Otherwise I

shouldn’t be so afraid of a furniture-van."

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2042

 

 

      ‘April  7th.  I  asked  again  to-day  what  the  "black  on  the  horses’

mouths" looked like. Hans said: "Like a muzzle." The curious thing is

that for the last three days not a single horse has passed on which he

could point out this "muzzle". I myself have seen no such horse on any

of my walks, although Hans asseverates that such horses do exist. I

suspect that some sort of horses’ bridle - the thick piece of harness

round their mouths, perhaps - really reminded him of a moustache,

and that after I alluded to this this fear disappeared as well.

   ‘Hans’s improvement is constant. The radius of his circle of activity

with  the  street-door  as  its  centre  grows  ever  wider.  He  has  even

accomplished the feat, which has hitherto been impossible for him, of

running across to the pavement opposite. All the fear that remains is

connected with the bus scene, the meaning of which is not yet clear to

me.

 

   ‘April 9th. This morning Hans came in to me while I was washing

and bare to the waist.

   ‘Hans: "Daddy, you are lovely! You’re so white."

   ‘I: "Yes. Like a white horse."   ‘Hans: "The only black thing’s your moustache." (Continuing) "Or

perhaps it’s a black muzzle?"

   ‘I told him then that I had been to see the Professor the evening

before, and said: "There’s one thing he wants to know." "I am curious,"

remarked Hans.

   ‘I told him I knew on what occasions it was that he made a row with

his feet. "Oh, yes!" he interrupted me, "when I’m cross, or when I have

to  do  ‘lumf’  and  would  rather  play."  (He  has  a  habit,  it  is  true,  of

making a row with his feet, i.e. of stamping, when he is angry. - "Doing

lumf" means doing number two. When Hans was small he said one

day  when  he  got  off  the  chamber:  "Look  at  the  lumf  [German:

‘Lumpf’]."  He  meant  "stocking"  [German:  "Strumpf"],  because  of  its

shape and colour. This designation has been preserved to this day. -

In  very  early  days,  when  he  had  to  be  put  on  the  chamber,  and

refused to leave off playing, he used to stamp his feet in a rage, and

kick about, and sometimes throw himself on the ground.)

   ‘"And you kick about with your feet as well, when you have to widdle

and don’t want to go, because you’d rather go on playing."

   ‘He: "Oh, I must widdle." And he went out of the room by way of

confirmation, no doubt.’

   In the course of his visit his father had asked me what Hans could

have been reminded of by the fallen horse kicking about with its feet. I

had suggested that that may have been his own reaction when he

retained  his  urine.  Hans  now  confirmed  this  by  means  of  the  re-

emergence during the conversation of a desire to micturate; and he

added some other meanings of the making a row with the feet.

   ‘We then went out in front of the street-door. When a coal-cart came

along, he said to me: "Daddy, I’m very much afraid of coal-carts, too."

   ‘I: "Perhaps that’s because they’re as big as buses, too."

   ‘Hans: "Yes; and because they’re so heavily loaded, and the horses

have so much to drag and might easily fall down. If a cart’s empty, I’m

not afraid." It is a fact, as I have already remarked, that only heavy

vehicles throw him into a state of anxiety.’

   Nevertheless, the situation was decidedly obscure. The analysis

was making little progress; and I am afraid the reader will soon begin

to find this description of it tedious. Every analysis, however, has dark

periods of this kind. But Hans was now on the point of leading us intoan unexpected region.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2043

 

 

   ‘I came home and was speaking to my wife, who had made various

purchases which she was showing me. Among them was a pair of

yellow  ladies’  drawers.  Hans  exclaimed  "Ugh!"  two  or  three  times,

threw himself on the ground, and spat. My wife said he had done this

two or three times already when he had seen the drawers.

   ‘"Why do you say ‘Ugh’?" I asked.

   ‘Hans: "Because of the drawers."

   ‘I: "Why? Because of their colour? Because they’re yellow?’, and

remind you of lumf or widdle?"

      ‘Hans:  "Lumf  isn’t  yellow.  It’s  white  or  black."  -  Immediately

afterwards: "I say, is it easy to do lumf if you eat cheese?" (I had once

told him so, when he asked me why I ate cheese.)

   ‘I: "Yes."

   ‘Hans: "That’s why you go straight off every morning and do lumf? I

should so much like to eat cheese with my bread-and-butter."

   ‘He had already asked me yesterday as he was jumping about in the

street: "I say, it’s true, isn’t it, if you jump about a lot you can do lumf

easily?" - There has been trouble with his stools from the very first;

and aperients and enemas have frequently been necessary. At one

time his habitual constipation was so great that my wife called in Dr. L.

He was of opinion that Hans was overfed, which was in fact the case,

and recommended a more moderate diet - and the condition was at

once brought to an end. Recently the constipation has again made its

appearance more frequently.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2044

 

   ‘After luncheon I said to him: "We’ll write to the Professor again,"

and he dictated to me: "When I saw the yellow drawers I said ‘Ugh!that makes me spit!’ and threw myself down and shut my eyes and

didn’t look."

   ‘I: "Why?"

   ‘Hans: "Because I saw the yellow drawers; and I did the same sort of

thing with the black drawers too.¹ The black ones are the same sort of

drawers, only they were black." (Interrupting himself) "I say, I am glad.

I’m always so glad when I can write to the Professor."

   ‘I: "Why did you say ‘Ugh’? Were you disgusted?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes, because I saw that. I thought I should have to do lumf."

   ‘I: "Why?"

   ‘Hans: "I don’t know."

   ‘I: "When did you see the black drawers?"

   ‘Hans: "Once, when Anna (our maid) had been here a long time -

with Mummy - she brought them home just after she’d bought them."

(This statement was confirmed by my wife.)

   ‘I: "Were you disgusted then, too?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "Have you seen Mummy in drawers like that?"

   ‘Hans: "No."

   ‘I: "When she was dressing?"

   ‘Hans: "When she bought the yellow ones I’d seen them once before

already." (This is contradicted. He saw the yellow ones for the first

time when his mother bought them.) "She’s got the black ones on to-

day too" (correct), "because I saw her take them off in the morning."

 

   ¹ ‘For the last few weeks my wife has possessed a pair of black bloomers for wearing on

cycling tours.’
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2045

 

   ‘I: "What? She took off the black drawers in the morning?"

   ‘Hans: "In the morning when she went out she took off the black

drawers, and when she came back she put the black ones on again."

   ‘I asked my wife about this, as it seemed to me absurd. She said it

was entirely untrue. Of course she had not changed her drawers when

she went out.   ‘I at once asked Hans about it: "You told me that Mummy had put on

some black drawers, and that when she went out she took them off,

and that when she came back she put them on again. But Mummy

says it’s not true."

   ‘Hans: "I think perhaps I may have forgotten she didn’t take them

off." (Impatiently) "Oh, do let me alone."'

   I have a few comments to make at this point on the business of the

drawers. It was obviously mere hypocrisy on Hans’s part to pretend to

be so glad of the opportunity of giving an account of the affair. In the

end he threw the mask aside and was rude to his father. It was a

question  of  things  which  had  once  afforded  him a  great  deal  of

pleasure, but of which, now that repression had set in, he was very

much ashamed, and at which he professed to be disgusted. He told

some downright lies so as to disguise the circumstances in which he

had seen his mother change her drawers. In reality, the putting on and

taking off of her drawers belonged to the ‘lumf’ context. His father was

perfectly aware of what it was all about and of what Hans was trying to

conceal.

   ‘I asked my wife whether Hans was often with her when she went to

the W.C. "Yes," she said, "often. He goes on pestering me till I let him.

Children are all like that."'

   Nevertheless, it is worth bearing carefully in mind the desire, which

Hans had already repressed, for seeing his mother doing lumf.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2046

 

   ‘We went out in front of the house. He was in very good spirits and

was prancing about all the time like a horse. So I said: "Now, who is it

that’s the bus-horse? Me, you or Mummy?"

   ‘Hans (promptly): "I am; I’m a young horse."

   ‘During the period when his anxiety was at its height, and he was

frightened at seeing horses frisking, he asked me why they did it; and

to reassure him I said: "Those are young horses, you see, and they

frisk about like little boys. You frisk about too, and you’re a little boy."

Since  then,  whenever  he  has  seen  horses  frisking,  he  has  said:"That’s right; those are young horses!"

   ‘As we were going upstairs I asked him almost without thinking:

"Used you to play at horses with the children at Gmunden?"

   ‘He: "Yes." (Thoughtfully) "I think that was how I got the nonsense."

   ‘I: "Who was the horse?"

   ‘He: "I was; and Berta was the coachman."

   ‘I: "Did you fall down by any chance, when you were a horse?"

   ‘Hans: "No. When Berta said ‘Gee-up’, I ran ever so quick; I just

raced along."¹

   ‘I: "You never played at buses?"

   ‘Hans: "No. At ordinary carts, and horses without carts. When a

horse has a cart, it can go without a cart just as well, and the cart can

stay at home."

   ‘I: "Used you often to play at horses?"

   ‘Hans: "Very often. Fritzl² was the horse once, too, and Franzl the

coachman; and Fritzl ran ever so fast and all at once he hit his foot on

a stone and bled."

   ‘I: "Perhaps he fell down?"

 

   ¹ ‘Hans had a set of toy harness with bells.’

   ² Another of the landlord’s children, as we already know.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2047

 

   ‘Hans: "No. He put his foot in some water and then wrapped it up."¹

   ‘I: "Were you often the horse?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh, yes."

   ‘I: "And that was how you got the nonsense?"

   ‘Hans: "Because they kept on saying ‘ 'cos of the horse, ‘ 'cos of the

horse’ " (he put a stress on the ‘'cos’); "so perhaps I got the nonsense

because they talked like that; ‘'cos of the horse.’"'²

   For a while Hans’s father pursued his enquiry fruitlessly along other

paths.

   ‘I: "Did they tell you anything about horses?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "What?"   ‘Hans: "I’ve forgotten."

   ‘I: "Perhaps they told you about their widdlers?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh, no."

   ‘I; "Were you frightened of horses already then?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh, no. I wasn’t frightened at all."

   ‘I: "Perhaps Berta told you that horses ---?"

   ‘Hans (interrupting): "---widdle? No."

 

   ¹ See below. His father was quite right in suspecting that Fritzl fell down.

   ² [‘Wegen dem Pferd’.] I may explain that Hans was not maintaining that he had got the

nonsense at that time but in that connection. Indeed, it must have been so, for theoretical
considerations require that what is to-day the object of a phobia must at one time in the past
have been the source of a high degree of pleasure. I may at the same time complete what the
child was unable to express, and add that the little word ‘wegen’ [‘because of’, ‘ 'cos of’] was
the means of enabling the phobia to extend from horses on to ‘Wagen’ [‘vehicles’] or, as Hans
was accustomed to pronounce the word and hear it pronounced, ‘Wägen’ [pronounced exactly
like ‘wegen’]. It must never be forgotten how much more concretely children treat words than
grown-up people do, and consequently how much more significant for them are similarities of
sound in words.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2048

 

 

   ‘On April 10th I took up our conversation of the day before, and tried

to  discover  what  his  "'cos  of  the  horse"  meant.  Hans  could  not

remember; he only knew that some children had stood outside the

front door one morning and had said, "'cos of the horse, 'cos of the

horse!" He had been there himself. When I pressed him more closely,

he declared that they had not said "'cos of the horse" at all, but that he

had remembered wrong.

   ‘I: "But you and the others were often in the stables. You must surely

have talked about horses there." - "We didn’t." - "What did you talk

about?"  -  "Nothing."  -  "Such  a  lot  of  children,  and  nothing  to  talk

about?" - "We did talk about something, but not about horses." - "Well,

what was it?" - "I don’t remember any more."

   ‘I allowed the matter to drop, as the resistances were evidently too

great,¹ and went on to the following question: "Did you like playing with

Berta?"   ‘He: "Yes, very much; but not with Olga. D’you know what Olga did?

I was given a paper ball once by Grete up there at Gmunden, and

Olga tore it all to pieces. Berta would never have torn my ball. I liked

playing with Berta very much."

   ‘I: "Did you see what Berta’s widdler looked like?"

   ‘He: "No, but I saw the horses’; because I was always in the stables,

and so I saw the horses’ widdlers."

   ‘I: "And so you were curious and wanted to know what Berta’s and

Mummy’s widdlers looked like?"

   ‘He: "Yes."

   ‘I reminded him of how he had once complained to me that the little

girls always wanted to look on while he was widdling.

 

   ¹ In point of fact there was nothing more to be got out of it than Hans’s verbal association,

and  this  had  escaped  his  father.  Here  is  a  good  instance  of  conditions  under  which  an
analyst’s efforts are wasted.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2049

 

      ‘He:  "Berta  always  looked  on  at  me  too"  (he  spoke  with  great

satisfaction and not at all resentfully); "often she did, I used to widdle

in the little garden where the radishes were, and she stood outside the

front door and looked on at me."

   ‘I: "And when she widdled, did you look on?"

   ‘He: "She used to go to the W.C."

   ‘I: "And you were curious?"

   ‘He: "I was inside the W.C. when she was in it."

   ‘(This was a fact. The servants told us about it once, and I recollect

that we forbade Hans to do it.)

   ‘I: "Did you tell her you wanted to go in?"

   ‘He: "I went in alone and because Berta let me. There’s nothing

shameful in that."

   ‘I: "And you’d have liked to see her widdler?"

   ‘He: "Yes, but I didn’t see it."

   ‘I then reminded him of the dream about playing forfeits that he had

had  at  Gmunden,  and  said:  "When  you  were  at  Gmunden  did  youwant Berta to make you widdle?"

   ‘He: "I never said so to her."

   ‘I: "Why didn’t you ever say so to her?"

   ‘He: "Because I didn’t think of it." (Interrupting himself) "If I write

everything to the Professor, my nonsense’ll soon be over, won’t it?"

   ‘I: "Why did you want Berta to make you widdle?"

   ‘He: "I don’t know. Because she looked on at me."

      ‘I:  "Did  you  think  to  yourself  she  should  put  her  hand  to  your

widdler?"

   ‘He: "Yes." (Changing the subject)("It was such fun at Gmunden. In

the little garden where the radishes were there was a little sand-heap;

I used to play there with my spade."

   ‘(This was the garden where he used always to widdle.)

   "I: ‘Did you put your hand to your widdler at Gmunden, when you

were in bed?"

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2050

 

   ‘He: "No. Not then; I slept so well at Gmunden that I never thought of

it at all. The only times I did it was at --- Street¹ and now."

   ‘I: "But Berta never put her hand to your widdler?"

   ‘He: "She never did, no; because I never told her to."

   ‘I: "Well, and when was it you wanted her to?"

   ‘He: "Oh, at Gmunden once."

   ‘I: "Only once?"

   ‘He: "Well, now and then."

   ‘I: "She used always to look on at you when you widdled; perhaps

she was curious to know how you did it?"

   ‘He: "Perhaps she was curious to know what my widdler looked like."

   ‘I: "But you were curious too. Only about Berta?"

   ‘He: "About Berta, and about Olga."

   ‘I: "About who else?"

   ‘He: "About no one else."

   ‘I: "You know that’s not true. About Mummy too."

   ‘He: "Oh, yes, about Mummy."   ‘I: "But now you’re not curious any more. You know what Hanna’s

widdler looks like, don’t you?"

   ‘He: "It’ll grow, though, won’t it?"²

   ‘I: "Yes, of course. But when it’s grown it won’t look like yours."

   ‘He: "I know that. It’ll be the same" (sc. as it now is) "only bigger."

      ‘I:  "When  we  were  at  Gmunden,  were  you  curious  when  your

Mummy undressed?"

   ‘He: "Yes. And then when Hanna was in her bath I saw her widdler."

   ‘I: "And Mummy’s too?"

   ‘He: "No."

   ‘I: "You were disgusted when you saw Mummy’s drawers?"

 

   ¹ The flat they were in before the move.

   ² Hans wants to be assured that his own widdler will grow.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2051

 

   ‘He: "Only when I saw the black ones - when she bought them - then

I spat. But I don’t spit when she puts her drawers on or takes them off.

I spit because the black drawers are like a lumf and the yellow ones

like a widdle, and then I think I’ve got to widdle. When Mummy has her

drawers on I don’t see them; she’s got her clothes on over them."

   ‘I: "And when she takes off her clothes?"

   ‘He: "I don’t spit then either. But when her drawers are new they look

like a lumf. When they’re old, the colour goes away and they get dirty.

When you buy them they’re quite clean, but at home they’ve been

made dirty. When they’re bought they’re new, and when they’re not

bought they’re old."

   ‘I: "Then you aren’t disgusted by old ones?"

   ‘He:  "When  they’re  old  they’re  much  blacker  than  a  lumf,  aren’t

they? They’re just a bit blacker."¹

   ‘I: "Have you often been into the W.C. with Mummy?"

   ‘He: "Very often."

   ‘I: "And were you disgusted?"

   ‘He: "Yes. . . . No."

   ‘I: "You like being there when Mummy widdles or does lumf?"   ‘He: "Yes, very much."

   ‘I: "Why do you like it so much?"

   ‘He: "I don’t know."

   ‘I: "Because you think you’ll see her widdler."

   ‘He: "Yes, I do think that."

   ‘I: "But why won’t you ever go into the W.C. at Lainz?"

   ‘(At Lainz he always begs me not to take him into the W.C.; he was

frightened once by the noise of the flush.)

 

   ¹ Our young man was here wrestling with a subject of which he was not equal to giving a

clear exposition; so that there is some difficulty in understanding him. He may perhaps have
meant that the drawers only recalled his feelings of disgust when he saw them on their own
account; as soon as his mother had them on, he ceased to connect them with lumf or widdle,
and they then interested him in a different way.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2052

 

   ‘He: "Perhaps it’s because it makes a row when you pull the plug."

   ‘I: "And then you’re afraid."

   ‘He: "Yes."

   ‘I: "And what about our W.C. here?"

   ‘He: "Here I’m not. At Lainz it gives me a fright when you pull the

plug. And when I’m inside and the water rushes down, then it gives

me a fright too."

   ‘And, "just to show me that he wasn’t frightened in our flat," he made

me go into the W.C. and set the flush in motion. He then explained to

me:

   ‘"First there’s a loud row, and then a loose one." (This is when the

water comes down.) "When there’s a loud row I’d rather stay inside,

and when there’s a soft one I’d rather go out."

   ‘I: "Because you’re afraid?"

   ‘He: "Because if there’s a loud row I always so much like to see it" -

(correcting himself) "to hear it; so I’d rather stay inside and hear it

properly."

   ‘I: "What does a loud row remind you of?"

   ‘He: "That I’ve got to do lumf in the W.C." (The same thing, that is,

that the black drawers reminded him of.)   ‘I: "Why?"

   ‘He: "I don’t know. A loud row sounds as though you were doing

lumf. A big row reminds me of lumf, and a little one of widdle." (Cf. the

black and the yellow drawers.)

      ‘I:  "I  say,  wasn’t  the  bus-horse  the  same  colour  as  a  lumf"

(According to his account it had been black.)

   ‘He (very much struck): "Yes."'

   At this point I must put in a few words. Hans’s father was asking too

many  questions,  and  was  pressing  the  inquiry  along  his  own  lines

instead  of  allowing  the  little  boy  to  express  his  thoughts.  For  this

reason the analysis began to be obscure and uncertain. Hans went his

own way and would produce nothing if attempts were made to draw

him off it. For the moment his interest was evidently centred upon lumf

and widdle, but we cannot tell why. Just as little satisfactory light was

thrown upon the business of the row as upon that of the yellow and

black drawers. I suspect that the boy’s sharp ears had clearly detected

the difference between the sounds made by a man micturating and a

woman.  The  analysis  succeeded  in  forcing  the  material  somewhat

artificially  into  an  expression  of  the  distinction  between  the  two

different calls of nature. I can only advise those of my readers who

have  not  as  yet  themselves  conducted  an  analysis  not  to  try  to

understand everything at once, but to give a kind of unbiased attention

to every point that arises and to await further developments.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2053

 

 

   ‘April 11th. This morning Hans came into our room again and was

sent away, as he always has been for the last few days.

   ‘Later on, he began: "Daddy, I thought something: I was in the bath,¹

and the plumber came and unscrewed it.² Then he took a bigger borer

and stuck it into my stomach."

   Hans’s father translated this phantasy as follows: ‘"I was in bed with

Mummy. Then Daddy came and drove me away. With his big penis he

pushed me out of my place by Mummy."'   Let us suspend our judgement for the present.

   ‘He went on to relate a second idea that he had had: "We were

travelling in the train to Gmunden. In the station we put on our clothes;

but we couldn’t get it done in time, and the train carried us on."

   ‘Later on, I asked: "Have you ever seen a horse doing lumf?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes, very often."

   ‘I: "Does it make a loud row when it does lumf?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "What does the row remind you of?"

   ‘Hans: "Like when lumf falls into the chamber."

   ‘The bus-horse that falls down and makes a row with its feet is no

doubt - a lumf falling and making a noise. His fear of defaecation and

his fear of heavily loaded carts is equivalent to the fear of a heavily

loaded stomach.’

      In  this  roundabout  way  Hans’s  father  was  beginning  to  get  a

glimmering of the true state of affairs.

 

   ¹ ‘Hans’s mother gives him his bath.’

   ² ‘To take it away to be repaired.’

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2054

 

 

      ‘April  11th.  At  luncheon  Hans  said:  "If  only  we  had  a  bath  at

Gmunden, so that I didn’t have to go to the public baths!" It is a fact

that  at  Gmunden  he  was  always  taken  to  the  neighbouring  public

baths to be given a hot bath - a proceeding against which he used to

protest with passionate tears. And in Vienna, too, he always screams

if he is made to sit or lie in the big bath. He must be given his bath

kneeling or standing.’

   Hans was now beginning to bring fuel to the analysis in the shape of

spontaneous utterances of his own. This remark of his established the

connection between his two last phantasies - that of the plumber who

unscrewed the bath and that of the unsuccessful journey to Gmunden.

His father had correctly inferred from the latter that Hans had some

aversion to Gmunden. This, by the way, is another good reminder ofthe fact that what emerges from the unconscious is to be understood

in the light not of what goes before but of what comes after.

   ‘I asked him whether he was afraid, and if so of what.

   ‘Hans: "Because of falling in."

   ‘I: "But why were you never afraid when you had your bath in the

little bath?"

   ‘Hans: "Why, I sat in that one. I couldn’t lie down in it, it was too

small."

   ‘I: "When you went in a boat at Gmunden weren’t you afraid of falling

into the water?"

   ‘Hans: "No, because I held on, so I couldn’t fall in. It’s only in the big

bath that I’m afraid of falling in."

   ‘I: "But Mummy baths you in it. Are you afraid of Mummy dropping

you in the water?"

   ‘Hans: "I’m afraid of her letting go and my head going in."

   ‘I: "But you know Mummy’s fond of you and won’t let go of you."

   ‘Hans: "I only just thought it."

   ‘I: "Why?"

   ‘Hans: "I don’t know at all."

   ‘I: "Perhaps it was because you’d been naughty and thought she

didn’t love you any more?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

      ‘I:  "When  you  were  watching  Mummy  giving  Hanna  her  bath,

perhaps you wished she would let go of her so that Hanna should fall

in?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."'

      Hans’s  father,  we  cannot  help  thinking,  had  made  a  very  good

guess.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2055

 

 

   ‘April 12th. As we were coming back from Lainz in a second-class

carriage, Hans looked at the black leather upholstery of the seats, and

said: "Ugh! that makes me spit! Black drawers and black horses makeme spit too, because I have to do lumf."

   ‘I: "Perhaps you saw something of Mummy’s that was black, and it

frightened you?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "Well, what was it?"

   ‘Hans: "I don’t know. A black blouse or black stockings."

      ‘I:  "Perhaps  it  was  black  hair  near  her  widdler,  when  you  were

curious and looked."

   ‘Hans (defending himself): "But I didn’t see her widdler."

   ‘Another time, he was frightened once more at a cart driving out of

the yard gates opposite. "Don’t the gates look like a behind?" I asked.

   ‘He: "And the horses are the lumfs!" Since then, whenever he sees a

cart driving out, he says: "Look, there’s a ‘lumfy’ coming!" This form of

the word ("lumfy") is quite a new one to him; it sounds like a term of

endearment. My sister-in-law always calls her child "Wumfy".

 

   ‘On April 13th he saw a piece of liver in the soup and exclaimed:

"Ugh! A lumf!" Meat croquettes, too, he eats with evident reluctance,

because their form and colour remind him of lumf.

   ‘In the evening my wife told me that Hans had been out on the

balcony and had said: "I thought to myself Hanna was on the balcony

and fell down off it." I had once or twice told him to be careful that

Hanna did not get too near the balustrade when she was out on the

balcony; for the railing was designed in the most unpractical way (by a

metal-worker of the Secessionist movement) and had big gaps in it

which I had to have filled in with wire netting. Hans’s repressed wish

was very transparent. His mother asked him if he would rather Hanna

were not there, to which he said "Yes".

 

      ‘April  14th.  The  theme  of  Hanna  is  uppermost.  As  you  may

remember from earlier records, Hans felt a strong aversion to the new-

born baby that robbed him of a part of his parents’ love. This dislike

has not entirely disappeared and is only partly overcompensated by

an exaggerated affection.¹ He has already several times expressed a

wish that the stork should bring no more babies and that we should

pay  him  money  not  to  bring  any  more  "out  of  the  big  box"  where

babies are. (Compare his fear of furniture-vans. Does not a bus looklike  a  big  box?)  Hanna  screams  such  a  lot,  he  says,  and  that’s  a

nuisance to him.

 

   ¹ The ‘Hanna’ theme immediately succeeded the ‘lumf’ theme, and the explanation of this at

length begins to dawn upon us: Hanna was a lumf herself - babies were lumfs.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2056

 

   ‘Once he suddenly said: "Can you remember when Hanna came?

She lay beside Mummy in bed, so nice and good." (His praise rang

suspiciously hollow.)

   ‘And then as regards downstairs, outside the house. There is again

great progress to be reported. Even drays cause him less alarm. Once

he called out, almost with joy: "Here comes a horse with something

black on its mouth!" And I was at last able to establish the fact that it

was  a  horse  with  a  leather  muzzle.  But  Hans  was  not  in  the  least

afraid of this horse.

   ‘Once he knocked on the pavement with his stick and said: "I say, is

there a man underneath? - some one buried? - or is that only in the

cemetery?" So he is occupied not only with the riddle of life but with

the riddle of death.

   ‘When we got indoors again I saw a box standing in the front hall,

and Hans said: "Hanna travelled with us to Gmunden in a box like

that. Whenever we travelled to Gmunden she travelled with us in the

box. You don’t believe me again? Really, Daddy. Do believe me. We

got a big box and it was full of babies; they sat in the bath." (A small

bath had been packed inside the box.) "I put them in it. Really and

truly. I can remember quite well."¹

   ‘I: "What can you remember?"

   ‘Hans: "That Hanna travelled in the box; because I haven’t forgotten

about it. My word of honour!"

   ‘I: "But last year Hanna travelled with us in the railway carriage."

   ‘Hans: "But before that she always travelled with us in the box."

 

   ¹ Hans was now going off into a phantasy. As we can see, a box and a bath have the same

meaning for him: they both represent the space which contains the babies. We must bear inmind Hans’s repeated assurances on this point.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2057

 

   ‘I: "Didn’t Mummy have the box?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes. Mummy had it."

   ‘I: "Where?"

   ‘Hans: "At home in the attic."

   ‘I: "Perhaps she carried it about with her?"¹

   ‘Hans:  "No.  And  when  we  travel  to  Gmunden  this  time  Hanna’ll

travel in the box again."

   ‘I: "And how did she get out of the box, then?"

   ‘Hans: "She was taken out."

   ‘I: "By Mummy?"

   ‘Hans: "Mummy and me. Then we got into the carriage, and Hanna

rode on the horse, and the coachman said ‘Gee-up’. The coachman

sat  up  in  front.  Were  you  there  too?  Mummy  knows  all  about  it.

Mummy doesn’t know; she’s forgotten about it already, but don’t tell

her anything!"

   ‘I made him repeat the whole of this.

   ‘Hans: "Then Hanna got out."

   ‘I: "Why, she couldn’t walk at all then."

   ‘Hans: "Well then, we lifted her down."

   ‘I: "But how could she have sat on the horse? She couldn’t sit up at

all last year."

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes, she sat up all right, and called out ‘Gee-up’, and

whipped with her whip - ‘Gee-up! Gee-up!’ - the whip I used to have.

The horse hadn’t any stirrups, but Hanna rode it. I’m not joking, you

know, Daddy."'

   What can be the meaning of the boy’s obstinate persistence in all

this  nonsense?  Oh  no,  it  was  no  nonsense:  it  was  parody,  it  was

Hans’s  revenge  upon  his  father.  It  was  as  much  as  to  say:  ‘If you

really expect me to believe that the stork brought Hanna in October,

when even in the summer, while we were travelling to Gmunden, I’d

noticed how big Mother’s stomach was, - then I expect you to believe

my lies.’  What  can  be  the  meaning  of  the  assertion  that  even  thesummer before the last Hanna had travelled with them to Gmunden ‘in

the  box’,  except  that  he  knew  about  his  mother’s  pregnancy?  His

holding out the prospect of a repetition of this journey in the box in

each  successive  year  exemplifies  a  common  way  in  which

unconscious thoughts from the past emerge into consciousness; or it

may have special reasons and express his dread of seeing a similar

pregnancy  repeated  on  their  next  summer  holiday.  We  now  see,

moreover, what the circumstances were that had made him take a

dislike  to  the  journey  to  Gmunden,  as  his  second  phantasy  had

indicated.

 

   ¹ The box was of course the womb. (Hans’s father was trying to let him know that he

understood this.) And the same is true of the caskets in which so many of the heroes of
mythology were exposed, from the time of King Sargon of Agade onwards. - [Added 1923:] Cf.
Rank’s study, Der Mythus von der Geburt des Helden, 1909.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2058

 

      ‘Later  on,  I  asked  him  how  Hanna  had  actually  come  into  his

mother’s bed after she was born.’

   This gave Hans a chance of letting himself go and fairly ‘stuffing’ his

father.

   ‘Hans: "Hanna just came. Frau Kraus" (the midwife) "put her in the

bed.  She  couldn’t  walk,  of  course.  But  the  stork  carried  her  in  his

beak. Of course she couldn’t walk." (He went on without a pause.)

"The stork came up the stairs up to the landing, and then he knocked

and everybody was asleep, and he had the right key and unlocked the

door and put Hanna in your¹ bed, and Mummy was asleep - no, the

stork put her in her bed. It was the middle of the night, and then the

stork put her in the bed very quietly, he didn’t trample about at all, and

then he took his hat and went away again. No, he hadn’t got a hat."

   ‘I: "Who took his hat? The doctor, perhaps?"

   ‘Hans: "Then the stork went away; he went home, and then he rang

at the door, and every one in the house stopped sleeping. But don’t

tell this to Mummy or Tini" (the cook). "It’s a secret."

   ‘I: "Are you fond of Hanna?" 

   ¹ Ironical, of course. Like his subsequent request that none of the secret should be betrayed

to his mother.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2059

 

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes, very fond."

   ‘I: "Would you rather that Hanna weren’t alive or that she were?"

   ‘Hans: "I’d rather she weren’t alive."

   ‘I: "Why?"

   ‘Hans: "At any rate she wouldn’t scream so, and I can’t bear her

screaming."

   ‘I: "Why, you scream yourself."

   ‘Hans: "But Hanna screams too."

   ‘I: "Why can’t you bear it?"

   ‘Hans: "Because she screams so loud."

   ‘I: "Why, she doesn’t scream at all."

      ‘Hans:  "When  she’s  whacked  on  her  bare  bottom,  then  she

screams."

   ‘I: "Have you ever whacked her?"

      ‘Hans:  "When  Mummy  whacks  her  on  her  bottom,  then  she

screams."

   ‘I: "And you don’t like that?"

   ‘Hans: "No. . . . Why? Because she makes such a row with her

screaming."

   ‘I: "If you’d rather she weren’t alive, you can’t be fond of her at all."

   ‘Hans (assenting): "H’m, well."

   ‘I: "That was why you thought when Mummy was giving her her

bath, if only she’d let go, Hanna would fall into the water . . ."

   ‘Hans (taking me up): ". . . and die."

   ‘I: "And then you’d be alone with Mummy. A good boy doesn’t wish

that sort of thing, though."

   ‘Hans: "But he may THINK it."

   ‘I: "But that isn’t good."

   ‘Hans: "If he thinks it, it IS good all the same, because you can write

it to the Professor."¹ 

   ¹ Well done, little Hans! I could wish for no better understanding of psycho-analysis from

any grown-up.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2060

 

   ‘Later on I said to him: "You know, when Hanna gets bigger and can

talk, you’ll be fonder of her."

   ‘Hans: "Oh no. I am fond of her. In the autumn, when she’s big, I

shall go with her to the Stadtpark quite alone, and explain everything

to her."

   ‘As I was beginning to give him some further enlightenment, he

interrupted me, probably with the intention of explaining to me that it

was not so wicked of him to wish that Hanna was dead.

   ‘Hans: "You know, all the same, she’d been alive a long time even

before she was here. When she was with the stork she was alive too."

   ‘I: "No. Perhaps she wasn’t with the stork after all."

   ‘Hans: "Who brought her, then? The stork had got her."

   ‘I: "Where did he bring her from, then?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh - from him."

   ‘I: "Where had he got her, then?"

   ‘Hans: "In the box; in the stork-box."

   ‘I: "Well, and what does the box look like?"

   ‘Hans: "Red. Painted red." (Blood?)

   ‘I: "Who told you that?"

   ‘Hans: "Mummy . . . I thought it to myself . . . it’s in the book."

   ‘I: "In what book?"

   ‘Hans: "In the picture-book." (I made him fetch his first picture-book.

In it was a picture of a stork’s nest with storks, on a red chimney. This

was the box. Curiously enough, on the same page there was also a

picture of a horse being shod. Hans had transferred the babies into

the box, as they were not to be seen in the nest.)

   ‘I: "And what did the stork do with her?"

   ‘Hans: "Then the stork brought Hanna here. In his beak. You know,

the  stork  that’s  at  Schönbrunn,  and  that  bit  the  umbrella."  (A

reminiscence of an episode at Schönbrunn.) 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2061

 

   ‘I: "Did you see how the stork brought Hanna?"

   ‘Hans: ‘Why, I was still asleep, you know. A stork can never bring a

little girl or a little boy in the morning."

   ‘I: "Why?"

   ‘Hans: "He can’t. A stork can’t do it. Do you know why: So that

people shan’t see. And then, all at once, in the morning, there’s a little

girl there."¹

   ‘I: "But, all the same, you were curious at the time to know how the

stork did it?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes."

   ‘I: "What did Hanna look like when she came?"

   ‘Hans (hypocritically): "All white and lovely. So pretty"

   ‘I: "But when you saw her the first time you didn’t like her."

   ‘Hans: "Oh, I did; very much!"

   ‘I: "You were surprised that she was so small, though."

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "How small was she?"

   ‘Hans: "Like a baby stork."

   ‘I: "Like what else? Like a lumf, perhaps?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh no. A lumf’s much bigger . . . a bit smaller than Hanna,

really."'

   I had predicted to his father that it would be possible to trace back

Hans’s phobia to thoughts and wishes occasioned by the birth of his

baby sister. But I had omitted to point out that according to the sexual

theory of children a baby is a ‘lumf’, so that Hans’s path would lie

through the excremental complex. It was owing to this neglect on my

part that the progress of the case became temporarily obscured. Now

that  the  matter  had  been  cleared  up,  Hans’s  father  attempted  to

examine the boy a second time upon this important point.

 

   ¹ There is no need to find fault with Hans’s inconsistencies. In the previous conversation his

disbelief  in  the  stork  had  emerged  from  his  unconscious  and  had  been  coupled  with  the
exasperation he felt against his father for making so many mysteries. But he had now becomecalmer and was answering his father’s questions with official thoughts in which he had worked
out glosses upon the many difficulties involved in the stork hypothesis.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2062

 

 

   The next day, ‘I got Hans to repeat what he had told me yesterday.

He said: "Hanna travelled to Gmunden in the big box, and Mummy

travelled in the railway carriage, and Hanna travelled in the luggage

train with the box; and then when we got to Gmunden Mummy and I

lifted Hanna out and put her on the horse. The coachman sat up in

front, and Hanna had the old whip" (the whip he had last year) "and

whipped the horse and kept on saying ‘Gee-up’, and it was such fun,

and  the  coachman  whipped  too.  -The  coachman  didn’t  whip  at  all,

because Hanna had the whip. -The coachman had the reins - Hanna

had the reins too." (On each occasion we drove in a carriage from the

station to the house. Hans was here trying to reconcile fact and fancy.)

"At Gmunden we lifted Hanna down from the horse, and she walked

up the steps by herself." (Last year, when Hanna was at Gmunden,

she was eight months old. The year before that - and Hans’s phantasy

evidently related to that time his mother had been five months gone

with child when we arrived at Gmunden.)

   ‘I: "Last year Hanna was there."

   ‘Hans: "Last year she drove in the carriage; but the year before that,

when she was living with us . . ."

   ‘I: "Was she with us already then?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes. You were always there; you used always to go in the

boat with me, and Anna was our servant."

   ‘I: "But that wasn’t last year. Hanna wasn’t alive then."

   ‘Hans: "Yes, she was alive then. Even while she was still travelling in

the box she could run about and she could say ‘Anna’." (She has only

been able to do so for the last four months.)

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2063 

   ‘I: "But she wasn’t with us at all then."

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes, she was; she was with the stork."

   ‘I: "How old is she, then?"

   ‘Hans: "She’ll be two years old in the autumn. Hanna was there, you

know she was."

   ‘I: "And when was she with the stork in the stork-box?"

   ‘Hans: "A long time before she travelled in the box, a very long time."

   ‘I: "How long has Hanna been able to walk, then? When she was at

Gmunden she couldn’t walk yet."

   ‘Hans: "Not last year; but other times she could."

   ‘I: "But Hanna’s only been at Gmunden once."

   ‘Hans: "No. She’s been twice. Yes, that’s it. I can remember quite

well. Ask Mummy, she’ll tell you soon enough."

   ‘I: "It’s not true, all the same."

   ‘Hans: "Yes, it is true. When she was at Gmunden the first time she

could walk and ride, and later on she had to be carried. -No. It was

only later on that she rode, and last year she had to be carried."

      ‘I:  "But  it’s  only  quite  a  short  time  that  she’s  been  walking.  At

Gmunden she couldn’t walk."

   ‘Hans: "Yes. Just you write it down. I can remember quite well. -Why

are you laughing?"

      ‘I:  "Because  you’re  a  fraud;  because  you  know  quite  well  that

Hanna’s only been at Gmunden once."

   ‘Hans: "No, that isn’t true. The first time she rode on the horse . . .

and the second time . . ." (He showed signs of evident uncertainty.)

   ‘I: "Perhaps the horse was Mummy?"

   ‘Hans: "No, a real horse in a fly."

   ‘I: "But we used always to have a carriage with two horses."

   ‘Hans: "Well, then, it was a carriage and pair."

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2064

 

   ‘I: "What did Hanna eat inside the box?"

      ‘Hans:  "They  put  in  bread-and-butter  for  her,  and  herring,  andradishes" (the sort of thing we used to have for supper at Gmunden),

"and as Hanna went along she buttered her bread-and-butter and ate

fifty meals."

   ‘I: "Didn’t Hanna scream?"

   ‘Hans: "No."

   ‘I: "What did she do, then?"

   ‘Hans: "Sat quite still inside."

   ‘I: "Didn’t she push about?"

   ‘Hans: "No, she kept on eating all the time and didn’t stir once. She

drank up two big mugs of coffee - by the morning it was all gone, and

she left the bits behind in the box, the leaves of the two radishes and a

knife for cutting the radishes. She gobbled everything up like a hare:

one minute and it was all finished. It was a joke. Hanna and I really

travelled together in the box; I slept the whole night in the box." (We

did in fact, two years ago, make the journey to Gmunden by night.)

"And Mummy travelled in the railway carriage. And we kept on eating

all the time when we were driving in the carriage, too; it was jolly. -

She didn’t ride on a horse at all . . ." (he now became undecided, for

he knew that we had driven with two horses) " . . . she sat in the

carriage.  Yes,  that’s  how  it  was,  but  Hanna  and  I  drove  quite  by

ourselves . . . Mummy rode on the horse, and Karoline" (our maid last

year) "on the other . . . I say, what I’m telling you isn’t a bit true."

   ‘I: "What isn’t true?"

   ‘Hans: "None of it is. I say, let’s put Hanna and me in the box¹ and

I’II widdle into the box. I’II just widdle into my knickers; I don’t care a

bit; there’s nothing at all shameful in it. I say, that isn’t a joke, you

know; but it’s great fun, though."

 

   ¹ ‘The box standing in the front hall which we had taken to Gmunden as luggage.’

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2065

 

   ‘Then he told me the story of how the stork came - the same story

as yesterday, except that he left out the part about the stork taking his

hat when he went away.

   ‘I: "Where did the stork keep his latch-key?"   ‘Hans: "In his pocket."

   ‘I: "And where’s the stork’s pocket?"

   ‘Hans: "In his beak."

   ‘I: "It’s in his beak! I’ve never seen a stork yet with a key in his beak."

   ‘Hans; "How else could he have got in? How did the stork come in at

the door, then? No, it isn’t true; I just made a mistake. The stork rang

at the front door and some one let him in."

   ‘I: "And how did he ring?"

   ‘Hans: "He rang the bell."

   ‘I: "How did he do that?"

   ‘Hans: "He took his beak and pressed on it with his beak."

   ‘I: "And did he shut the door again?"

      ‘Hans:  "No,  a  maid  shut  it.  She  was  up  already,  you  see,  and

opened the door for him and shut it."

   ‘I: "Where does the stork live!"

      ‘Hans:  "Where?  In  the  box  where  he  keeps  the  little  girls.  At

Schönbrunn, perhaps."

   ‘I: "I’ve never seen a box at Schönbrunn."

   ‘Hans: "It must be farther off, then. -Do you know how the stork

opens the box? He takes his beak - the box has got a key, too - he

takes his beak, lifts up one’ ‘ (i.e. one-half of the beak) "and unlocks it

like this." (He demonstrated the process on the lock of the writing-

table.) "There’s a handle on it too."

   ‘I: "Isn’t a little girl like that too heavy for him?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh no."

   ‘I: "I say, doesn’t a bus look like a stork-box?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes,"

   ‘I: "And a furniture-waggon?"

   ‘Hans:  "And  a  scallywaggon"  ("scallywag"  -  a  term  of  abuse  for

naughty children) "too."

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2066

 

 

      ‘April  17th.  Yesterday  Hans  carried  out  his  long-premeditatedscheme of going across into the courtyard opposite. He would not do it

to-day,  as  there  was  a  cart  standing  at  the  loading  dock  exactly

opposite the entrance gates. "When a cart stands there," he said to

me, "I’m afraid I shall tease the horses and they’ll fall down and make

a row with their feet."

   ‘I: "How does one tease horses!"

   ‘Hans: "When you’re cross with them you tease them, and when you

shout ‘Gee-up’."¹

   ‘I: "Have you ever teased horses?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes, quite often. I’m afraid I shall do it, but I don’t really."

   ‘I: "Did you ever tease horses at Gmunden?"

   ‘Hans: "No."

   ‘I: "But you like teasing them?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes, very much."

   ‘I: "Would you like to whip them?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "Would you like to beat the horses as Mummy beats Hanna? You

like that too, you know."

   ‘Hans: "It doesn’t do the horses any harm when they’re beaten." (I

said this to him once to mitigate his fear of seeing horses whipped.)

"Once I really did it. Once I had the whip, and whipped the horse, and

it fell down and made a row with its feet."

   ‘I: "When?"

   ‘Hans: "At Gmunden."

   ‘I: "A real horse? Harnessed to a cart?"

   ‘Hans: "It wasn’t in the cart."

 

   ¹ ‘Hans has often been very much terrified when drivers beat their horses and shout "Gee-

up".’
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2067

 

   ‘I: "Where was it, then?"

   ‘Hans: "I just held it so that it shouldn’t run away." (Of course, all this

sounded most improbable.)

   ‘I: "Where was that?"   ‘Hans: "Near the trough."

   ‘I: "Who let you? Had the coachman left the horse standing there?"

   ‘Hans: "It was just a horse from the stables."

   ‘I: "How did it get to the trough?"

   ‘Hans: "I took it there."

   ‘I: "Where from? Out of the stables?"

   ‘Hans: "I took it out because I wanted to beat it."

   ‘I: "Was there no one in the stables?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes, Loisl." (The coachman at Gmunden.)

   ‘I: "Did he let you?"

   ‘Hans: "I talked nicely to him, and he said I might do it."

   ‘I: "What did you say to him?"

   ‘Hans: "Could I take the horse and whip it and shout at it. And he

said ‘Yes’."

   ‘I: "Did you whip it a lot?"

   ‘Hans: "What I’ve told you isn’t the least true."

   ‘I: "How much of it’s true?"

   ‘Hans: "None of it’s true; I only told it you for fun."

   ‘I: "You never took a horse out of the stables?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh no."

   ‘I: "But you wanted to."

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes, wanted to. I’ve thought it to myself."

   ‘I: "At Gmunden?"

   ‘Hans: "No, only here. I thought it in the morning when I was quite

undressed; no, in the morning in bed."

   ‘I: "Why did you never tell me about it?"

   ‘Hans: "I didn’t think of it."

   ‘I: "You thought it to yourself because you saw it in the street."

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "Which would you really like to beat? Mummy, Hanna, or me?"

   ‘Hans: "Mummy."

   ‘I: "Why?"

   ‘Hans: "I should just like to beat her."

   ‘I: "When did you ever see any one beating their Mummy?"

   ‘Hans: "I’ve never seen any one do it, never in all my life."

   ‘I: "And yet you’d just like to do it. How would you like to set about

it?"   ‘Hans: "With a carpet-beater." (His mother often threatens to beat

him with the carpet-beater.)

   ‘I was obliged to break off the conversation for to-day.

   ‘In the street Hans explained to me that buses, furniture vans, and

coal-carts were stork-box carts.’

      That  is  to  say,  pregnant  women.  Hans’s  access  of  sadism

immediately before cannot be unconnected with the present theme.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2068

 

 

   ‘April 21st. This morning Hans said that he had thought as follows:

"There  was  a  train  at  Lainz  and  I  travelled  with  my  Lainz

Grandmummy to the Hauptzollamt station. You hadn’t got down from

the bridge yet, and the second train was already at St. Veit. When you

came down, the train was there already, and we got in."

   ‘(Hans was at Lainz yesterday. In order to get on to the departure

platform one has to cross a bridge. From the platform one can see

along the line as far as St. Veit station. The whole thing is a trifle

obscure. Hans’s original thought had no doubt been that he had gone

off by the first train, which I had missed, and that then a second train

had come in from Unter St. Veit and that I had gone after him in it. But

he  had  distorted  a  part  of  this  runaway  phantasy,  so  that  he  said

finally: "Both of us only got away by the second train."

   ‘This phantasy is related to the last one, which was not interpreted,

and according to which we took too long to put on our clothes in the

station at Gmunden, so that the train carried us on.)

   ‘Afternoon, in front of the house. Hans suddenly ran indoors as a

carriage  with  two  horses  came  along.  I  could  see  nothing  unusual

about it, and asked him what was wrong. "The horses are so proud,"

he said, "that I’m afraid they’ll fall down." (The coachman was reining

the  horses  in  tight,  so  that  they  were  trotting  with  short  steps  and

holding their heads high. In fact their action was "proud".)

   ‘I asked him who it really was that was so proud.

   ‘He: "You are, when I come into bed with Mummy."   ‘I: "So you want me to fall down?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes. You’ve got to be naked" (meaning "bare foot", as Fritzl

had been) "and knock up against a stone and bleed, and then I’II be

able to be alone with Mummy for a little bit at all events. When you

come up into our flat I’II be able to run away quick so that you don’t

see."

   ‘I:  "Can  you  remember  who  it  was  that  knocked  up  against  the

stone?"

   ‘He: "Yes, Fritzl."

   ‘I: "When Fritzl fell down, what did you think?"¹

   ‘He: "That you should hit the stone and tumble down."

   ‘I: "So you’d like to go to Mummy?"

   ‘He: "Yes."

   ‘I: "What do I really scold you for?"

   ‘He: "I don’t know." (!!)

   ‘I: "Why?"

   ‘He: "Because you’re cross."

   ‘I: "But that’s not true."

   ‘Hans: "Yes, it is true. You’re cross. I know you are. It must be true."

 

   ¹ So that in fact Fritzl did fall down - which he at one time denied.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2069

 

   ‘Evidently, therefore, my explanation that only little boys come into

bed with their Mummies and that big ones sleep in their own beds had

not impressed him very much.

   ‘I suspect that his desire to "tease" the horse, i.e. to beat it and shout

at it, does not apply to his mother, as he pretended, but to me. No

doubt he only put her forward because he was unwilling to admit the

alternative  to  me.  For  the  last  few  days  he  has  been  particularly

affectionate to me.’

   Speaking with the air of superiority which is so easily acquired after

the event, we may correct Hans’s father, and explain that the boy’s

wish to ‘tease’ the horse had two constituents; it was compounded of

an obscure sadistic desire for his mother and of a clear impulse forrevenge against his father. The latter could not be reproduced until the

former’s turn had come to emerge in connection with the pregnancy

complex.  In  the  process  of  the  formation  of  a  phobia  from  the

unconscious thoughts underlying it, condensation takes place; and for

that reason the course of the analysis can never follow that of the

development of the neurosis.

 

   ‘April 22nd. This morning Hans again thought something to himself:

"A  street-boy  was  riding  on  a  truck,  and  the  guard  came  and

undressed  the  boy  quite  naked  and  made  him  stand  there  till  next

morning, and in the morning the boy gave the guard 50,000 florins so

that he could go on riding on the truck."

   ‘(The Nordbahn runs past opposite our house. In a siding there

stood a trolley on which Hans once saw a street-boy riding. He wanted

to do so too; but I told him it was not allowed, and that if he did the

guard would be after him. A second element in this phantasy is Hans’s

repressed wish to be naked.)'

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2070

 

   It has been noticeable for some time that Hans’s imagination was

being  coloured  by  images  derived  from  traffic,  and  was  advancing

systematically from horses, which draw vehicles, to railways. In the

same way a railway-phobia eventually becomes associated with every

street-phobia.

   ‘At lunch-time I was told that Hans had been playing all the morning

with  an  india-rubber  doll  which  he  called  Grete.  He  had  pushed  a

small penknife in through the opening to which the little tin squeaker

had originally been attached, and had then torn the doll’s legs apart so

as to let the knife drop out. He had said to the nurse-maid, pointing

between the doll’s legs: "Look, there’s its widdler!"

   ‘I: "What was it you were playing at with your doll to-day?"

   ‘Hans: "I tore its legs apart. Do you know why? Because there was a

knife inside it belonging to Mummy. I put it in at the place where the

button squeaks, and then I tore apart its legs and it came out there."      ‘I:  "Why  did  you  tear  its  legs  apart?  So  that  you  could  see  its

widdler?"

   ‘He: "Its widdler was there before; I could have seen it anyhow."

   ‘I: "What did you put the knife in for?"

   ‘He: "I don’t know."

   ‘I: "Well, what does the knife look like?"

   ‘He brought it to me.

   ‘I: "Did you think it was a baby, perhaps?"

   ‘He: "No, I didn’t think anything at all; but I believe the stork got a

baby once - or some one."

   ‘I: "When?"

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2071

 

   ‘He: "Once. I heard so - or didn’t I hear it at all? - or did I say it

wrong?"

   ‘I: "What does ‘say it wrong’ mean?"

   ‘He: "That it’s not true."

   ‘I: "Everything one says is a bit true."

   ‘He: "Well, yes, a little bit."

      ‘I  (after  changing  the  subject):  "How  do  you  think  chickens  are

born?"

   ‘He: "The stork just makes them grow; the stork makes chickens

grow - no, God does."

   ‘I explained to him that chickens lay eggs, and that out of the eggs

there come other chickens.

   ‘Hans laughed.

   ‘I: "Why do you laugh?"

   ‘He: "Because I like what you’ve told me."

   ‘He said he had seen it happen already.

   ‘I: "Where?"

   ‘Hans: "You did it."

   ‘I: "Where did I lay an egg?"

   ‘Hans: "At Gmunden; you laid an egg in the grass, and all at once a

chicken came hopping out. You laid an egg once; I know you did, Iknow it for certain. Because Mummy said so."

   ‘I: "I’II ask Mummy if that’s true."

   ‘Hans: "It isn’t true a bit. But I once laid an egg, and a chicken came

hopping out."

   ‘I: "Where?"

   ‘Hans: "At Gmunden I lay down in the grass - no, I knelt down - and

the children didn’t look on at me, and all at once in the morning I said:

‘Look for it, children; I laid an egg yesterday.’ And all at once they

looked, and all at once they saw an egg, and out of it there came a

little Hans. Well, what are you laughing for? Mummy didn’t know about

it, and Karoline didn’t know, because no one was looking on, and all at

once  I  laid  an  egg,  and  all  at  once  it  was  there.  Really  and  truly.

Daddy, when does a chicken grow out of an egg? When it’s left alone?

Must it be eaten?"

   ‘I explained the matter to him.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2072

 

   ‘Hans: "All right, let’s leave it with the hen; then a chicken’ll grow.

Let’s pack it up in the box and let’s take it to Gmunden."'

   As his parents still hesitated to give him the information which was

already  long  overdue,  little  Hans  had  by  a  bold  stroke  taken  the

conduct of the analysis into his own hands. By means of a brilliant

symptomatic act, ‘Look!’ he had said to them, ‘this is how I imagine

that a birth takes place.’ What he had told the maid-servant about the

meaning of his game with the doll had been insincere; to his father he

explicitly denied that he had only wanted to see its widdler. After his

father had told him, as a kind of payment on account, how chickens

come  out  of  eggs,  Hans  gave  a  combined  expression  to  his

dissatisfaction, his mistrust, and his superior knowledge in a charming

piece  of  persiflage,  which  culminated  with  his  last  words  in  an

unmistakable allusion to his sister’s birth.

   ‘I: "What were you playing at with your doll?"

   ‘Hans: "I said ‘Grete’ to her."

   ‘I: "Why?"   ‘Hans: "Because I said ‘Grete’ to her."

   ‘I: "How did you play?"

   ‘Hans: ‘"I just looked after her like a real baby."

   ‘I: "Would you like to have a little girl?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes. Why not? I should like to have one, but Mummy

mustn’t have one; I don’t like that."

   (He has often expressed this view before. He is afraid of losing still

more of his position if a third child arrives.)

   ‘I: "But only women have children."

   ‘Hans: "I’m going to have a little girl."

   ‘I: "Where will you get her, then?"

   ‘Hans: "Why, from the stork. He takes the little girl out, and all at

once the little girl lays an egg, and out of the egg there comes another

Hanna - another Hanna. Out of Hanna there comes another Hanna.

No, one Hanna comes out."

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2073

 

   ‘I: "You’d like to have a little girl."

   ‘Hans: "Yes, next year I’m going to have one, and she’ll be called

Hanna too."

   ‘I: "But why isn’t Mummy to have a little girl?"

   ‘Hans: "Because I want to have a little girl for once."

   ‘I: "But you can’t have a little girl."

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes, boys have girls and girls have boys."¹

   ‘I:  "Boys  don’t  have  children.  Only  women,  only  Mummies  have

children."

   ‘Hans: "But why shouldn’t I?"

   ‘I: "Because God’s arranged it like that."

   ‘Hans: "But why don’t you have one? Oh yes, you’ll have one all

right. Just you wait."

   ‘I: "I shall have to wait some time."

   ‘Hans: "But I belong to you."

      ‘I:  "But  Mummy  brought  you  into  the  world.  So  you  belong  to

Mummy and me."   ‘Hans: "Does Hanna belong to me or to Mummy?"

   ‘I: "To Mummy."

   ‘Hans: "No, to me. Why not to me and Mummy?"

   ‘I: "Hanna belongs to me, Mummy, and you."

   ‘Hans: "There you are, you see."'

   So long as the child is in ignorance of the female genitals, there is

naturally a vital gap in his comprehension of sexual matters.

 

   ‘On April 24th my wife and I enlightened Hans up to a certain point:

we  told  him  that  children  grow  inside  their  Mummy,  and  are  then

brought into the world by being pressed out of her like a "lumf", and

that this involves a great deal of pain.

   ‘In the afternoon we went out in front of the house. There was a

visible improvement in his state. He ran after carts, and the only thing

that betrayed a remaining trace of his anxiety was the fact that he did

not venture away from the neighbourhood of the street-door and could

not be induced to go for any considerable walk.

 

   ¹ Here is another bit of infantile sexual theory with an unsuspected meaning.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2074

 

 

   ‘On April 25th Hans butted me in the stomach with his head, as he

has already done once before. I asked him if he was a goat.

   ‘"Yes," he said, "a ram." I enquired where he had seen a ram.

   ‘He: "At Gmunden: Fritzl had one." (Fritzl had a real lamb to play

with.)

   ‘I: "You must tell me about the lamb. What did it do?"

   ‘Hans: "You know, Fräulein Mizzi" (a school-mistress who lived in

the house) "used always to put Hanna on the lamb, but it couldn’t

stand up then and it couldn’t butt. If you went up to it it used to butt,

because it had horns. Fritzl used to lead it on a string and tie it to a

tree. He always tied it to a tree."

   ‘I: "Did the lamb butt you?"

   ‘Hans: "It jumped up at me; Fritzl took me up to it once. . . . I went upto it once and didn’t know, and all at once it jumped up at me. It was

such fun - I wasn’t frightened."

   ‘This was certainly untrue.

   ‘I: "Are you fond of Daddy?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes."

   ‘I: "Or perhaps not."

   ‘Hans was playing with a little toy horse. At that moment the horse

fell down, and Hans shouted out: "The horse has fallen down! Look

what a row it’s making!"

   ‘I: "You’re a little vexed with Daddy because Mummy’s fond of him."

   ‘Hans: "No."

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2075

 

   ‘I: "Then why do you always cry whenever Mummy gives me a kiss?

It’s because you’re jealous."

   ‘Hans: "Jealous, yes."

   ‘I: "You’d like to be Daddy yourself."

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes."

   ‘I: "What would you like to do if you were Daddy?"

   ‘Hans: "And you were Hans? I’d like to take you to Lainz every

Sunday - no, every week-day too. If I were Daddy I’d be ever so nice

and good."

   ‘I: "But what would you like to do with Mummy?"

   ‘Hans: "Take her to Lainz, too."

   ‘I: "And what besides?"

   ‘Hans: "Nothing."

   ‘I: "Then why were you jealous?"

   ‘Hans: "I don’t know."

   ‘I: "Were you jealous at Gmunden, too?"

   ‘Hans: "Not at Gmunden." (This is not true.) "At Gmunden I had my

own things. I had a garden at Gmunden and children too."

   ‘I: "Can you remember how the cow got a calf?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes. It came in a cart." (No doubt he had been told this at

Gmunden;  another  attack  on  the  stork  theory.)  "And  another  cowpressed  it  out  of  its  behind."  (This  was  already  the  fruit  of  his

enlightenment, which he was trying to bring into harmony with the cart

theory.)

   ‘I: "It isn’t true that it came in a cart; it came out of the cow in the

cow-shed."

   ‘Hans disputed this, saying that he had seen the cart in the morning.

I pointed out to him that he had probably been told this about the calf

having come in a cart. In the end he admitted this, and said: "Most

likely Berta told me, or not - or perhaps it was the landlord. He was

there and it was at night, so it is true after all, what I’ve been telling

you - or it seems to me nobody told me; I thought it to myself in the

night."

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2076

 

   ‘Unless I am mistaken, the calf was taken away in a cart; hence the

confusion.

   ‘I: "Why didn’t you think it was the stork that brought it?"

   ‘Hans: "I didn’t want to think that."

   ‘I: "But you thought the stork brought Hanna?"

   ‘Hans: "In the morning" (of the confinement) "I thought so. - I say,

Daddy, was Herr Reisenbichler" (our landlord) "there when the calf

came out of the cow?"¹

   ‘I: "I don’t know. Do you think he was?"

   ‘Hans: "I think so. . . . Daddy, have you noticed now and then that

horses have something black on their mouths?"

   ‘I: "I’ve noticed it now and then in the street at Gmunden."

   ‘I: "Did you often get into bed with Mummy at Gmunden?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "And you used to think to yourself you were Daddy?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "And then you felt afraid of Daddy?"

   ‘Hans: "You know everything. I didn’t know anything."

   ‘I: "When Fritzl fell down you thought: ‘If only Daddy would fall down

like that! ‘ And when the lamb butted you you thought: ‘If only it wouldbutt Daddy!’ Can you remember the funeral at Gmunden?" (The first

funeral that Hans had seen. He often recalls it, and it is no doubt a

screen memory.)

   ‘Hans: "Yes. What about it?"

   ‘I: "You thought then that if only Daddy were to die you’d be Daddy."

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "What carts are you still afraid of?"

 

   ¹ Hans, having good reason to mistrust information given him by grown-up people, was

considering whether the landlord might not be more trustworthy than his father.

   ² The train of thought is as follows. For a long time his father had refused to believe what he

said about there being something black on horses’ mouths, but finally it had been verified.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2077

 

   ‘Hans: "All of them."

   ‘I: "You know that’s not true."

   ‘Hans: "I’m not afraid of carriages and pair or cabs with one horse.

I’m afraid of buses and luggage-carts, but only when they’re loaded

up, not when they’re empty. When there’s one horse and the cart’s

loaded full up, then I’m afraid; but when there are two horses and it’s

loaded full up, then I’m not afraid."

   ‘I:  "Are  you  afraid  of  buses  because  there  are  so  many  people

inside?"

   ‘Hans: "Because there’s so much luggage on the top."

   ‘I: "When Mummy was having Hanna, was she loaded full up too?"

   ‘Hans: "Mummy’ll be loaded full up again when she has another one,

when another one begins to grow, when another one’s inside her."

   ‘I: "And you’d like that?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "You said you didn’t want Mummy to have another baby."

   ‘Hans: "Well, then she won’t be loaded up again. Mummy said if

Mummy  didn’t  want  one,  God  didn’t  want  one  either.  If  Mummy

doesn’t  want  one  she  won’t  have  one."  (Hans  naturally  asked

yesterday if there were any more babies inside Mummy. I told him not,

and said that if God did not wish it none would grow inside her.)   ‘Hans: "But Mummy told me if she didn’t want it no more’d grow, and

you say if God doesn’t want it."

   ‘So I told him it was as I had said, upon which he observed: "You

were there, though, weren’t you? You know better, for certain." He

then proceeded to cross-question his mother, and she reconciled the

two statements by declaring that if she didn’t want it God didn’t want it

either.¹

 

   ¹ Ce que femme veut Dieu veut. But Hans, with his usual acumen, had once more put his

finger upon a most serious problem.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2078

 

   ‘I: "It seems to me that, all the same, you do wish Mummy would

have a baby."

   ‘Hans: "But I don’t want it to happen."

   ‘I: "But you wish for it?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes, wish."

   ‘I: "Do you know why you wish for it? It’s because you’d like to be

Daddy."

   ‘Hans: "Yes. . . . How does it work?"

   ‘I: "How does what work?"

   ‘Hans: "You say Daddies don’t have babies; so how does it work, my

wanting to be Daddy?"

   ‘I: "You’d like to be Daddy and married to Mummy; you’d like to be

as big as me and have a moustache; and you’d like Mummy to have a

baby."

   ‘Hans: "And, Daddy, when I’m married I’II only have one if I want to,

when I’m married to Mummy, and if I don’t want a baby, God won’t

want it either, when I’m married."

   ‘I: "Would you like to be married to Mummy?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh yes."'

      It  is  easy  to  see  that  Hans’s  enjoyment  of  his  phantasy  was

interfered with by his uncertainty as to the part played by fathers and

by his doubts as to whether the begetting of children would be under

his control. 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2079

 

 

   ‘On the evening of the same day, as Hans was being put to bed, he

said to me: "I say, d’you know what I’m going to do now? Now I’m

going to talk to Grete till ten o’clock; she’s in bed with me. My children

are always in bed with me. Can you tell me why that is?" -As he was

very sleepy already, I promised him that we should write it down next

day, and he went to sleep.

   ‘I have already noticed in earlier records that since Hans’s return

from Gmunden he has constantly been having phantasies about "his

children", has carried on conversations with them, and so on.¹

   ‘So on April 26th I asked him why he was always thinking of his

children.

   ‘Hans: "Why? Because I should so like to have children; but I don’t

ever want it; I shouldn’t like to have them."²

   ‘I: "Have you always imagined that Berta and Olga and the rest were

your children?"

      ‘Hans:  "Yes.  Franzl,  and  Fritzl,  and  Paul  too"  (his  playmates  at

Lainz), "and Lodi." This is an invented girl’s name, that of his favourite

child, whom he speaks of most often - I may here emphasize the fact

that the figure of Lodi is not an invention of the last few days, but

existed  before  the  date  of  his  receiving  the  latest  piece  of

enlightenment (April 24th).

   ‘I: "Who is Lodi? Is she at Gmunden?"

   ‘Hans: "No."

   ‘I: "Is there a Lodi?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes, I know her."

   ‘I: "Who is she, then?"

   ‘Hans: "The one I’ve got here."

   ‘I: "What does she look like?"

   ‘Hans: "Look like? Black eyes, black hair. . . . I met her once with

Mariedl" (at Gmunden) "as I was going into the town."

    ¹ There is no necessity on this account to assume in Hans the presence of a feminine strain

of  desire  for  having  children.  It  was  with  his  mother  that  Hans  had  had  his  most  blissful
experience as a child, and he was now repeating them, and himself playing the active part,
which was thus necessarily that of mother.

   ² This startling contradiction was one between phantasy and reality, between wishing and

having. Hans knew that in reality he was a child and that the other children would only be in
his way; but in phantasy he was a mother and wanted children with whom he could repeat the
endearments that he had himself experienced.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2080

 

   ‘When I went into the matter it turned out that this was an invention.¹

   ‘I: "So you thought you were their Mummy?"

   ‘Hans: "And really I was their Mummy."

   ‘I: "What did you do with your children?"

   ‘Hans: "I had them to sleep with me, the girls and the boys."

   ‘I: "Every day?"

   ‘Hans: "Why, of course."

   ‘I: "Did you talk to them?"

   ‘Hans: "When I couldn’t get all the children into the bed, I put some

of the children on the sofa, and some in the pram, and if there were

still some left over I took them up to the attic and put them in the box,

and if there were any more I put them in the other box."

   ‘I: "So the stork-baby-boxes were in the attic?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "When did you get your children? Was Hanna alive already?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes, she had been a long time."

   ‘I: "But who did you think you’d got the children from?"

   ‘Hans: "Why from me."²

   ‘I: "But at that time you hadn’t any idea that children came from

some one."

   ‘Hans: "I thought the stork had brought them." (Clearly a lie and an

evasion.)³

 

   ¹ It is possible, however, that Hans had exalted into his ideal some one whom he had met

casually at Gmunden. The colour of this ideal’s eyes and hair, by the way, was copied from
his mother.

   ² Hans could not help answering from the auto-erotic point of view.   ³ They were the children of his phantasy, that is to say, of his masturbation.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2081

 

   ‘I: "You had Grete in bed with you yesterday, but you know quite well

that boys can’t have children."

   ‘Hans: "Well, yes. But I believe they can, all the same."

   ‘I: "How did you hit upon the name Lodi? No girl’s called that. Lotti,

perhaps?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh no, Lodi. I don’t know; but it’s a beautiful name, all the

same."

   ‘I (jokingly): "Perhaps you mean a Schokolodi?"¹

      ‘Hans  (promptly):  "No,  a  Saffalodi,²  .  .  .  because  I  like  eating

sausages so much, and salami too."

   ‘I: "I say, doesn’t a Saffalodi look like a lumf"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "Well, what does a lumf look like?"

   ‘Hans: "Black. You know" (pointing at my eyebrows and moustache),

"like this and like this."

   ‘I: "And what else? Round like a Saffaladi?"

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "When you sat on the chamber and a lumf came, did you think to

yourself you were having a baby?"

   ‘Hans (laughing): "Yes. Even at --- Street, and here as well."

   ‘I: "You know when the bus-horses fell down? The bus looked like a

baby-box, and when the black horse fell down it was just like . . ."

   ‘Hans (taking me up): ". . . like having a baby."

   ‘I: "And what did you think when it made a row with its feet?"

   ‘Hans: "Oh, when I don’t want to sit on the chamber and would

rather play, then I make a row like this with my feet." (He stamped his

feet.)

   ‘This was why he was so much interested in the question whether

people liked or did not like having children.

 

   ¹ [’Schokolade’ is the German for ‘chocolate’.]

   ² ‘"Saffaladi" means "Zervelatwurst"" ["saveloy", a kind of sausage]. My wife is fond ofrelating how her aunt always calls it "Soffilodi". Hans may have heard this.’
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2082

 

   ‘All day long to-day Hans has been playing at loading and unloading

packing-cases; he said he wished he could have a toy waggon and

boxes of that kind to play with. What used most to interest him in the

courtyard  of  the  Customs  House  opposite  was  the  loading  and

unloading of the carts. And he used to be frightened most when a cart

had been loaded up and was on the point of driving off. "The horses’ll

fall down,"¹ he used to say. He used to call the doors of the Head

Customs House shed "holes" (e.g. the first hole, second hole, third

hole, etc.). But now, instead of "hole", he says "behind-hole".

   ‘The anxiety has almost completely disappeared, except that he

likes to remain in the neighbourhood of the house, so as to have a line

of retreat in case he is frightened. But he never takes flight into the

house now, but stops in the street all the time. As we know, his illness

began with his turning back in tears while he was out for a walk; and

when he was obliged to go for a second walk he only went as far as

the Hauptzollamt station on the Stadtbahn, from which our house can

still be seen. At the time of my wife’s confinement he was of course

kept away from her; and his present anxiety, which prevents him from

leaving the neighbourhood of the house, is in reality the longing for her

which he felt then.

 

   ‘April 30th. Seeing Hans playing with his imaginary children again,

"Hullo," I said to him, "are your children still alive? You know quite well

a boy can’t have any children."

   ‘Hans: "I know. I was their Mummy before, now I’m their Daddy."

   ‘I: "And who’s the children’s Mummy?"

   ‘Hans: "Why, Mummy, and you’re their Grandaddy."

   ‘I: "So then you’d like to be as big as me, and be married to Mummy,

and then you’d like her to have children."

   ‘Hans: "Yes, that’s what I’d like, and then my Lainz Grandmummy"

(my mother) "will be their Grannie."'

   Things were moving towards a satisfactory conclusion. The littleOedipus had found a happier solution than that prescribed by destiny.

Instead of putting his father out of the way, he had granted him the

same happiness that he desired himself: he made him a grandfather

and married him to his own mother too.

 

   ¹ Do we not use the word ‘niederkommen’ [literally, ‘to come down’] when a woman is

delivered?
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2083

 

 

   ‘On May 1st Hans came to me at lunch-time and said: "D’you know

what? Let’s write something down for the Professor."

   ‘I: "Well, and what shall it be?"

   ‘Hans: "This morning I was in the W.C. with all my children. First I

did lumf and widdled, and they looked on. Then I put them on the seat

and they widdled and did lumf, and I wiped their behinds with paper.

D’you know why? Because I’d so much like to have children; then I’d

do everything for them - take them to the W.C., clean their behinds,

and do everything one does with children."'

   After the admission afforded by this phantasy, it will scarcely be

possible to dispute the fact that in Hans’s mind there was pleasure

attached to the excretory functions.

   ‘In the afternoon he ventured into the Stadtpark for the first time. As

it is the First of May, no doubt there was less traffic than usual, but still

quite enough to have frightened him up to now. He was very proud of

his achievement, and after tea I was obliged to go with him to the

Stadtpark once again. On the way we met a bus; Hans pointed it out

to  me,  saying:  "Look!  a  stork-box  cart!"  If  he  goes  with  me  to  the

Stadtpark again to-morrow, as we have planned, we shall really be

able to regard his illness as cured.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2084

  

   ‘On May 2nd Hans came to me in the morning. "I say," he said, "I

thought something to-day." At first he had forgotten it; but later on he

related  what  follows,  though  with  signs  of  considerable  resistance:

"The plumber came; and first he took away my behind with a pair of

pincers,  and  then  gave  me  another,  and  then  the  same  with  my

widdler. He said: ‘Let me see your behind!’ and I had to turn round,

and he took it away; and then he said: ‘Let me see your widdler!’"'

   Hans’s father grasped the nature of this wishful phantasy, and did

not hesitate a moment as to the only interpretation it could bear.

   ‘I: "He gave you a bigger widdler and a bigger behind."

   ‘Hans: "Yes."

   ‘I: "Like Daddy’s; because you’d like to be Daddy."

   ‘Hans: "Yes, and I’d like to have a moustache like yours and hairs

like yours." (He pointed to the hairs on my chest.)

   ‘In the light of this, we may review the interpretation of Hans’s earlier

phantasy to the effect that the plumber had come and unscrewed the

bath and had stuck a borer into his stomach. The big bath meant a

"behind", the borer or screwdriver was (as was explained at the time)

a widdler.¹ The two phantasies are identical. Moreover, a new light is

thrown  upon  Hans’s  fear  of  the  big  bath.  (This,  by  the  way,  has

already diminished.) He dislikes his "behind" being too small for the

big bath.’

   In the course of the next few days Hans’s mother wrote to me more

than once to express her joy at the little boy’s recovery.

 

   ¹ Perhaps, too, the word ‘borer’ [‘Bohrer’] was not chosen without regard for its connection

with ‘born’ [‘geboren’] and ‘birth’ [‘Geburt’]. If so, the child could have made no distinction
between  ‘bored’  [‘gebohrt’]  and  ‘born’  [‘geboren’].  I  accept  this  suggestion,  made  by  an
experienced fellow-worker, but I am not in a position to say whether we have before us here a
deep and universal connection between the two ideas or merely the employment of a verbal
coincidence  peculiar  to  German.  Prometheus  (Pramantha),  the  creator  of  man,  is  also
etymologically ‘the borer’. (Cf. Abraham, Traum und Mythus, 1909.)
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2085

 

    A week later came a postscript from Hans’s father.

   ‘My dear Professor, I should like to make the following additions to

Hans’s case history:

      ‘(1)  The  remission  after  he  had  been  given  his  first  piece  of

enlightenment was not so complete as I may have represented it. It is

true that Hans went for walks; but only under compulsion and in a

state  of  great  anxiety.  Once  he  went  with  me  as  far  as  the

Hauptzollamt  station,  from  which  our  house  can  still  be  seen,  but

could not be induced to go any farther.

   ‘(2) As regards "raspberry syrup" and "a gun for shooting with". Hans

is given raspberry syrup when he is constipated. He also frequently

confuses the words "shooting" and "shitting".¹

   ‘(3) Hans was about four years old when he was moved out of our

bedroom into a room of his own.

   ‘(4) A trace of his disorder still persists, though it is no longer in the

shape  of  fear  but  only  in  that  of  the  normal  instinct  for  asking

questions. The questions are mostly concerned with what things are

made of (trams, machines, etc.), who makes things, etc. Most of his

questions are characterized by the fact that Hans asks them although

he has already answered them himself. He only wants to make sure.

Once when he had tired me out with his questions and I had said to

him: "Do you think I can answer every question you ask?" he replied:

"Well, I thought as you knew that about the horse you’d know this too."

   ‘(5) Hans only refers to his illness now as a matter of past history -

"at the time when I had my nonsense".

   ‘(6) An unsolved residue remains behind; for Hans keeps cudgelling

his brains to discover what a father has to do with his child, since it is

the mother who brings it into the world. This can be seen from his

questions, as, for instance: "I belong to you, too, don’t I?" (meaning,

not only to his mother). It is not clear to him in what way he belongs to

me. On the other hand, I have no direct evidence of his having, as you

suppose, overheard his parents in the act of intercourse.

   ‘(7) In presenting the case one ought perhaps to insist upon the

violence of his anxiety. Otherwise it might be said that the boy would

have gone out for walks soon enough if he had been given a sound

thrashing.’

    ¹ [In German ‘schiessen’ and ‘scheissen’.]

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2086

 

 

   In conclusion let me add these words. With Hans’s last phantasy the

anxiety which arose from his castration complex was also overcome,

and  his  painful  expectations  were  given  a  happier  turn.  Yes,  the

Doctor (the plumber) did come, he did take away his penis, - but only

to give him a bigger one in exchange for it. For the rest, our young

investigator has merely come somewhat early upon the discovery that

all  knowledge  is  patchwork,  and  that  each  step  forward  leaves  an

unsolved residue behind.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2087

 

                                            III

 

                                    DISCUSSION

 

   I shall now proceed to examine this observation of the development

and resolution of a phobia in a boy under five years of age, and I shall

have  to  do  so  from  three  points  of  view.  In  the  first  place  I  shall

consider how far it supports the assertions which I put forward in my

Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905d). Secondly, I shall

consider to what extent it can contribute towards our understanding of

this  very  frequent  form  of  disorder.  And  thirdly,  I  shall  consider

whether  it  can  be  made  to  shed  any  light  upon  the  mental  life  of

children or to afford any criticism of our educational aims.

 

                                            (I)

 

   My impression is that the picture of a child’s sexual life presented in

this observation of little Hans agrees very well with the account I gaveof it (basing my views upon psycho-analytic examinations of adults) in

my Three Essays. But before going into the details of this agreement I

must deal with two objections which will be raised against my making

use of the present analysis for this purpose. The first objection is to

the effect that Hans was not a normal child, but (as events - the illness

itself, in fact - showed) had a predisposition to neurosis, and was a

young  ‘degenerate’;  it  would  be  illegitimate,  therefore,  to  apply  to

other,  normal  children  conclusions  which  might  perhaps  be  true  of

him. I shall postpone consideration of this objection, since it only limits

the  value  of  the  observation,  and  does  not  completely  nullify  it.

According  to  the  second  and  more  uncompromising  objection,  an

analysis of a child conducted by his father, who went to work instilled

with my theoretical views and infected with my prejudices, must be

entirely  devoid  of  any  objective  worth.  A  child,  it  will  be  said,  is

necessarily highly suggestible, and in regard to no one, perhaps, more

than to his own father; he will allow anything to be forced upon him,

out of gratitude to his father for taking so much notice of him; none of

his  assertions  can  have  any  evidential  value,  and  everything  he

produces  in  the  way  of  associations,  phantasies,  and  dreams  will

naturally take the direction into which they are being urged by every

possible  means.  Once  more,  in  short,  the  whole  thing  is  simply

‘suggestion’ - the only difference being that in the case of a child it can

be unmasked much more easily than in that of an adult.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2088

 

   A singular thing. I can remember, when I first began to meddle in the

conflict of scientific opinions twenty-two years ago, with what derision

the older generation of neurologists and psychiatrists of those days

received assertions about suggestion and its effects. Since then the

situation has fundamentally changed. The former aversion has been

converted into an only too ready acceptance; and this has happened

not  only  as  a  consequence  of  the  impression  which  the  work  of

Liébeault and Bernheim and their pupils could not fail to create in the

course  of  these  two  decades,  but  also  because  it  has  since  beendiscovered how great an economy of thought can be effected by the

use of the catchword ‘suggestion’. Nobody knows and nobody cares

what  suggestion  is,  where  it  comes  from,  or  when  it  arises,  -  it  is

enough that everything awkward in the region of psychology can be

labelled  ‘suggestion’.  I  do  not  share  the  view  which  is  at  present

fashionable that assertions made by children are invariably arbitrary

and untrustworthy. The arbitrary has no existence in mental life. The

untrustworthiness  of  the  assertions  of  children  is  due  to  the

predominance of their imagination, just as the untrustworthiness of the

assertions  of  grown-up  people  is  due  to  the  predominance  of  their

prejudices. For the rest, even children do not lie without a reason, and

on the whole they are more inclined to a love of truth than are their

elders. If we were to reject little Hans’s statements root and branch we

should certainly be doing him a grave injustice. On the contrary, we

can quite clearly distinguish from one another the occasions on which

he was falsifying the facts or keeping them back under the compelling

force  of  a  resistance,  the  occasions  on  which,  being  undecided

himself, he agreed with his father (so that what he said must not be

taken  as  evidence),  and  the  occasions  on  which,  freed  from  every

pressure, he burst into a flood of information about what was really

going  on  inside  him  and  about  things  which  until  then  no  one  but

himself  had  known.  Statements  made  by  adults  offer  no  greater

certainty. It is a regrettable fact that no account of a psycho-analysis

can reproduce the impressions received by the analyst as he conducts

it, and that a final sense of conviction can never be obtained from

reading about it but only from directly experiencing it. But this disability

attaches in an equal degree to analyses of adults.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2089

 

   Little Hans is described by his parents as a cheerful, straightforward

child, and so he should have been, considering the education given

him by his parents, which consisted essentially in the omission of our

usual  educational  sins.  So  long  as  he  was  able  to  carry  on  his

researches  in  a  state  of  happy naïveté,  without  a  suspicion  of  theconflicts which were soon to arise out of them, he kept nothing back;

and the observations made during the period before the phobia admit

of no doubt or demur. It was with the outbreak of the illness and during

the  analysis  that  discrepancies  began  to  make  their  appearance

between  what  he  said  and  what  he  thought;  and  this  was  partly

because unconscious material, which he was unable to master all at

once, was forcing itself upon him, and partly because the content of

his thoughts provoked reservations on account of his relation to his

parents. It is my unbiased opinion that these difficulties, too, turned

out no greater than in many analyses of adults.

   It is true that during the analysis Hans had to be told many things

that  he  could  not  say  himself,  that  he  had  to  be  presented  with

thoughts which he had so far shown no signs of possessing, and that

his attention had to be turned in the direction from which his father

was expecting something to come. This detracts from the evidential

value of the analysis; but the procedure is the same in every case. For

a  psycho-analysis  is  not  an  impartial  scientific  investigation,  but  a

therapeutic measure. Its essence is not to prove anything, but merely

to alter something. In a psycho-analysis the physician always gives his

patient (sometimes to a greater and some times to a less extent) the

conscious  anticipatory  ideas  by  the  help  of  which  he  is  put  in  a

position to recognize and to grasp the unconscious material. For there

are some patients who need more of such assistance and some who

need less; but there are none who get through without some of it.

Slight disorders may perhaps be brought to an end by the subject’s

unaided efforts, but never a neurosis - a thing which has set itself up

against the ego as an element alien to it. To get the better of such an

element another person must be brought in, and in so far as that other

person can be of assistance the neurosis will be curable. If it is in the

very nature of any neurosis to turn away from the ‘other person’ - and

this  seems  to  be  one  of  the  characteristics  of  the  states  grouped

together  under  the  name  of  dementia  praecox  -  then  for  that  very

reason such a state will be incurable by any efforts of ours. It is true

that a child, on account of the small development of his intellectual

systems, requires especially energetic assistance. But, after all, the

information which the physician gives his patient is itself derived in its

turn from analytical experience; and indeed it is sufficiently convincingif, at the cost of this intervention by the physician, we are enabled to

discover the structure of the pathogenic material and simultaneously

to dissipate it.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2090

 

   And yet, even during the analysis, the small patient gave evidence

of  enough  independence  to  acquit  him  upon  the  charge  of

‘suggestion’.  Like  all  other  children,  he  applied  his  childish  sexual

theories  to  the  material  before  him  without  having  received  any

encouragement to do so. These theories are extremely remote from

the  adult  mind.  Indeed,  in  this  instance  I  actually  omitted  to  warn

Hans’s father that the boy would be bound to approach the subject of

childbirth  by  way  of  the  excretory  complex.  This  negligence  on  my

part,  though  it  led  to  an  obscure  phase  in  the  analysis,  was

nevertheless the means of producing a good piece of evidence of the

genuineness  and  independence  of  Hans’s  mental  processes.  He

suddenly  became  occupied  with  ‘lumf’,  without  his  father,  who  is

supposed to have been practising suggestion upon him, having the

least idea how he had arrived at that subject or what was going to

come of it. Nor can his father be saddled with any responsibility for the

production of the two plumber phantasies, which arose out of Hans’s

early acquired ‘castration complex’. And I must here confess that, out

of  theoretical  interest,  I  entirely  concealed  from  Hans’s  father  my

expectation that there would turn out to be some such connection, so

as not to interfere with the value of a piece of evidence such as does

not often come within one’s grasp.

   If I went more deeply into the details of the analysis I could produce

plenty more evidence of Hans’s independence of ‘suggestion’; but I

shall break off the discussion of this preliminary objection at this point.

I  am  aware  that  even  with  this  analysis  I  shall  not  succeed  in

convincing any one who will not let himself be convinced, and I shall

proceed  with  my  discussion  of  the  case  for  the  benefit  of  those

readers  who  are  already  convinced  of  the  objective  reality  of

unconscious  pathogenic  material.  And  I  do  this  with  the  agreeableassurance that the number of such readers is steadily increasing.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2091

 

 

   The first trait in little Hans which can be regarded as part of his

sexual life was a quite peculiarly lively interest in his ‘widdler’ - an

organ  deriving  its  name  from  that  one  of  its  two  functions  which,

scarcely  the  less  important  of  the  two,  is  not  to  be  eluded  in  the

nursery. This interest aroused in him the spirit of enquiry, and he thus

discovered that the presence or absence of a widdler made it possible

to differentiate between animate and inanimate objects. He assumed

that  all  animate  objects  were  like  himself,  and  possessed  this

important bodily organ; he observed that it was present in the larger

animals, suspected that this was so too in both his parents, and was

not deterred by the evidence of his own eyes from authenticating the

fact in his new-born sister. One might almost say that it would have

been too shattering a blow to his ‘Weltanschauung’ if he had had to

make up his mind to forgo the presence of this organ in a being similar

to him; it would have been as though it were being torn away from

himself. It was probably on this account that a threat of his mother’s,

which was concerned precisely with the loss of his widdler, was hastily

dismissed from his thoughts and only succeeded in making its effects

apparent at a later period. The reason for his mother’s intervention

had been that he used to like giving himself feelings of pleasure by

touching  his  member:  the  little  boy  had  begun  to  practise  the

commonest - and most normal - form of auto-erotic sexual activity.

   The pleasure which a person takes in his own sexual organ may

become associated with scopophilia (or sexual pleasure in looking) in

its active and passive forms, in a manner which has been very aptly

described by Alfred Adler (1908) as ‘confluence of instincts’. So little

Hans began to try to get a sight of other people’s widdlers; his sexual

curiosity developed, and at the same time he liked to exhibit his own

widdler. One of his dreams, dating from the beginning of his period of

repression, expressed a wish that one of his little girl friends shouldassist him in widdling, that is, that she should share the spectacle. The

dream  shows,  therefore,  that  up  till  then  this  wish  had  subsisted

unrepressed,  and  later  information  confirmed  the  fact  that  he  had

been  in  the  habit  of  gratifying  it.  The  active  side  of  his  sexual

scopophilia soon became associated in him with a definite theme. He

repeatedly expressed both to his father and his mother his regret that

he had never yet seen their widdlers; and it was probably the need for

making a comparison which impelled him to do this. The ego is always

the standard by which one measures the external world; one learns to

understand it by means of a constant comparison with oneself. Hans

had  observed  that  large  animals  had  widdlers  that  were

correspondingly larger than his; he consequently suspected that the

same was true of his parents, and was anxious to make sure of this.

His mother, he thought, must certainly have a widdler ‘like a horse’.

He was then prepared with the comforting reflection that his widdler

would grow with him. It was as though the child’s wish to be bigger

had been concentrated on his genitals.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2092

 

   Thus in little Hans’s sexual constitution the genital zone was from

the outset the one among his erotogenic zones which afforded him the

most intense pleasure. The only other similar pleasure of which he

gave evidence was excretory pleasure, the pleasure attached to the

orifices through which micturition and evacuation of the bowels are

effected.  In  his  final  phantasy  of  bliss,  with  which  his  illness  was

overcome, he imagined he had children, whom he took to the W.C.,

whom he made to widdle, whose behinds he wiped - for whom, in

short, he did ‘everything one can do with children’; it therefore seems

impossible to avoid the assumption that during the period when he

himself had been looked after as an infant these same performances

had  been  the  source  of  pleasurable  sensations  for  him.  He  had

obtained this pleasure from his erotogenic zones with the help of the

person who had looked after him - his mother, in fact; and thus the

pleasure  already  pointed  the  way  to  object-choice.  But  it  is  justpossible that at a still earlier date he had been in the habit of giving

himself this pleasure auto-erotically - that he had been one of those

children  who  like  retaining  their  excreta  till  they  can  derive  a

voluptuous sensation from their evacuation. I say no more than that it

is possible, because the matter was not cleared up in the analysis; the

‘making a row with the legs’ (kicking about), of which he was so much

frightened  later  on,  points  in  that  direction.  But  in  any  case  these

sources of pleasure had no particularly striking importance with Hans,

as they so often have with other children. He early became clean in

his  habits,  and  neither  bed-wetting  nor  diurnal  incontinence  played

any part during his first years; no trace was observed in him of any

inclination  to  play  with  his  excrement,  a  propensity  which  is  so

revolting in adults, and which commonly makes its reappearance at

the termination of processes of psychical involution.

 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2093

 

   At this juncture it is as well to emphasize at once the fact that during

his phobia there was an unmistakable repression of these two well-

developed  components  of  his  sexual  activity.  He  was  ashamed  of

micturating before other people, accused himself of putting his finger

to  his  widdler,  made  efforts  to  give  up  masturbating,  and  showed

disgust  at  ‘lumf’  and  ‘widdle’  and  everything  that  reminded  him  of

them. In his phantasy of looking after his children he undid this latter

repression.

   A sexual constitution like that of little Hans does not appear to carry

with it a predisposition to the development either of perversions or of

their negative (we will limit ourselves to a consideration of hysteria).

As  far  as  my  experience  goes  (and  there  is  still  a  real  need  for

speaking with caution on this point) the innate constitution of hysterics

- that this is also true of perverts is almost self-evident - is marked by

the  genital  zone  being  relatively  less  prominent  than  the  other

erotogenic zones. But we must expressly except from this rule one

particular  ‘aberration’  of  sexual  life.  In  those  who  later  become

homosexuals we meet with the same predominance in infancy of thegenital  zone  (and  especially  of  the  penis)  as  in  normal  persons.¹

Indeed it is the high esteem felt by the homosexual for the male organ

which decides his fate. In his childhood he chooses women as his

sexual object, so long as he assumes that they too possess what in

his  eyes  is  an  indispensable  part  of  the  body;  when  he  becomes

convinced  that  women  have  deceived  him  in  this  particular,  they

cease to be acceptable to him as a sexual object. He cannot forgo a

penis in any one who is to attract him to sexual intercourse; and if

circumstances are favourable he will fix his libido upon the ‘woman

with a penis’, a youth of feminine appearance. Homosexuals, then, are

persons  who,  owing  to  the  erotogenic  importance  of  their  own

genitals, cannot do without a similar feature in their sexual object. In

the course of their development from auto-erotism to object-love, they

have remained at a point of fixation between the two.

 

   ¹ As my expectations led me to suppose, and as Sadger’s observations have shown, all

such people pass through an amphigenic phase in childhood.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2094

 

      There  is  absolutely  no  justification  for  distinguishing  a  special

homosexual instinct. What constitutes a homosexual is a peculiarity

not in his instinctual life but in his choice of an object. Let me recall

what  I  have  said  in  my Three  Essays  to  the  effect  that  we  have

mistakenly imagined the bond between instinct and object in sexual

life as being more intimate than it really is. A homosexual may have

normal instincts, but he is unable to disengage them from a class of

objects  defined  by  a  particular  determinant.  And  in  his  childhood,

since at that period this determinant is taken for granted as being of

universal application, he is able to behave like little Hans, who showed

his  affection  to  little  boys  and  girls  indiscriminately,  and  once

described his friend Fritzl as ‘the girl he was fondest of’. Hans was a

homosexual (as all children may very well be), quite consistently with

the fact, which must always be kept in mind, that he was acquainted

with only one kind of genital organ - a genital organ like his own.¹

    ¹ [Footnote added 1923:] I have subsequently (1923e) drawn attention to the fact that the

period  of  sexual  development  which  our  little  patient  was  passing  through  is  universally
characterized by acquaintance with only one sort of genital organ, namely, the male one. In
contrast to the later period of maturity, this period is marked not by a genital primacy but by a
primacy of the phallus.
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2095

 

      In  his  subsequent  development,  however,  it  was  not  to

homosexuality that our young libertine proceeded, but to an energetic

masculinity  with  traits  of  polygamy;  he  knew  how  to  vary  his

behaviour,  too,  with  his  varying  feminine  objects  -  audaciously

aggressive  in  one  case,  languishing  and  bashful  in  another.  His

affection had moved from his mother on to other objects of love, but at

a time when there was a scarcity of these it returned to her, only to

break down in a neurosis. It was not until this happened that it became

evident  to  what  a  pitch  of  intensity  his  love  for  his  mother  had

developed and through what vicissitudes it had passed. The sexual

aim which he pursued with his girl playmates, of sleeping with them,

had originated in relation to his mother. It was expressed in words

which might be retained in maturity, though they would then bear a

richer connotation.¹ The boy had found his way to object-love in the

usual manner from the care he had received when he was an infant;

and a new pleasure had now become the most important for him - that

of  sleeping  beside  his  mother.  I  should  like  to  emphasize  the

importance  of  pleasure  derived  from  cutaneous  contact  as  a

component  in  this  new  aim  of  Hans’s,  which,  according  to  the

nomenclature  (artificial  to  my  mind)  of  Moll,  would  have  to  be

described as satisfaction of the instinct of contrectation.

 

   ¹ [The German ‘bei jemandem schlafen’, literally ‘to sleep with some one’, is used (like the

English ‘to lie with’) in the sense of ‘to copulate with’.]
 


                  Analysis Of A Phobia In A Five-Year-Old Boy

                                                                                      2096

 